MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF EVANS COLORADO 
  
  
  
  
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Evans, Colorado 
  
  
  
Beginning with Supp. No. 2, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF EVANS 
Mayor 
John Morris 
Mayor Pro Tem 
Jay Schaffer - Ward 3 
City Council 
Ward 1 - Laura Brown 
Ward 1 - Lance Homann 
Ward 2 - Sherri Finn 
Ward 2 - Mark Clark 
Ward 3 - Brian Rudy 
City Manager 
Aden Hogan 
City Clerk 
Raegan Robb 
Attorneys 
Scott Krob, City Attorney 
Avi Rocklin, Prosecuting Attorney 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
The Evans, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, will be kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last . 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instruction sheet should be placed behind the Supplementation tab, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions : Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Evans Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2.02.90, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Evans Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions: A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2.02.90 of the "EvansMunicipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2.02.90 of the "EvansMunicipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal: Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2.02.90 of the "EvansMunicipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 

> 
PREFACE 
The City of Evans, a Home Rule City, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Table of Contents is the table containing each Title and Chapter title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each Chapter by the subject name provided. 
The three-place section numbering system places the Title number first, followed by the Chapter number and Section number, separated by hyphens. Each Section may be cited by the Title, Chapter and Section number which are in sequence within each Title. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved title and page numbers for expansion or revision of the code without undue complication when changes are made to the code by supplementation. 
The Code Comparison Table and Disposition of Ordinances Table identify the sources for the contents of the code. The Code Comparison Table identifies prior code sections and their location in the new code. The Disposition of Ordinances Table provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether a prior code section, an ordinance or a portion thereof, is contained within the code, the Code Comparison Table and Disposition of Ordinances Table will provide that information. The Table of Up-to-Date Pages lists all of the current pages through the most recent supplementation. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the code provide regular updating of the code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the code. 

> 
Home Rule Charter[1] 
  
PREFACE 
    Evans is at the beginning point of an expansion program. In order to take full advantage of this expansion, it is necessary that we modernize our system of local government. 
    At the present time we operate under the authority of the Legislature of the State of Colorado. It is desired that we change this form of Government and operate under the Home Rule Charter, which will give the local citizens control of local affairs. 
    Under date of February 21st, 1973, an election was held to form a Charter Convention. At this election 21 local citizens were selected to draft a Home Rule Charter. The subsequent pages in this book are the results of efforts of the members of the Home Rule Charter Convention to submit to the Council and voters. 
    The proposed Charter provides for a Council-Manager form of City Government, the Council to be composed of 7 members with a term of 4 years for each councilman and 2 years for Mayor, 2 members to be elected from each Ward, and Mayor elected at large. Provision is made for overlapping terms, with an election each 2 years, and the Mayor has a vote on every issue. This will eliminate delays due to a tie vote. 
    The City Council will have all policy making and legislative power in the City. They will appoint the City Manager, City Attorney, Municipal Judge and members of the advisory boards and commissions. Your elected committee has discussed and passed affirmatively on every item in the proposed Charter. Differences of opinion have been thrashed out, so that the proposed Charter has the entire support of the Committee. 
    The Charter Committee feels we have submitted a sound and effective Government proposal for the City of Evans, and respectfully presents this Charter application to the voters of Evans for their approval. 
CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF EVANS, COLORADO
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of Evans, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain, establish, and adopt this Home Rule Charter for the City of Evans. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the city, as adopted on June 12, 1973, and subsequently amended April 8, 1986; April 7, 1992; April 2, 1996, April 7, 1998; April 2, 2002; April 8, 2008; April 6, 2010; November 6, 2012; and November 4, 2014. Further amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the June 12, 1973 ordinance as amended through November 4, 2014. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. 

CHAPTER I. - General Provisions 

1.1 - Name and boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the "City of Evans" in Weld County of Colorado shall remain and continue as a politic and corporate and under this Charter shall be known as the "City of Evans" with the same boundaries until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
1.2 - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." The municipal government provided by this charter shall not be changed except by Charter Convention and by a majority vote of qualified electors at any election. Pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Colorado and subject only to limitations imposed therein and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective City Council. 
1.3 - Municipal powers. 
    The City shall have all powers which are necessary, requisite or proper for the government and administration of its local and municipal matters, and all powers which are granted to Home Rule Cities by the Constitution of the State of Colorado. 
1.4 - Present ordinances in force. 
    All ordinances of the City of Evans in force shall continue in force at the time this Charter becomes effective; shall continue in force except insofar as they conflict with provisions of this Charter, or until they shall be amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
1.5 - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors through petitioning the Council, or by the Council on its own initiative, in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado. Nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one election. 
CHAPTER II. - Elections 

2.1 - Regular municipal elections. 
    Regular municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in April in the even numbered years commencing with 1974 and bi-annually thereafter. 
2.2 - Special municipal elections. 
    Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least 45 days in advance of such election, or when required by this Charter or Statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
2.3 - Laws governing elections. 
    Regular and Special Municipal elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Law as now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or as Council may prescribe by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance establish election procedures, the method for registration of electors, the number, qualifications and compensation for election of Judges and Clerks, and the boundaries of election Wards. 
2.4 - Notice of election. 
    The City Clerk shall provide notice of election in accordance with federal, state, or municipal law, whichever is applicable. 
2.5 - Election Judges. 
    The Council may by resolution delegate to the City Clerk the authority and responsibility to appoint and establish compensation for election judges. 
2.6 - Recall from office. 
(1)  Every Elective City Officer of the City of Evans, Colorado, may be recalled from office at any time after he has held office for six months, by the electors of the City of Evans, by recall petition filed with the City Clerk, with signatures of qualified electors equal in number to twenty-five per cent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding General Municipal election for all candidates for the position which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies. 
(2)  Such petitions shall contain a general statement of not more than two hundred words, of the grounds on which the recall is sought, and may be on one or more sheets of paper. Each signer of such petition shall add to their signature the date of their signing, their place of residence and street number. The persons circulating such petitions shall subscribe to an oath on each sheet of paper that the signatures thereon are genuine. 
(3)  The procedure hereunder to effect the recall of an elective officer shall be, as far as applicable, by the method provided in Article XXI, and Section 4 thereof, of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, known as "Recall from Office", with power in the City Council to provide by ordinance such other and further procedure as it may deem necessary. 
CHAPTER III. - Council-Mayor 

3.1 - City Council. 
    The City Council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor. The City Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem necessary. 
3.2 - Wards. 
    The City shall be divided into three Wards. Changes in the boundaries of Wards may be made by ordinance adopted by the City Council, which changes shall be made at least 90 days prior to any regular municipal election. Wards shall be comprised of compact and contiguous territory so as to contain as nearly possible an equal number of inhabitants. The City Council shall, as deemed necessary, readjust the Ward boundaries to comprise compact and contiguous territory for each ward to contain as nearly as possible an equal number of inhabitants. 
3.3 - Qualifications. 
    No person shall be eligible to the office of Mayor or Councilmembers unless the individual is a citizen of the United States, at least eighteen years of age, shall be a qualified elector of the City of Evans, shall have been for thirty days immediately preceding such election a resident of his or her Ward. (Applied only to Ward Councilmembers). A person who has been convicted of a felony shall not be eligible to become a candidate for a City Office. No elected official shall hold any other elective public office. 
3.4 - Terms. 
    The term of office of the Councilmember hereafter to be elected in accordance with the provisions of this Charter shall commence at the hour of 7:30 p.m. on the next Tuesday of April following their election, and shall continue during the term for which they shall have been elected and until their successors shall have been elected and qualified. In the year 1974, the first municipal election shall be held under the provisions of this Charter at which one Councilmember shall be elected from each Ward for a term of four years and every four years thereafter. In the year 1976, the second municipal election shall be held under the provisions of this Charter in which one Councilmember shall be elected from each Ward for a term of four years and every four years thereafter, and in the year 1976, the Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. At every subsequent bi-annual election a Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. For purposes of applying Article XVIII, Section 11 of the Colorado Constitution regarding limitation on terms, Council members filling partial terms of office and Council members filling vacancies, whether by election or appointment, are not deemed to have served a term in office. In no event shall a Council member serve more than ten continuous years, whether by election or appointment, regardless of whether a portion of that period was a partial term. 
3.5 - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor or Councilmember, the Council shall appoint an eligible person to fill such vacancy within ninety days after the Council receives notice of such vacancy. Such appointment shall continue until the next Regular Municipal Election subject to the qualification provisions of Section 3.3. If the office in which the vacancy occurs is not an office for which a successor would otherwise have been elected at the next regular election, the term of office of the successor elected at that regular election shall be shortened so that the following regular election for the office is held at the time at which it would have been held if no vacancy had occurred. Candidates for an election in a Ward for which there has been an appointment to fill a vacancy shall designate on their nomination petition, prior to circulation, whether they are a candidate for a two- (2) year term or a four- (4) year term. Any such vacancy shall exist when an elective officer fails to qualify within thirty days after their term would commence under Section 3.4, dies, resigns, is removed from office, moves their permanent residence from the City, moves their permanent residence from the Ward, (applies only to Ward Councilmember), absents theirself continuously therefrom for more than two months, is convicted of a felony or is judicially declared mentally ill. Council may declare a vacancy if a Council Member is absent from four of six consecutive regular Council meetings unless the absences are excused by resolution. Council vacancies shall be established by competent evidence thereof and placed on record in the City Council's minutes. 
3.6 - Compensation of Mayor and Councilmembers. 
    The members of the City Council shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall by ordinance prescribe; provided, however, they shall neither increase nor decrease the compensation of any member of the Council during their term. 
3.7 - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of their office, every officer designated by this Charter shall take, subscribe, and file with the City Clerk, an oath or affirmation that they will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Colorado, this Charter and the Ordinances of the City of Evans, Colorado, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. The Oath of Office must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days from the date of their appointment, or within ten days from the date prescribed in this Charter to take office. Failure to file an oath or affirmation within the allotted time as prescribed by this Charter shall be interpreted as a declination of the office by the officer. The office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which the officer may qualify as above set forth. 
3.8 - Appointive boards and commissions. 
    Unless otherwise required by this Charter or by Law, all Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the Council and shall have such power and perform such duties as are prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance, and unless otherwise provided by this Charter any member of a Board or Commission may be removed by the Council for cause after public hearing. 
3.9 - Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall preside over meetings of the City Council and have the same right to speak and vote therein as any other member. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring his or her signature as such an official. The City Council within their membership, shall elect, at their first meeting following their election, a Mayor-Pro Tem who shall become acting Mayor with the same duties as provided for the Mayor in absence or disability. The Mayor shall in no case have the power to veto. The Mayor shall be a conservator of peace, and in emergencies may exercise within the City the powers conferred by the Governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City and to suppress riot and disorder. 
3.10 - Membership rules. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Council shall be the judge of the elections and qualifications of its own members, shall determine its own rules of procedure, and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as the Council may provide. 
3.11 - Power to make contracts. 
    The Council may enter into contracts and leases on behalf of the Municipal Government; all written contracts, to which the Municipal Government is a party, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and as to substance by the City Manager. Nothing shall prevent the making of contracts or spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part by issuance of bonds, nor making of contracts or leases or for services for a period exceeding the budget year in which such contract is made, if otherwise permissible under this Charter. 
3.12 - Contracts with other governmental bodies. 
    The Council by resolution may enter into contracts with other governmental bodies to furnish governmental service and make charges for such services, or enter into cooperative or joint activities with other governmental bodies. 
3.13 - Regular meetings. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the time and number of regular Council meetings or meetings each month provided the Council may, by resolution, change the time and place of any particular regular meeting. The agenda shall be posted or published, at the discretion of the City Council, twenty-four hours prior to any regular meeting. 
3.14 - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Clerk on a written request of the Mayor, or by any three members of the Council on at least twenty-four hours' written notice to each member of the Council. Notice by the Clerk may be provided by electronic correspondence, by telephone, in writing served personally, or delivered to a Council Member's usual place of residence but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing or through electronic correspondence with the Clerk. 
3.15 - Meeting to be public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council and those of any board, commission, or committee of the City shall be open to the public, except for executive sessions. Citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as Council may prescribe. Any meeting may be recessed by a two-thirds affirmative vote of the members present to an executive session, provided there is a quorum, and such meeting, shall be closed to the public, for any of the following purposes: 
(a)  The purchase, acquisition, lease, transfer or sale of real, personal or other property interests. 
(b)  Conferences with an attorney to receive legal advice on specific legal questions. 
(c)  Matters required to be kept confidential by Federal or State law, rules or regulations. 
(d)  Specialized details of security arrangements or investigations. 
(e)  Determining positions relative to matters that may be subject to negotiations, developing strategy for negotiations and instructing negotiators. 
(f)  Personnel matters, unless the employee who is the subject of the personnel matter requests that the meeting be held in public. 
(g)  Consideration of any documents that are required to be confidential under the "Open Records Act." 
(h)  No final policy decision, resolution, rule, ordinance or regulation and no action approving a contract or other formal and legally binding act shall be adopted at any executive session. 
3.16 - Conflict of interest. 
    No members of the Council shall be interested directly in any contract with the City. No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning the individual's own conduct. 
3.17 - Board of Health. 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council may constitute the Board of Health of the City, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statutes. The Council may by ordinance designate and appoint an existing area-wide health department as the City Health Department. 
CHAPTER IV. - General Administrative Organization 

4.1 - Administrative departments. 
    The Administrative functions of the City shall be performed within the Administrative Departments that exist on the effective date of this Charter. The City Council may establish, alter, consolidate, or abolish Administrative Departments by ordinance. All Administrative Departments shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager. 
4.2 - Operation of departments. 
    All Departments of the City except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager, who shall have the right to divide such departments into separate divisions and to assign the various functions and duties to the different departments and divisions. 
4.3 - City Manager-Appointment and qualifications. 
    The Council may appoint a City Manager within ninety days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the Council. The City Manager shall be selected solely on the basis of the individual's executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to their actual experience in and their knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of their office as hereafter set forth. At the time of the individual's appointment, he or she need not be a resident of the City or State, but during tenure of office he or she shall reside within the City. The City Manager shall be a full time employee and may engage in other business and employment activities, but only upon approval of a majority of the entire City Council. The City Manager's salary shall be fixed by the Council. Upon such termination, the Council may in its discretion, provide termination pay. 
4.4 - City Manager-Functions and duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City government. The City Manager's functions and duties shall be: 
(a)  To be responsible to the Council for efficient administration of all departments of the City government except the City Attorney and the Municipal Judge. 22, 7 
(b)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(c)  To appoint the heads of the several City departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this Charter, and to direct and supervise such department heads. 
(d)  To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts, or agreements. 
(e)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed. 
(f)  To recommend an annual budget to the Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Council, and to keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. 
(g)  To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote. 
(h)  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the City that are not imposed by this Charter or ordinance upon some other official. Not counteracting any other provision in this Charter, the Manager may, in the event of an emergency, at his or her discretion, exercise complete administrative authority over any department, department head, or City employee and all City owned property. The City Manager shall determine when such emergency exists. 
(i)  To be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by the Council and which shall conform to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting. The City Manager shall submit financial statements to the Council monthly, or more often as the Council directs. 
(j)  To act as Purchasing Agent for the City and in such capacity to purchase all supplies and equipment and dispose of the same in accordance with procedures established by the Council. 
(k)  To establish, subject to approval by the Council, appropriate personnel rules and regulations governing officers and employees of the City. 
(l)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Charter or required of the City Manager by ordinance or by direction of the Council. 
(m)  The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the City including a financial report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
4.5 - Acting City Manager. 
    The Council may appoint or designate an Acting City Manager during the period of vacancy in the office or during the absence of the City Manager from the City or disability of the City Manager. Such Acting City Manager shall, while in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions, and authority of the City Manager. 
4.6 - Relationship of Council to administrative service. 
    Neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Manager or in any way interfere with the City Manager or other City officers to prevent the individual from exercising their judgement in the appointment or employment of employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
4.7 - Clerk-Functions and duties. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings and shall be appointed and removed by the City Manager with the approval by a majority vote of all members of the City Council. 
(b)  The Clerk shall be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. This individual shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The Clerk shall certify by their signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
(d)  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in the individual's office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter. 
(e)  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for this individual by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
4.8 - The Treasurer-Functions and duties. 
(a)  The City Manager shall appoint a City Treasurer to perform duties required by law, by City ordinances, and such other duties as may be required by the City Manager. The appointment or removal of the City Treasurer by the City Manager shall be subject to approval by a majority vote of all members of the entire City Council. 10 
(b)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the City, any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk, and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City. 
(c)  The Treasurer shall collect all monies of the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. This individual shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by such officers, employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the City Manager. 
(e)  The Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and procedures to be established by the Council. 
(f)  As directed by Council, The Treasurer may be in charge of investing any and all surplus City funds including surplus water and sewer utility funds as such surplus water and sewer utility funds are established. 
(g)  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for this individual by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
(h)  The Council, on recommendation of the City Manager, may authorize the same person to serve as City Treasurer and City Clerk. 
4.9 - City Attorney. 
(a)  The Council shall appoint a City Attorney for an indefinite term. The City Attorney shall be an attorney at law admitted to practice law in the State of Colorado and have a minimum of five years experience in the active practice of law. The Council may provide the City Attorney with such assistance as the Council may deem necessary. 
(b)  The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council. The Attorney shall advise any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to the Attorney's official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by the individual. 
(c)  The City Attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall conduct for the City cases in Court and before other legally constituted tribunals. The Attorney shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(d)  The City Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds, and other written instruments which are submitted to the Attorney by the Council and City Manager and shall promptly give his or her opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(e)  The City Attorney shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the City. 
(f)  The City Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for the individual by this Charter or by the Council. 
(g)  Upon recommendation of the City Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the City Attorney therein. 
(h)  The compensation of the City Attorney shall be set by the Council. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement between the Council and the City Attorney or special counsel, before the service has been rendered, for which such compensation is to be paid. 
4.10 - Acting Officers-Deputies. 
    During the absence or disability of any appointed officer provided for in this Chapter, any other person may be designated to serve. Such person shall, while in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions, and authority of that office. The Council may provide for Deputy City Clerk and Deputy City Treasurer, as needed, with such duties, functions, and authority as the City Manager or Council shall determine. 
CHAPTER V. - Municipal Court 

5.1 - Municipal Court. 
(a)  There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the City, subject to appeal to the appropriate Court in the manner provided by law for appeals from Municipal Court to the appropriate Court. The Court may punish contempt of Court by fine and/or imprisonment in an amount and length as allowed for by law; may enforce its orders and judgement in like manner as a Court of record may do, and as provided by general law; and may render final judgement on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to such Court, subject to appeal as in other cases. 11 
(b)  When the Municipal Judge or Judges are not immediately available for purposes of admission to bail of persons arrested and brought to the Municipal Court or jail on charges of violating a municipal ordinance or code, such persons may be admitted to bail pursuant to Court Rule, by the Municipal Court Clerk, a Deputy Municipal Court Clerk or other responsible and appropriate officer designated by the Judge or Judges. The court shall provide by rule for the conditions and circumstances under which such admission to bail will be granted pending appearance before the Judge. Bail so required may be, at the election of the accused, in the form of a cash security, real property or tangible or intangible personal property, and acceptable corporate surety bond or adequate and acceptable private sureties. In cases when so permitted, under the rules established by the Court, bail may be upon personal recognizance without security or surety. 
5.2 - Presiding Officer-Qualifications and compensation. 
    The Municipal Court shall be presided over and its functions exercised by one or more Judges. The Judge or Judges shall be an Attorney at Law admitted to practice law in the State of Colorado. The Judge or Judges shall be appointed by the Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Council shall designate the presiding Judge. Each Judge shall receive a fixed salary or compensation, not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided, and to be fixed by the Council from time to time. In the event all regularly appointed Judges are absent, disqualified or unable to act in any matter or case, the Mayor may call any eligible person to act and serve temporarily. 
(a)  The Council shall provide a suitable place and all supplies and things necessary for the proper functioning of the Court. 
(b)  The forms of the Complaint and all other rules, procedures and proceedings in the Municipal Court shall be fixed by the presiding Municipal Judge. The costs and fees in the Municipal Court shall be fixed by the presiding Municipal Judge with the approval of the Council by resolution. 
(c)  There shall be provided a Clerk of the Municipal Court and such deputies as is deemed necessary. The Municipal Court Clerk and the Deputy Municipal Court Clerks shall have such duties and authority as fixed by this Charter, by ordinance or by rules of the Municipal Court. 33 
5.3 - Process jurisdiction. 
    Summons, complaints, citations, and warrants or any other process of the Municipal Court may be served on any person anywhere in the State of Colorado. 
CHAPTER VI. - Personnel and Career Service 

6.1 - Personnel merit system. 
    Council may establish a system for employment and promotion of City Employees based on personnel merit. Such system shall include at least the following: 
(a)  Employment and promotion in the City Government based on individual merit. 
(b)  Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment. 
(c)  Classification and compensation according to duties and responsibilities. 
(d)  Provisions for systematic tests and evaluations if necessary for appointments, promotions, and other personnel actions based on merit principle. 
(e)  Continuity of employment based on behavior, performance of work and necessity for performance of work. 
(f)  Dismissal and disciplinary procedures shall be established, publicized and observed. 
6.2 - Administration. 
    The Manager shall administer the system with fairness to all and in a manner designed to stimulate high morale of the employees. Nothing herein shall preclude the Manager from the appointment of, removal of, and discipline of employees included under the merit system or at the Manager's discretion to delegate authority to do so. 
6.3 - Employees included. 
    All employees of the City shall be included within the provisions of the merit system, except the City Manager, elective officers, appointees of Council, appointed members of boards and commissions, persons employed to make or conduct a special inquiry, investigation, examination or installation, or audit. 
6.4 - Employee grievances. 
    The City Council shall provide for a system of appeal for employees to grieve any adverse action taken against an employee that results in loss of employment, pay, or benefits that assures each employee an opportunity to protect their constitutional rights in accordance with current law. 
6.5 - Implementation. 
    The Manager shall present to Council such rules and regulations as are necessary to implement and carry out the intent expressed in this Chapter. Any ordinance adopted by Council under these sections may be amended from time to time upon recommendation of the Manager and as Council deems advisable provided such changes are not inconsistent with the intent of this Chapter. 
6.6 - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of the City whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by the way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the City an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that they will on demand deliver over their successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent to the City, all books, papers, monies, effects, and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to the individual's office, which may be in his or her custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that the individual will, on demand, pay over or account for to the City, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all monies received by the individual as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, City employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City. The Clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except that the Treasurer shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the Clerk. In the event the offices of Clerk and Treasurer are held by the same person, then the City Manager shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining to the Clerk and Treasurer. 
6.7 - Delivery of office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, the individual shall within five days, or sooner on demand, deliver to their successor in office or to their superior all books, papers, monies, and effects in the individual's custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the statute. Any employee found guilty by competent tribunal of violating this provision may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as determined by the Court. 
6.8 - Conflicting interest prohibited. 
    The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. No member of the Council, shall act in such a manner which results in conflicting interest. Conflicting interest shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(a)  Acting in official capacity on matters in which the official has a substantial private financial interest clearly separate from that of the general public. 
(b)  The acceptance of gifts and other things of substantial value, which would tend to improperly influence a reasonable person in an official position to depart from the faithful discharge of his or her public duties; or which he or she knows, or which a reasonable person in his or her position should know under the circumstances is primarily for the purpose of rewarding him or her for official action which has been taken. 
(c)  Disclosure or use of confidential information acquired in the course of official duties in order to substantially further personal financial interests. 
(d)  Engaging in a financial transaction for private business purposes with a person whom the official inspects or supervises in the course of official duties. 
(e)  Performing an official act directly and substantially affecting to its economic benefit a business or other undertaking in which the official either has a substantial financial interest or is engaged as counsel, consultant, representative or agent. 
(f)  Taking action on any contract or proposed contract made on behalf of the City by an official having personal or private interest in such contract. 
(g)  Any elective official of the City holding any appointive office or being employed by the City during the term for which said elective official was elected. 
6.9 - Compensation of officers and employees. 
    The compensation of all officers and employees of the City whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan which may be adopted by the Council. The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees, as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. Such fees, commissions and compensation shall belong to the City and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the City Treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Manager. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in behalf of the City. 
6.10 - Anti-nepotism. 
    The City Manager shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that no relatives are placed in supervisory-subordinate relationships. 
CHAPTER VII. - Legislation 

7.1 - Prior City legislation. 
    All valid by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provided for the appointment of any officers or members of any board or commission shall, hereafter be appointed by the Council. 
7.2 - Repeal. 
    Those provisions of any effective by-law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
7.3 - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    All official action by the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Action by resolution, motion or order shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done so by this Charter or by State or Federal laws pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the City Government. In addition to such acts of the Council as may be required by other provisions of the Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by number and by a code section number, when a codification of ordinances is completed. 
7.4 - Form of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be introduced in written form and no ordinance or section thereof shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance regularly adopted. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Evans, Colorado". 
7.5 - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance may be introduced at any regular or special meeting. It may be passed on first reading by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members elected to the Council at the meeting at which it is introduced. 29 
(b)  After the passage of an ordinance on first reading, the ordinance shall be posted and the title published as required in this Charter. 
(c)  No ordinance may be passed on second and final reading earlier than ten days after the first reading, provided this provision shall not apply to emergency ordinances. 
(d)  An ordinance may be passed on second and final reading by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members elected to Council. An ordinance may be amended after first reading and passage and before second reading and final passage, provided said amendment or amendments do not change the stated purpose of the ordinance. The text of any such amendment or amendments shall be read in full. 29 
(e)  The effective date of all ordinances shall be on the date of final passage unless another date is prescribed therein. 
(f)  The "Yes" and "No" votes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions and entered upon the journal of the Council proceedings. A Councilmember shall be excused from voting on matters involving the consideration of the individual's own official conduct, or where the individual's financial interests are involved. 
7.6 - Passage of emergency ordinances. 
    An ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety with the reason specified within the ordinance, may be enacted at the regular or special meeting at which it is introduced by five affirmative votes without any requirement of prior posting or publication and without any requirement of a second reading and passage. Such emergency ordinances, after passage, shall be posted and the title published as required by this Charter. 
7.7 - Posting and publication. 
    The full text of each ordinance after passage on first reading and before second reading and final passage, and after second reading and final passage shall be posted in the City in such places as are designated by resolution of the Council. The title of each ordinance and a statement that the ordinance is on file in the City Clerk's office for public inspection shall be published in a newspaper legally qualified for City publications as provided in this Charter after first passage and before second passage and again after second and final passage. 
7.8 - Amendment or repeal. 
    No ordinance, section or sub-section thereof shall be amended, superseded, or repealed except by an ordinance regularly adopted. No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the revised sections or sub-section of the ordinance, as amended, shall be re-enacted. However, an ordinance, section or sub-section thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
7.9 - Recording of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book called "The Ordinance Book" and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
7.10 - Penalties for violation of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance may provide for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any ordinance shall be at the discretion of the Municipal Judge, but shall not exceed the maximum amount for fines and punishment as provided under state law. 
7.11 - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  The City is hereby authorized to enact any ordinance which adopts any code by reference, in whole or in part; and such primary code, thus adopted, may in turn adopt by reference, in whole or in part, any secondary codes duly described therein. However, the title of every primary code and every secondary code which is incorporated in any such adopting ordinance, shall be specified in the title of the ordinance. 
(b)  After the first reading of the adopting ordinance, the Council shall schedule a public hearing concerning the adopting ordinance and of the code and any secondary codes to be adopted thereby. Notice of the hearing shall be published twice in a newspaper meeting the requirements for publication of ordinances, once at least eight days preceding the hearing, and once at least fifteen days preceding it. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, that copies of the adopting ordinance, of the primary code and also copies of the secondary codes, if any, being considered for adoption, are on file with the City Clerk and open to public inspection. The notice shall also contain a description which the Council deems sufficient to give notice to interested persons of the purpose of the code and of any secondary code incorporated thereby by reference, the subject matter of each such code, the name and address of the agency by which each has been promulgated, or municipality which has enacted such code, and the date of publication of such code or codes, and in the case of a code of any municipality as they existed and were effective at a given date. 
(c)  After the hearing, the Council may amend, adopt or reject the adopting ordinance in the same manner in which it is empowered to act in the case of other ordinances; provided, nothing in this Charter shall be deemed to permit the adoption by reference of any penalty clause which may appear in any code which is adopted by reference. Any such penalty clause may be enacted only if set forth in full in the adopting ordinance. It is further provided that all changes or additions to any code made by the Council shall be set out in full in the adopting ordinance. 
(d)  The adopting ordinance shall be posted and the title of the ordinance shall be published as is provided in the case of any other ordinance. Not less than three copies of the adopting ordinance together with three copies of each primary code, and of each secondary code pertaining thereto, all certified to be true copies by the Mayor and the City Clerk, shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk prior to the enacting of the adopting ordinance on first reading and shall remain on file prior to the public hearing and following adoption after the public hearing. Following the adoption of any code, the City Clerk shall at all times maintain a reasonable supply of copies of the primary code and of any secondary code incorporated in it by reference, available to the public at a moderate price. The Council shall not be required to read the code text at the meetings at which the adopting ordinance is passed on first and second readings, provided said codes and primary codes, if any, are on file in the office of the City Clerk, as herein provided. 
(e)  If, at any time, any code which the City has previously adopted by reference, shall be amended by the agency or municipality which originally promulgated, adopted, or enacted it, then the Council may adopt such amendment by reference through the same procedure as required for the adoption of the original code; or an ordinance may be enacted in regular manner setting forth the entire text of such amendment. 
(f)  Copies of such codes in published form, duly certified by the City Clerk and the Mayor of the City, shall be received without further proof as prima facie evidence of the provisions of such codes or public records in all courts and administrative tribunals of this State. 
7.12 - Definitions. 
    As used in the text of this Charter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context requires otherwise: 
(a)  "Code" shall mean any published compilation of statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, or standards adopted by the Federal government or the State of Colorado, or by an agency of either of them, or by municipality within the State of Colorado, or by any state or nationally recognized organization, institution or agency, such as, but not limited to the Pacific Coast Building Officials Conference and the National Fire Protection Association. It shall include any codification or compilation of existing ordinances of the adopting municipality. 
(b)  "Primary Code" shall mean any code which is directly adopted by reference in whole or in part by any ordinance passed pursuant to this Charter. 
(c)  "Secondary Code" shall mean any code which is incorporated by reference directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, in any primary code or in any secondary code. 
7.13 - Severability of ordinances. 
    If any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a Court such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the Court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. Each ordinance shall be deemed to have included as a part of it this severability provision even though this severability provision is not set out in the ordinance, unless an ordinance shall expressly provide that this severability provision is not applicable. 
7.14 - Codification of ordinances. 
(1)  The Council may direct and complete the codification of all ordinances of the City and shall provide for the subsequent amendments thereto so that such amendments may readily be made a part of such published code and maintained thereafter in current form. Any such codification may originally include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the City. 
(2)  The Council shall provide for making copies of the codification available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge therefore and shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such codification before the effective date thereof. Such printing and making available of the codification and notice thereof shall constitute publication of any such codification other provisions of this Charter for publication notwithstanding. 
(3)  The copies of the ordinances and of the codification thereof, and of provisions adopted by reference may be certified by the Clerk, and when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all Courts and other legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
7.15 - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereafter provided. The referendum provision of this Charter shall not apply to any ordinance which contains therein a declaration that said ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, nor shall the referendum provision apply to appropriations for the support and maintenance of any City department. 
7.16 - Initiatory and referendary petition. 
(1)  An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City, as of the date of the last regular City election, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within twenty-one days before the date of filing the petition with the City Clerk. 
(2)  Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to content and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposed to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or part thereof, or code section it proposes to have repealed. 
(3)  Each signer of a petition shall sign their name, and shall place thereon, after their name, the date and their place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of qualified electors of the City, the City Clerk shall notify forthwith by registered mail the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
7.17 - Council procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    Upon the presentation to the Council of an initiatory or referendary petition by the City Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty days, either: 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition. 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition; or 
(c)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
7.18 - Submission of initiatory and referendary ordinance to electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next Municipal election held in the City for any other purpose or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special Municipal election called for that purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no Municipal election is to be held in the City for any other purpose within one hundred fifty (150) days from the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not enact the ordinance, then the Council shall call a special Municipal election within sixty (60) days from such date of presentation for the submission of the initiative proposal. The result of all Municipal elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
7.19 - Miscellaneous provisions on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of six months after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of six months after the date of the election at which it was repealed; provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended, or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
CHAPTER VIII. - General Finance-Budget-Audit 

8.1 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of January of each year and end on the thirty-first day of December of the same year. 
8.2 - Budget procedures. 
    The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council on or before the fifteenth of October of each year a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, which shall include therein at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates with the Manager's supporting explanations of all proposed expenditures for each department, office, and agency of the City; and for the Court, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full; and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year. 17 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the City from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to September first, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit of the end of the current fiscal year. 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
8.3 - Schedule of capital outlay. 
    If required by the Council, by resolution or ordinance, the City Manager shall submit to the Council simultaneously with a recommended budget, a schedule showing all recommended capital outlay expenditures during the following five fiscal years. 
8.4 - Public budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least ten days in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than ten days prior to such hearing. 
8.5 - Adoption of budget. 
    The City Council, by resolution, shall adopt an annual budget and shall make annual appropriations pursuant to procedures outlined by State law. 
8.6 - Budget control. 
(1)  Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from funds of the City except in accordance with an appropriation thereof, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year, except that money from the contingency fund may be transferred by ordinance at any time during the year. The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditure shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
(2)  The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the General Fund, except any such balance in the Utilities Fund shall become a part of the same fund for the next fiscal year. 
(3)  If the City Council fails to adopt a budget before certification of the mill levy as provided under State law, then one hundred percent (100%) of the amounts appropriated in the current fiscal year for operation and maintenance expenses shall be deemed reappropriated for the purposes specified in such last appropriation ordinance. 
8.7 - Sinking funds. 
    The Council may by ordinance provide for sinking or special funds, to provide for monies held in trust, for depreciation and obsolescence of structures, machinery and equipment, for debt service, and for local improvements. 
8.7-1 - Emergency contingency fund. 
(1)  The Council shall establish an Emergency Contingency Fund. Beginning with the fiscal year 1987 and annually thereafter, the Council shall budget and appropriate to said fund an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the estimated General Fund revenues, until such fund is equal in amount to twenty-five percent (25%) of actual General Fund expenditures of the preceding year. Any time the Emergency Contingency Fund is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of actual General Fund expenditures of the preceding year, the Council shall again budget and appropriate funds, not exceeding five percent (5%) of estimated General Fund revenues, until such fund is again equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of actual General Fund expenditures of the preceding year. At any time the Emergency Contingency Fund exceeds $1,000,000 any funds exceeding $1,000,000 may, by Council approval, be transferred to the general fund. 
(2)  No funds shall be expended from the Emergency Contingency Fund unless such expenditure is first approved by an ordinance declaring an emergency and setting forth the facts constituting such emergency. Such ordinance must be passed by five affirmative votes of the Council. 
8.8 - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for City funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies. The Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
8.9 - Investments. 
    Subject to the provisions of this Charter, monies remaining in any fund which the City Treasurer may determine will not be required to be disbursed for a period of thirty days or more thereafter, may in the discretion of the City Treasurer, and with City Council approval, be invested in one or more of the securities permitted by the statutes of Colorado governing investment of public funds, or in bonds payable out of the revenues of any service or facility furnished by the City; or in general obligation bonds of the City. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the fund to which the invested money belongs, if such can be determined, otherwise to the General Fund of the City. City funds may be placed in any savings account that is guaranteed by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation for no greater amount than is guaranteed in each bank. 
8.10 - Independent audit, annual report. 
    Subject to the provisions of this Charter, independent audits shall be made of all City accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council, and has to be returned within 120 days. Such audits shall be made by Certified or Registered Public Accountants, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
8.11 - Copies of audit. 
    Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
CHAPTER IX. - Taxation 

9.1 - Collection of taxes. 
(1)  Until the Council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, the County Treasurer shall collect City taxes in the same manner and at the same time as State taxes are collected. 
(2)  In like manner the Council may provide for collection of special improvement assessments by said Treasurer. All laws of this State for the assessment of property and the levy and collection of general taxes, sale of property for taxes, and the redemption of the same, shall apply and have as full effect in respect to taxes of the City as of such general taxes, except as modified by the Charter. The County Treasurer shall report and pay to the City the amount of tax collections of the City for the preceding month. The estimated costs of tax collections and losses shall be included in the budget. 
9.2 - Limitation on tax powers of City. 
    No sales tax or cigarette tax shall be adopted until it shall have been approved by five affirmative votes of the Council. 
9.3 - Authority to acquire property. 
    In addition to all other power which it has to acquire property, the City of Evans is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and/or special assessments. The City may also dispose of any property acquired under this authority. 
9.4 - City Assessor. 
    The Council, by ordinance, may provide for the assessment of property within the City for municipal taxation and the levy and collection of taxes thereon for municipal purposes and special assessments for local improvements. 
CHAPTER X. - Municipal Borrowing 

10.1 - Forms of borrowing. 
    The City may borrow money and issue the following securities to evidence such borrowing: 
(a)  Short-term notes 
(b)  General Obligation Bonds and other like securities 
(c)  Revenue Bonds and other like securities 
(d)  Local Improvement Bonds and other like securities 
10.2 - Short-term notes. 
    The Municipal Government upon the affirmative vote of five members of the Council, is hereby authorized to borrow money without an election in anticipation of the collection of taxes or the revenues and to issue short-term notes to evidence the amount so borrowed. Such short-term notes shall mature before the close of the fiscal year in which the money is so borrowed, and shall not be extended or funded except in compliance with Section 10.3, "General Obligation Bonds" of this Chapter. 
10.3 - General obligation bonds. 
    No Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general (Ad Valorem) property taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the City are pledged, shall be issued, except in pursuance of an ordinance nor until the question of their issuance shall at a special or general election be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors and approved by a majority of those voting on the question; provided that such securities issued for acquiring water and water rights thereto, or acquiring, improving or extending a municipal water system, sanitary sewer system, sewage disposal system or any combination of such purposes, may be so issued without an election. 
10.4 - Limitation on indebtedness. 
    The aggregate amount of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall not exceed fifteen percent of the actual valuation of the taxable property within the City as shown by the last preceding assessment for City purposes; provided, however, that in determining the amount of indebtedness, there shall not be included within the computation, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness outstanding or authorized water works system or the municipal storm sewer, sanitary sewer, combined storm and sanitary sewers or sewage disposal systems, short-term notes, local improvement securities, or securities payable solely from the revenues of an income-producing system, utility, or other project. 
10.5 - Revenue bonds. 
    The City in pursuance of an ordinance may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, condemning, otherwise acquiring, extending or improving a water, electric, gas or sewer system, or other public utility or income producing project; provided that the bonds or other obligations shall be made payable solely out of the revenues derived from the operation of such system, utility, or other such project; and provided, further, that any two or more of such systems, utilities and projects may be combined, operated and maintained as joint municipal systems, utilities or projects, in which case such bonds or other obligations shall be made payable solely out of the net revenue derived from the operation of such joint systems, utilities or project. No election shall be necessary to authorize the bonds. 
10.6 - Refunding bonds. 
(1)  The City, pursuant to ordinance, may issue its bonds or other securities without an election for the purpose of refunding outstanding general obligation bonds, general obligation water bonds or revenue bonds, or other such securities, and it shall be the duty of the Council to refund such securities whenever it determines it is advantageous and favorable to the City to do so. Any such refunding revenue securities shall be payable solely from the net revenues of the system, utility or other income producing project acquired, extended or improved, with proceeds from issuance of the securities so refunded. The period of payment of refunding bonds shall not exceed the estimated life of the facilities financed by the bonds being refunded and in no case for a longer term than thirty years from the date of the refunding bonds. 
(2)  The proceeds derived from the issuance of any refunding bonds under the provisions of this section shall either be immediately applied to the payment, or redemption, and retirement of the bonds to be refunded, and the costs and expenses incident thereto, or shall immediately be placed in escrow to be applied to the payment of said bonds upon their presentation therefore, and the costs and expenses incident thereto, as may be provided by the City Council. Any funds of the City legally available therefore may be placed in any escrow account established under the provisions of this section, and may be used for the purposes specified in the escrow agreement, if such procedure is deemed by the City Council to be in the best interests of the City. 
10.7 - Bonds limited to life of the project. 
    The ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation or revenue bonds or other such securities shall state the estimated period of usefulness of the property or improvements for which issued, and the term of any such bonds shall not exceed such estimated period. No bonds shall be issued for a term longer than thirty years from the date thereof. 
10.8 - Bonds-Interest, sale. 
    The terms and maximum interest rate or general obligation or revenue bonds or other like securities shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance and such securities shall be sold to the best advantage of the City; provided that any refunding bond may be exchanged dollar for dollar for a bond refunded. All bonds may contain provisions for calling the same at designated interest periods prior to the final due date. The bonds may be sold at private sale. 
10.9 - Long term rentals and leaseholds. 
    In order to provide necessary land, buildings, equipment, and other property for governmental or proprietary purposes, the City is hereby authorized to enter into long term rental or leasehold agreements. Such agreements may include an option or options to purchase and acquire title to such leased or rented property within a period of not exceeding the useful life of such property, and in no case exceeding forty years. Each such agreement and the terms thereof shall be concluded by an ordinance, duly enacted by the City. No such ordinance shall take effect before thirty days after its passage. The Council is authorized and empowered to provide for the payment of said rentals from a general levy imposed upon both personal and real property included within the boundaries of the City, or by imposing rates, tolls, and service charges for the use of such property or any part thereof by others, or from any other available municipal income, or from any one or more of the above sources. The obligation to pay such rentals shall not constitute an indebtedness of the City within the meaning of the constitutional limitations on contracting of indebtedness by cities. Property acquired or occupied pursuant to this Charter shall be exempt from taxation so long as used for authorized governmental or proprietary functions of the City. 
CHAPTER XI. - Improvement Districts 

11.1 - Special and local improvement districts and construction of improvements therein. 
(1)  The Council shall have the power to establish, by ordinance, improvement districts for the construction of special or local improvements of every kind and character in the following manner to-wit: 
(a)  On a petition by the owners of more than fifty-one percent of the area of the proposed district, provided that such majority shall include not less than fifty-one percent of the landowners. 
(b)  By order of the Council upon its determination that such improvement is necessary for the preservation of the public welfare. 
(2)  A public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties may appear and be heard. The City shall fix the time and place for such hearing. The improvement district proposal shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall fix the time and the place for such hearing. Publication shall take place not less than seven days nor more than fourteen days prior to said hearing, and during this period a notice or summary thereof shall be mailed to each property owner affected. At the conclusion of the public hearing the Council shall consider all protests and shall establish or reject all or any part of the proposed district as the interests of the petitioners and the general public may best be served. 
(3)  The establishing ordinance shall prescribe the method and manner of making such improvements, the letting of contracts therefore and the assessing of the cost thereof. The ordinance shall provide for issuing and paying special improvement bonds to defray the costs and expenses of the organization of said district and of the construction or installation of said improvements. Property owners shall have the right to pay their individual assessments in full prior to certification of the assessment to the County and such payment in full shall be subject to a discount in an amount to be set by Council, not to exceed their proportionate share of the bond interest plus the cost of annual collection. 
11.2 - Special or local improvement district bonds-General benefits. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the Council may levy annual taxes on the taxable property within the city, not exceeding three mills in any one year to be disbursed as determined by the Council for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessments levied against the City itself in connection with bonds issued for special or local improvement districts and for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereafter created. 
11.3 - Local improvements. 
    The power to create special local improvement districts, to assess the costs of the construction of public improvements of a local and municipal character or any part thereof against benefited property therein, and to issue special or local improvement bonds, is vested in the Council. The cost of that part of local improvement which is of a special benefit to particular real property may be assessed against the real property as benefited. The procedure governing the creation of special or local improvement districts, the assessment of a part or all the cost against the benefited property, and the issuance of special local improvement bonds shall be governed by general law relating to special or local improvements in cities and towns, unless prior to the initiation thereof, the Council by ordinance has prescribed a different procedure thereto, and except insofar as general law has been superseded by this Charter or by ordinance. The Council may prescribe the procedure to be followed in the construction of special or local improvements, assessments of the cost, time of payment thereof, foreclosure, and all other matters relating to the mechanics of levying and paying assessments. 
11.4 - Surplus and deficiency fund. 
    Where all outstanding bonds have been paid in a special or local improvement district and any money remains to the credit of the district, it shall be refunded to the current property owners in the district. 
11.5 - Review of improvement district proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized by this Chapter, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had under this Chapter, or of the City, with reference thereto, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within thirty days after the performance of the act or the effective date of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
CHAPTER XII. - Zoning 

12.1 - Planning Commission. 
    There shall be a City Planning Commission which shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be qualified electors residing within the City and all of whom shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of five years, Members of the City Council shall be prohibited from serving on the Planning Commission. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. Any member of the Commission may be removed by the Council for cause, after public hearing, if a hearing is requested by such member. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure (bylaws), which shall include its process for election of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, scheduling of meetings, and proceedings of meetings. All meetings and records of the Commission shall be open to the public. City staff shall keep minutes of the Commission's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its official actions. 
12.2 - Planning Commission, term of members, vacancies. 
    Repealed by a vote of citizens on April 6, 2010. 
12.3 - Planning Commission-Powers and duties. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, provide for the powers and duties of the Planning Commission. 
12.4 - Director of Planning. 
    Repealed by a vote of citizens on April 6, 2010. 
12.5 - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals which shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be qualified electors residing within the City and all of whom shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of five years Members of the City Council shall be prohibited from serving on the Zoning Board of Appeals. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. Any member of the Board may be removed by the Council for cause, after public hearing, if a hearing is requested by such member. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure (bylaws), which shall include its process for election of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, scheduling of meetings, and proceedings of meetings. All meetings and records of the Board shall be open to the public. City staff shall keep minutes of the Board's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its official actions. 
12.6 - The comprehensive plan. 
    The Council shall adopt, by ordinance, rules, procedures, and requirements for the adoption of the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
12.7 - Platting and subdivisions control. 
    The Council shall adopt, by ordinance, rules, procedures, and requirements for the adoption of the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
12.8 - Regulations governing subdivision of land. 
    Repealed by a vote of citizens on April 6, 2010. 
12.9 - Zoning ordinance. 
    For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the City, the Council shall, by ordinance, establish zoning districts and permitted uses in such districts and regulate the location, heights, bulk, aesthetics, design, and size of buildings and other structures; design and size of bufferyards, setbacks, landscaping, and other open spaces; off-street parking; the density of population; and the uses of buildings, structures, and land. The Council shall adopt, by ordinance, rules, procedures, and requirements for the processing of applications for variances to such requirements. 
12.10 - Powers of City Council in slum clearance and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
    The Council may adopt, modify, and carry out plans for clearance of slum and rehabilitation of blighted areas within the City consistent with the Colorado Urban Renewal Law. 
12.11 - Housing. 
    The Council may provide, by ordinance, for sale of sanitary housing accommodations for families of low income and for such purpose may prepare plans for housing projects, authorize the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any housing constructed or acquired by the City. All property both real and personal acquired, owned, leased, rented or operated for housing projects shall be deemed public property for public use and the providing of safe and sanitary housing for families of low income is hereby declared to be a public use and public purpose. The Council may enter into agreement with the Weld County Housing Authority, or similar agency, for the provision of such housing. 
12.12 - Zoning procedure. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt procedures for the establishment and amendment of zoning of property within the City. 
CHAPTER XIII. - Boards and Commissions 

13.1 - General provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any provisions in Sections 3.8, 6.4, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, or any other Charter provision or ordinance in conflict herewith, the qualifications, number, term, power, duties, and procedures of all boards and commissions shall be established by the Council. 
13.2 - Creation. 
    Advisory boards may be created by resolution. All other boards shall be created by ordinance. 
13.3 - Boards abolished. 
    The Council may abolish any board or commission not required by statute or this Charter as it deems advisable. 
CHAPTER XIV. - Utilities and Franchises 

14.1 - Powers. 
    The City Council shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises, all municipal powers, including without limitation, all powers now existing and which may be hereafter provided by the Constitution of the State of Colorado and Statutes of the State of Colorado. The right of the City to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, is expressly reserved. 
14.2 - Water rights. 
    The City shall have the power to own and control water rights and to exchange water rights owned by it for water rights owned by other municipalities or quasi-municipal corporations or by other persons, and to purchase, obtain or acquire water and water rights from any source including such existing water rights as may be used upon any land which is annexed to the City from time to time. 
14.3 - Consolidation. 
    The City shall have the right to contract with municipalities or quasi-municipal corporations or any other persons for the purpose of forming consolidated water or sewer districts or for furnishing any municipal service. 
14.4 - Extension of territory. 
    With respect to any franchise, after negotiation or mutual agreement, the Council may by ordinance extend the area including streets, alleys or public places and property not embraced in such franchise when public convenience and necessity requires, subject to the terms and conditions of such original franchise, and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified electors. 
14.5 - Railroad tracks and crossings. 
    Council may require by ordinance and by fair apportionment of the cost, any railroad or other transportation system to elevate or lower any of its right-of-way or tracks running over, under, along or across any public thoroughfare: and to construct and maintain all street crossings, bridges, viaducts, and other conveniences in good condition with proper approaches and safety devices. 
14.6 - Revocable license. 
    After public hearing, Council by ordinance may grant a license, revocable for cause, to lay sidetracks, and switches along, or across any public thoroughfare, in accordance with standards and procedures to be adopted by Council. 
14.7 - Revocable permits. 
    Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupancy of any street, alley or public place. Such permits shall be revocable by Council at any time whether or not the right is expressly reserved in the permit. 
14.8 - Term of compensation and restriction. 
    No franchise shall be granted for a period longer than twenty years or without reserving to the City such fair fee arising from the use thereof as shall be provided in the grant of such franchise. This compensation shall not exempt the grantee or the individual's assignees from any lawful assessment upon the individual's property or from other tax not related to the franchise privilege, or pertaining to the physical operation thereof, but shall exempt the grantee or the individual's assignees from any occupancy tax, license, tax, permit charge, inspection fee, or similar tax on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, as shall be fixed in the grant of any franchise. The franchise fee established by ordinance shall be paid as provided and be subject to mutual periodic re-negotiation, and failure to pay such fee shall result in forfeiture of franchise at the option of Council. Assignment or leasing of a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless application therefore be made to the City, and consent given by the Council by ordinance with such change of conditions or terms as they deem necessary. Council reserves the right to deny any assignment of franchise. 
14.9 - Franchise records. 
    The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all public utility franchises heretofore and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the grantee and any assignors. The records shall be a complete history of all such franchises and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual reports, and such other matters of information and public interest as the Council may from time to time require. 
14.10 - Limitations. 
    The granting of franchises by the City shall be limited only by the provisions of the Constitution and applicable Statutes of the State of Colorado as now in effect or as hereafter amended and shall be submitted to the vote of the people when required by constitutional provision. 
14.11 - Existing franchise. 
    All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance. 
CHAPTER XV. - Miscellaneous 

15.1 - Vested rights continued. 
(1)  After the effective date of this Charter the City shall be vested with all property, monies, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of operation under statutes governing second class cities. 
(2)  No right or liability, either in favor of or against the City, existing at the time this Charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be the debts and liabilities of the City, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
15.2 - Sundays and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this Charter or by ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
15.3 - Penalties for violation of Charter. 
    Any violation of a provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be tried in the Municipal Court. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished as provided in the Evans Municipal Code, but to be no more than the maximum permitted for fines and punishment as provided under state law. Any officer or employee of the City so convicted may be deprived of their office or employment and may be ineligible for any City office or employment for two years thereafter. The power to suspend or remove an elected official, City Manager, City Attorney, board or commission member, or any other official appointed by the Council, convicted under this section shall be vested in the Council. 
15.4 - Eminent domain. 
    In carrying out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this Charter or by the general statutes, the City shall have power to acquire within or without its corporate limits, lands, buildings, water, water rights and water storage rights, water and sewer properties, and other properties, and any interest in land and air rights over land, and may take the same upon paying just compensation to the owner as provided by law. 
15.5 - Chapter titles and subheadings. 
    The Chapter Titles and Sub-Headings are inserted for convenience and reference only and shall not be construed to limit, describe or control the scope or intent of any provision therein. 
15.6 - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors through petitioning the Council or by the Council on its own initiative in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Colorado. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one election. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between amendments voted upon at the same election and more than one be adopted, then the amendment receiving the largest number of votes shall prevail. 
15.7 - Actions: notice of injury. 
    No Action for the recovery of compensation for personal injury, death or property damage against the City on account of its negligence, shall be maintained unless written notice of the time, place and cause of injury, death or property damage is given to the City Clerk by the person injured, his agent or attorney, within sixty days of the occurrence causing the injury, death or property damage. The notice given under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed invalid or insufficient solely by reason of any inaccuracy in stating the time, place or cause of injury, if it is shown that there was no intent to mislead and that the City, in fact, was not misled thereby. This provision shall not be construed as a waiver of any governmental immunity the City may have. 
15.8 - Invalidity of part. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to be invalid or unconstitutional any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this Charter, such judgement or decree shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this Charter, but the effect thereof shall be confined to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this Charter so adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
15.9 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Charter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(b)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(c)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this Charter. 
(d)  Appropriation: The authorized amount of funds set aside or allocated for expenditure during a specified time and for a specified purpose. 
(e)  Ballot: Not limited to a piece of paper but may include any mechanical means such as voting machines, through which a voter expresses and records their choice thereon. 
(f)  City: The City of Evans, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
(g)  Council: The City Council of the City of Evans, Colorado. 
(h)  Employee: Any person in municipal service who is not an officer. 
(i)  Franchise: A special privilege granted by the City permitting the continuing use of public property such as City streets. 
(j)  Election: The municipal election held every two years at which candidates for elective offices of the City are voted upon. 
(k)  May: Construed as permissive. 
(l)  Officer: Any person who is elected to office or appointed by Council, including appointees to Boards and Commissions. 
(m)  Person: Is intended to have a broad definition not limited to such as is herein enumerated but to include at least the following: individual, corporation, association, political sub-division, state agency, singular or plural of each. 
(n)  Public Utility: Public utility or public utility corporations shall mean any person, firm, or corporation, operating heat, power or light systems, communications systems, water, sewer or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public. It shall not include any person, firm or corporation owning or operating sidetracks or switches for the accommodation of manufacturing plants and business houses, or private telephone lines, and shall not include municipally-owned utilities. 
(o)  Quorum: Shall mean a majority of the members of the Council, board, commission or similar body present for a meeting. 
(p)  Qualified Elector: A resident of the City who is qualified to vote under the Constitution and statutes and of the State of Colorado. 
(q)  Shall: Construed as mandatory. 
(r)  Statutes: The applicable laws of the State of Colorado as they now exist or as they may be amended, changed, repealed or otherwise modified by legal procedure. 
CHAPTER XVI. - Transitional Provisions 

16.1 - Status of transitional provisions. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for an orderly transition from the present City Government to a Home Rule Government under the provision of this Charter. This Chapter shall constitute a part of this Charter during the transition period. 
16.2 - Transition period. 
    Six months from the effective date of this Charter shall be known as the "transition period". During this period all officers and employees shall proceed with due diligence to put into effect the provisions of this Charter. During the transition period the Council shall designate by resolution provisions of the Charter to become operative. Resolutions shall fix the dates on which and the agency or agencies to which each provision becomes operative. Until superseded by the Charter, or any provision thereof, the State Statutes shall be in effect. 
16.3 - Present Council and Mayor to continue in office. 
    The Council and Mayor or their appointed successors, in office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall serve and carry out the functions, powers, and duties of their offices until their term of office expires. 
16.4 - Prior City legislation. 
    All by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the date of effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective by-laws, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Notes of Reference 
1.  Added Section 8.7-1 by vote of citizens on April 8, 1986 requiring an Emergency Contingency Fund and providing that expenditures from said funds may only be made with the unanimous consent of the City Council. 
2.  Section 10.3 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 1986, to include sanitary sewer systems and sewage disposal systems as exceptions to the general rule that general obligation bonds be approved by the voters. 
3.  Chapter 13 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 1986, to provide that the qualitications, number, term, powers, duties and procedures of all boards and commissions be established by City Council. 
4.  Section 3.5 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to require the City Council to fill a vacancy within forty-five (45) days, if such occurs in the office of the Mayor or Councilmember; and to require a Councilmember or Mayor to become qualified to serve within thirty (30) days after his term would begin, after election. 
5.  Section 3.15 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to require all meetings of the City Council or of any City Board, Commission, or Committee be open to the public except for negotiations on real estate transactions and certain other similar negotiations, conferences with an attorney, matters required by law to be confidential, security or investigatory matters, personnel matters, and consideration of any documents required by law to be confidential. 
6.  Section 4.1 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to eliminate the Utilities Department, allow administrative functions and departments to be established and changed by City Council, and further provide that all departments be under the supervision of the City Manager. 
7.  Section 4.4(a) amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to delete any reference to the Utilities Director. 
8.  Section 4.6 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to delete any reference to the Utilities Director. 
9.  Section 4.7 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to delete the prohibition against the City Clerk from being appointed City Manager and further delete any reference to the City Clerk acting as City Treasurer. 
10.  Section 4.8(a) amended by vote of citizens on April 7, !992, to require the appointment or removal of the City Treasurer to have the approval of a majority of the City Council. 
11.  Section 5.1 (a) amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to eliminate the restrictive limitations of a maximum fifty dollar ($50.00) fine and five (5) days imprisonment on the Municipal Court for punishment for contempt. 
12.  Section 6.3 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to place department heads within the merit system. 
13.  Section 6.4(b) & (c) amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to expand the definition of discrimination on the basis of employment to include race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, and mental or physical handicap. 
14.  Section 6.8 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to prohibit members of the City Council from engaging in activities designated as conflicts of interests including accepting gifts, using the position on Council to advance a private financial interest, and improper use of confidential information. 
15.  Section 6.10 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to charge the City Manager with the responsibility of ensuring that related persons are not employed in a supervisory/subordinate position. 
16.  Section 7.10 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to permit ordinances to have maximum penalties as provided by State Law, the present maximum penalties being a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine and/or one (1) year imprisonment. 
17.  Section 8.2(a) amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1992, to eliminate references to a Utilities Budget and eliminate the requirement that the City Manager submit a report of expenditures through September 1st, on the 15th of September each year. 
18.  Section 3.2 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, be to delete the designation of Ward boundaries but continue to permit the City Council, by Ordinance, to alter the three (3) Ward boundaries so as to contain approximately the same number of voters in each ward. 
19.  Section 3.5 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to clarify the term of office for which a successor is to be elected for the next regular election. 
20.  Section 3.12 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to provide that the City Council may enter into contracts with other governmental agencies by Resolution rather than by Ordinance. 
21.  Section 4.3 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to provide that the City Manager may engage in other business and employment activities, but only upon approval of a majority of the entire City Council. 
22.  Section 4.4(a) amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to clarify present language providing that the City Manager be responsible for all City departments except for that of the City Attorney and Municipal Judge. 
23.  Section 6.4 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to delete the specific provisions regarding appeal of employee grievances relating to discrimination and instead provide that the City Council shall adopt a system of appeal for employees to grieve any adverse action against them. 
24.  Section 8.5 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, to provide that the City Council shall adopt an annual budget and that annual appropriations shall be made pursuant to procedures outlined by State law. 
25.  Section 8.6 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, deleting the provision restricting the transfer of monies from one fund to another until after the first of July of the current fiscal year and further deleting the requirement that the City Manager submit monthly reports to the City Council showing the relationship between the estimated and actual revenue expenditures to date and providing specifically that if the City Council fails to adopt a budget prior to certification of the mill levy, then 100% of the amounts appropriated in the current fiscal year will be reappropriated for the subsequent fiscal year. 
26.  Section 8.7-1 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 1996, reducing the required Emergency Contingency Fund from fifty percent (50%) of General Fund Expenditures to twenty-five percent (25%) and further providing that the City Council may transfer any excess amounts in the Emergency Contingency Fund to the General Fund. 
27.  Section 2.5 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1998, to eliminate the requirement for an Election Commission and allow the City Clerk to appoint and establish compensation for City Election Judges. 
28.  Section 6.1, first sentence, amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1998, to eliminate the requirement that the City Council act only by ordinance to establish an employee Personnel Merit System. 
29.  Section 7.5, subsections (a) and (d), amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1998, to eliminate the requirement of orally reading ordinances at City Council meetings but retain the requirement that the full text of the ordinance be posted. 
30.  Section 11.4 amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1998, to eliminate the requirement that the City pay any deficiency in special improvement district bond payment and require that any excess money collected be reimbursed to the current property owners in the district. 
31.  Chapter XII amended by vote of citizens on April 7, 1998, to designate the Director of Planning as the technical advisor to the Planning Commission (to be appointed by the City Manager), to make minor corrections to the text of the Chapter and to change certain language in the text so that it is gender neutral. 
32.  Section 3.2 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 2002, to allow readjustment of Ward boundaries at least 90 days prior to any municipal regular election and allow the City Council to readjust the Ward boundaries, as deemed necessary, to comprise compact and contiguous territory for each ward to contain as nearly as possible an equal number of inhabitants. 
33.  Section 5.2(c) amended by vote of citizens on April2, 2002, to change the position of the Clerk of the Municipal Court from a position appointed by the City Council to an employment position that falls under the Personnel Merit System. 
34.  Section 8.2 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 2002, to correspond with the State statute deadline for submitting the annual budget to City Council. 
35.  Section 8.7-1 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 2002, to allow City Council to approve emergency expenditures by five affirmative votes of the City Council. 
36.  Section 12.1 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 2002, to allow any qualified elector of the City except a paid employee to be a member of the Planning Commission. 
37.  Section 15.3 amended by vote of citizens on April 2, 2002, to increase the maximum penalty permitted by Municipal Court to make them consistent with state law which is currently $1,000 and one year imprisonment. 
38.  Section 2.4 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 2008 to have the City Clerk give Notice of Election in accordance with federal, state, or municipal law, whichever is applicable. 
39  Section 3.5 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 2008 to change the time period from 45 to 90 days to fill a vacancy on the City Council and change the time period from six to two months that a Council member can be continuously absent without being disqualified from office. 
40.  Section 4.3 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 2008 to be consistent with federal law and allow the City Council to terminate the City Manager without the option of the City Manager to force a public hearing prior to termination. 
41.  Section 5.4 Violations Bureau was deleted by vote of citizens on April 8, 2008. 
42.  Section 7.19 amended by vote of citizens on April 8, 2008 to permit an ordinance enacted by City Council to be effective unless there is a majority vote of the citizens to either amend or repeal such ordinance. 
43.  Chapter XII amended by vote of citizens on April 6, 2010 to be consistent with current law and provisions for subdivisions, zoning, housing, blight, the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Planning Commission; to clarify that Planning Commissioners may not hold any other position with the City whether paid or unpaid; to amend provisions regarding the City Council overruling a recommendation of the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals to allow such by majority vote of the entire Council; to add a provision that one member of the Planning Commission and one member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be non-residents of the City provided that such members reside within the urban growth area of the City; and to make other miscellaneous changes designed to clarify and make these provisions consistent with current law and procedure. 
44.  Section 8.7-1 amended by vote of citizens on November 6, 2012 that the Emergency Contingency Fund be amended to provide for a ceiling of $1,000,000 to be accumulated in such fund allowing any funds exceeding $1,000,000 to be transferred to the General Fund, effective January 1, 2013. 
45.  Section 3.4 amended by vote of citizens on November 4, 2014 to clarify that Council members filling partial terms and filling vacancies will not be deemed to have served a term in office for purposes of determining term limits, and further providing that in no event shall a person serve more than ten continuous years as a Council member regardless of whether they are appointed or elected. 
46.  Chapter 12 amended by vote of citizens on November 4, 2014 to require members of the Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals to be qualified electors residing within the City and to allow such members to hold other board or commission positions in the City. 
47.  The Evans Home Rule Charter was amended by vote of citizens on April 5, 2016 to make the language of the Charter gender neutral and include labels for each subsection. 
48.  Chapter 3.14 was amended by vote of citizens on April 5, 2016 to include more modern means of providing notice of a Special Meeting of the Evans City Council Members. 
49.  Chapter 7.10 was amended by vote of citizens on April 5, 2016 to state that the fine for violating a city ordinance shall be at the discretion of the Municipal Judge, but shall not exceed the maximum amount for fines and punishment as provided under state law. 
THE CITY OF EVANS, COLORADO CHARTER CONVENTION CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION 
    We, the undersigned, present members of the Evans Charter Convention, duly elected by the people of Evans, Colorado, at a special election held on February 21, 1973, under the Authorization of Article XX, the Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the City of Evans, do hereby certify that the foregoing of the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Convention on the 30th day of April, 1973, for submission to the people of Evans at a special election to be held on June 12, 1973. 
    Done in triplicate at Evans, Colorado on the 30th day of April, 1973. 
GARRY G. EWING, Chairperson 
NELLIE DILL, Vice-Chairperson 
GERALD W. LOTT, Vice-Chairperson 
EVELYN CASTEEL, Secretary 
ROBERT L. ASBURY GERALD KREUTZER EUALINE BROWN JOHN JOE LOVATO EDWARD L. BROYLES RALPH R. LYMAN RETHA M. DORSEY MARTHA MINNING CHARLES E. ERICKSON JOAN M. ROBERTS RICHARD C. GRAMS RALPH SCHULTZ MARIE JORDAN WALLACE SHORT PAUL A. KEENER ROGER L. WOOD LILLIAN G. THOMPSON  
TITLE 1 - General Provisions 
CHAPTER 1.01 - Code Adoption 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 7.11 and 7.14 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Evans, there is adopted the "Evans Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.020 - Title - citation - reference. 
    The Code shall be known as the Evans Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Evans Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Evans Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Evans Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.030 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of Code. 
    The last ordinance included in the original code was Ordinance 571 83, passed October 4, 1983. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 571 83, but prior to adoption of this Code, are adopted and made a part of this Code: Ordinances 572 83, passed November 15, 1983 through 596 84, passed August 21, 1984. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.040 - Codification authority. 
    This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 31-16-201 through 31-16-208, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Evans Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section thereof. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.080 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinances codified in this Chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.090 - Effective date. 
    This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code as the "Evans Municipal Code" shall become effective. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
CHAPTER 1.04 - Definitions 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City or State, shall be construed as defined in this Section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Building permit means the development permit issued by the City before any building or construction activity can be initiated on a parcel of land. 
    Capital facilities includes: 
(1)  Buildings and facilities used for transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, and police protection services. 
(2)  Apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useful life of at least five (5) years, for transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, and police protection services. 
(3)  Excludes periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and equipment, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
    Capital improvement means a public improvement of a permanent nature, and may include land and equipment necessary for the functioning of a building or other capital improvement. 
    City and town each mean the City of Evans, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Evans, Colorado, and such territory outside of the City's boundaries over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Evans. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen holding office. 
    County means the County of Weld. 
    Developer means a person or entity that commences a Development creating the need for additional transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, or police protection services. 
    Development means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, which creates or may create impacts on capital facilities for transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, or police protection services. 
    Fire district means the Evans Fire Protection District. 
    Fiscal Impact Fee Study means a study prepared by an outside engineer or consultant that mathematically calculates the fiscal impact of future demand for services on existing facilities of the City of Evans or within is boundaries. 
    Impact fee means a fee established as provided in this Chapter that is intended to defray the projected impacts on Capital Facilities for streets, park recreation or trail facilities, fire/rescue services, or police protection services caused by proposed development within the City of Evans. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State, the ordinances of the City of Evans, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Local improvement means public improvement specially beneficial to the property affected, and also includes the abatement of such unsafe, unhealthful or unsanitary conditions as the board of trustees shall determine to be a public nuisance. 
    May is permissive. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Must and shall are each mandatory. 
    Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Office . The use of any title of any officer, employee, or any office, or ordinance means such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of the City of Evans, Colorado, unless otherwise specifically designated. 
    Ordinance means the law of the City. 
    Owner , applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Public improvement means improvements to or in connection with streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, buildings, sewer systems, water systems, power systems, and any other real property or appurtenances thereof of the City used by the public. 
    Public utility includes all common carriers in the public streets, water, sewage disposal, electrical light, central heating, gas, electric power, telephone and telegraph lines and systems, and such other and different enterprises as the law or the board of trustees may determine. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the State. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    TischlerBise Impact Fee Study means the July 2015 Study accepted by the City Council on September 15, 2015. 
    Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ; Ord. 597 84, 1984) 
CHAPTER 1.08 - Form of Government 

1.08.010 - Reclassification. 
    The town of Evans, Colorado, shall reclassify itself as a City upon the adoption of a home rule charter. [1] 
(Ord. 249, 1972) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Home Rule Charter was adopted April 30, 1973 and was accepted by voters at the election of June 12, 1973. 

CHAPTER 1.12 - Ward Boundaries 

1.12.010 - Wards 1 through 3 established-Boundaries. 
    Ward boundaries in the City of Evans, Colorado, shall hereafter be as follows: 
A.  Ward 1. All that part of the City lying east of the line described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the north City limit boundary line with the centerline of Pleasant Acres Road; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 32nd Street; thence east along said centerline to the centerline of 11th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 34th Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 17th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 37th Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 23rd Avenue extended; thence south along said centerline to the south City limit boundary line. 
B.  Ward 2. All that part of the City lying west of the line described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the north City limit boundary line with the centerline of Pleasant Acres Road; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 32nd Street; thence east along said centerline to the centerline of 11th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 34th Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 17th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of 37th Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 23rd Avenue extended; thence south along said centerline to the south City limit boundary line and all that part of the City lying east of the line described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the north City limit boundary line with the centerline of 29th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of Prairie View Drive; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 35th Avenue extended; thence south along said centerline to the south City limit boundary line. 
C.  Ward 3. All that part of the City lying west of the ling described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the north City limit boundary line with the centerline of 29th Avenue; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of Prairie View Drive; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of 35th Avenue extended; thence south along said centerline to the south City limit boundary line. 
( Ord. 671-17 ,  1, 2017; Ord. 527-11: 413-07: 104-01: 880-93: 571 83) 
1.12.020 - Transition for implementation of readjustment of Ward Boundaries. 
    This Section shall provide for an orderly transition for Council Members that may be displaced due to the readjustment of Ward boundaries. 
A.  Should a Council Member be displaced due solely to adjustments in Ward boundaries, he or she may continue to serve as a Council Member in that Ward until the end of the term to which he or she was elected and/or appointed. 
(Ord. 104-01) 
CHAPTER 1.14 - Elections 

1.14.010 - Nomination petitions. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in the Colorado Municipal Election Code or Uniform Election Code, the time periods for circulation, submission and cure of nomination petitions for any City mail ballot election shall be as follows: 
Action Days Before Election First day to pick up petitions 91 days Last day to file petition with City Clerk 71 days Last day to cure petition with City Clerk 66 days Affidavit of intent 
(last day for write-in candidates) 64 days Election may be cancelled 64 days Last day to withdraw from nomination 63 days  
( Ord. No. 674-17 ,  1, 2017; Ord. No. 645-16, 2016 ; Ord. 414-07) 
1.14.020 - Affidavit of intent. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in by the close of business on the sixty-fourth day before the date of the election, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office, if elected. The City Clerk shall maintain an appropriate form of affidavit in the Clerk's office. 
( Ord. No. 674-17 ,  1, 2017; Ord. No. 645-16, 2016 ; Ord. 414-07; Ord. 827-92; Ord. 757-90) 
1.14.030 - Election may be cancelled - when. 
    If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the sixty-fourth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent, as set forth in Section 1.14.020 of this Chapter, the City Council, by resolution, shall cancel the election and declare the candidates elected. Notice of such cancellation shall be published and posted. 
( Ord. No. 674-17 ,  1, 2017; Ord. No. 645-16, 2016 ; Ord. 414-07; Ord. 827-92; Ord. 757-90) 
CHAPTER 1.16 - General Penalty 

1.16.010 - Violation of Code provisions - penalty - additional remedies. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, unless provision is otherwise herein made shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Lack of or delay in enforcement of any provision of this Code shall not constitute a waiver of such provision. The City assumes no liability for any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 466-09; Ord. 842-92: Prior code 1.01.160) 
1.16.020 - Violation - penalty - juvenile offenders. 
    The violation of any section of this Code by any person not having attained the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of the commission of the violation shall be a misdemeanor, however, such conviction shall be punishable by a fine only, not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), unless a different fine is specifically set forth herein, and notwithstanding the application of imprisonment penalties which may otherwise be applicable to such offenses, if committed by a person eighteen (18) years of age or over as set forth in Section 1.16.010 above or any specific penalty provision of a Municipal Ordinance or Code section. In the event that the juvenile court should assume jurisdiction over the juvenile person so charged pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Children's Code, prior to final adjudication by the Municipal Court, then all jurisdiction in the matter shall vest with the juvenile court, and the municipal action shall be dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 466-09; Ord. 875-93) 
1.16.030 - Violation - penalty - useful public service. 
A.  A violator, upon conviction, may be sentenced to perform a certain number of hours of community or useful public service, not to exceed forty (40) hours, in addition to any other penalty provided in this Chapter. If a person is convicted of more than one (1) violation, community or useful public service may be imposed on any or each and every violation; any community or useful public service penalties in excess of one (1) arising out of multiple violations within one (1) case may run and be satisfied concurrently or consecutively, in the discretion of the Municipal Court. 
B.  For the purposes of Subsection A above, community or useful public service means any work which is beneficial to the public, any public entity, or any bona fide nonprofit private or public organization and which work would not with the exercise of reasonable care, endanger the health or safety of the person required to work. 
C.  Any community or useful public service penalty imposed pursuant to this Section shall be suitable to the age and abilities of the violator, and the amount of community or useful public service work ordered shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the violations. 
D.  The Municipal Court may assess a fee to cover the costs of the defendant participating in the useful public service program, upon every person required to perform community or useful public service pursuant to this Section. The Municipal Court may waive all or a portion of this fee if the Municipal Court determines the violator to be indigent. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 909-94) 
1.16.040 - Right of entry on property. 
    The administrative authority or agents of the City, without liability, may enter upon any property, vacant lots or premises in the City to perform any abatement allowed by this Code. Prior to entry upon any private property, vacant lots or premises, the administrative authority or agents of the City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner or tenant of such property. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
1.16.050 - Abatement of violations by City. 
    Any violation of this Code may be abated by the City. The full cost of such abatement, together with a fifteen-percent fee to defray the cost of inspection, abatement and collection, shall be billed to the owner or agent in charge of the property containing or causing such violation. Any such bill that is not paid within thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against such property, to have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, together with a fifteen-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by the laws of the State. Any violation of this Code causing a real or potential hazard to life, limb, or property may be abated by the City without prior notice to the owner. Abatement of any other violation shall not commence unless a notice of violation has not been complied with. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
CHAPTER 1.17 - Administrative Penalty Citations for Code Violations 

1.17.010 - General intent. 
A.  The City Council finds that the enforcement of this Code is an important public service, and that code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The City Council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with these ordinances. 
B.  This Chapter provides for administrative penalties that may be imposed for violation of certain sections of this Code. The Chapter specifically affected is Chapter 8.24 of this Code. 
C.  The purpose of this Chapter is to encourage prompt compliance with the Code and prompt payment of any penalties. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.020 - Definitions. 
    When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    City means the City of Evans. 
    City Manager means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
    Code means those provisions of the Evans Municipal Code enumerated in Subsection 1.17.010.B. 
    Enforcement Official means an employee or agent of the City authorized to enforce the ordinances of the City. 
    Hearing Officer means the officer appointed by the City Manager to hear appeals under this Chapter. 
    Responsible party means a person or entity who has violated the Code or, in the case of property violations, the responsible party may also be the property owner, the occupant, or an individual or an entity who, acting as an agent for or in any other legal capacity on behalf of the owner, has authority over property subject to an administrative citation under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.030 - Authority. 
A.  Any responsible party violating provisions of the Code may be issued an administrative citation by an Enforcement Official as provided in this Chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, responsible parties cited under the provisions of this Chapter shall have only the appeal rights granted herein. 
C.  Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for which a separate administrative citation may be issued. However, once an administrative citation has been issued for a violation of the Code, no additional administrative citation shall be issued for the same violation for seven (7) days or, if the responsible party requests an appeal in accordance with this Chapter, until after the appeal has been heard and the responsible party has not complied with an administrative enforcement order of the Hearing Officer within seven (7) days of its issuance or such other time as the Hearing Officer has specified. 
D.  A civil penalty assessed by means of an administrative citation may be collected by any means allowed by law. 
E.  Enforcement actions are intended to be cumulative in nature. The City may pursue one (1) or more civil, criminal and administrative actions, fees, fines, sentences, penalties, judgments and remedies and may do so simultaneously or in succession. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in no way interfere with the City's right to prosecute violations as criminal offenses. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.040 - Procedures for issuance of an administrative citation. 
A.  Whenever the Enforcement Official determines that a violation of the Code exists, the Enforcement Official shall give a notice of violation and order to correct ("Notice of Violation") to the responsible party. The Notice of Violation shall be in writing and shall describe with reasonable detail the violation so that the responsible party may properly correct it. The Notice of Violation shall provide a reasonable time (typically seven [7] days) for correction given the circumstances of the violation, but in no case more than thirty (30) days. 
B.  The Notice of Violation shall be served as follows: 
1.  The Enforcement Official shall attempt to issue the Notice of Violation to the responsible party at the site of any violation. If the responsible party is not located, a copy of the Notice of Violation shall be left with any adult person residing or working at the site, or if no adult person is found at the site and the violation occurred on private property or on property for which the responsible party has responsibility, then a copy of the Notice of Violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the site and a copy mailed, first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the responsible party. 
2.  If the Enforcement Official is unable to issue the Notice of Violation to the responsible party personally, then the Notice of Violation shall be sent via first-class mail to the responsible party. In the case of violations occurring on private property where the owner of such property is a responsible party, the Notice of Violation shall be sent to the address shown in the County Assessor records for the County. In the case of violations occurring on property for which the responsible party is not the owner, the Notice of Violation shall be sent to the most recent mailing address available to the City for that responsible party. 
3.  The Notice of Violation shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the responsible party, if personally served, or upon the fifth day after mailing of the Notice of Violation. Notices posted in a conspicuous place on the site, in accordance with Paragraph 1. above shall be deemed personally served. Notices of violation for violations that pose a threat to public health and safety or to the environment, but cannot be personally served or posted in a conspicuous place on the property, shall be sent to the address shown in the County Assessor records and shall be deemed served on the date of postmark. 
C.  If, after service of the Notice of Violation, the Code violation is not timely corrected an Enforcement Official may issue an administrative citation to a responsible party. 
D.  Service of administrative citation on a responsible party shall be made in the same manner as the Notice of Violation as described in Subsection B. above, except that the Enforcement Official shall attempt to obtain the signature of the person receiving the administrative citation on the administrative citation. If that person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation or is not available to sign, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation and subsequent proceedings. The administrative citation shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the responsible party, if personally served, or upon the fifth day after mailing of the administrative citation. Notices posted in a conspicuous place on the site, in accordance with Paragraph B.1. above, shall be deemed personally served. Administrative citations for violations that pose a threat to public health and safety or to the environment but cannot be personally served or posted in a conspicuous place on the property shall be sent to the address shown in the County Assessor records and shall be deemed served on the date of postmark. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.050 - Voluntary compliance agreements. 
A.  A voluntary compliance agreement may be entered into at any time after issuance of a notice of violation or a citation pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  The voluntary compliance agreement is a commitment by the person responsible for code compliance under which the person agrees to do any combination of abating the violation, remediating the site or mitigating the impacts of the violation. The voluntary compliance agreement shall include the following: 
1.  Name and address of the party responsible for the violation; 
a.  Responsible party association with the property/violation; 
2.  Address or legal description of the location of the violation; 
3.  Description of the violation with reference to the applicable section of Code; 
4.  Description of necessary corrective action, includes: 
a.  Deadline of corrective action (the Enforcement Official may either require that compliance be achieved by a specific date or that compliance be achieved by a date to be determined based on the occurrence of some future event); 
5.  The subsequent action the Enforcement Official shall enact should voluntary compliance not be satisfied as stipulated in the agreement, unless superseded by state or federal law; 
6.  An acknowledgment that if the department determines that the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met, the City may abate the violation in accordance with Section 1.16.050 of this Title; 
7.  An acknowledgment that if any assessed penalty, fee or cost is not paid, the City may charge the unpaid amount as a lien against the property where the nuisance code violation occurred if owned by the person responsible for code compliance; 
8.  An acknowledgment that by entering into the voluntary compliance agreement the person responsible for code compliance waives the right to administratively appeal, and thereby admits that the conditions described in the voluntary compliance agreement existed and constituted a civil code violation; and that if the department determines the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met, the person is subject to and liable for any remedy authorized by this Section, which includes the assessment of the civil penalties identified in the voluntary compliance agreement, abatement of the violation, assessment of the costs incurred by the City to pursue code compliance and to abate the violation, including legal and incidental expenses, and the suspension, revocation or limitation of a development or building permit; and 
9.  An acknowledgment that the person responsible for code compliance understands that he or she has the right to be served with a citation, notice and order to correct or cease and desist order for any violation identified in the voluntary compliance agreement, has the right to administratively appeal any such citation, notice and order to correct or cease and desist order and that he or she is knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently waiving those rights. 
C.  Upon entering into a voluntary compliance agreement, a person responsible for code compliance waives the right to administratively appeal, and thereby admits that the conditions described in the voluntary compliance agreement existed and constituted a civil code violation; and agrees that if the department determines the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met, he or she is liable for the civil penalty identified in the voluntary compliance agreement, is liable for the costs incurred by the City to pursue code compliance and to abate the violation, including legal and incidental expenses, and is subject to all other remedies provided for in this Section. 
D.  Voluntary compliance agreements shall extend the deadline for corrective action for a reasonable amount of time, but never more than thirty (30) days from the date of agreement. 
1.  Only one (1) extension of the time limit for compliance or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the department if the person responsible for code compliance has shown due diligence or substantial progress in correcting the violation but circumstances render full and timely compliance under the original conditions unattainable. 
E.  The voluntary compliance agreement is not a settlement agreement. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.060 - Contents of administrative citation. 
A.  The administrative citation shall state the date and location of the violations, and the approximate time the violations were observed. Where applicable, the administrative citation shall identify the property in violation by address or legal description. 
B.  The administrative citation shall state the Code sections violated and describe the violations. 
C.  The administrative citation shall describe the action required to correct the violations. 
D.  The administrative citation shall require the responsible party to correct the violations within a reasonable time given the circumstances, but in no case more than seven (7) days, and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct said violations. 
E.  The administrative citation shall state the amount of penalty imposed for the violations. 
F.  The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty. 
G.  The administrative citation shall identify the right and procedures for appealing the administrative citation. 
H.  The administrative citation shall contain the signature of the Enforcement Official and the signature of the responsible party if it can be obtained. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.070 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  A person served with an administrative citation may file a notice of appeal in person or by mail postmarked no later than seven (7) calendar days from the service of the administrative citation. Compliance with this time limit shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to any appeal brought under this Chapter. Failure to comply with such time limit shall be deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the administrative citation has been provided. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall be made in writing, filed with the City Clerk and contain the following information. 
1.  The reasons the appellant believes the administrative citation is objectionable, incorrect or illegal. 
2.  The amount and type of claim or dispute involved, and the time during which it accrued or occurred. 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the appellant. 
4.  The signature of the appellant, legal representative and/or corporate agent. 
C.  A processing fee in the amount indicated on the administrative citation shall be paid by cash, check or certified funds simultaneously with the filing of the notice of appeal. The processing fee is not refundable except as provided in Subsection 1.17.080.L of this Chapter. 
D.  If, in the opinion of the City Clerk, the appeal meets all of the requirements of Sections A through C above, the City Clerk shall forward the notice of appeal to the designated Hearing Officer. 
E.  If, in the opinion of the City Clerk, the appeal does not meet all of the requirements of Subsections A through C above, the City Clerk shall promptly return the appeal and notify the appellant of what requirements the appeal fails to meet. 
F.  As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the designated Hearing Officer shall schedule a date, time and location for the hearing, unless, if requested by the appellant and in the sole discretion of the designated Hearing Officer it is submitted on written brief and supporting material. 
G.  Written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be personally served upon or sent by first-class mail to the responsible party at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.080 - Procedures and standards at administrative citation appeal hearings. 
A.  The procedure and format of the administrative citation appeal hearing shall follow procedures as set forth herein. Procedure: In addition to any procedural hearing requirements the Hearing Officer may adopt by rule, the Hearing Officer shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  The Hearing Officer may keep a record of the proceedings, either stenographically or by sound recording, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any person upon request within sixty (60) days of the hearing and payment in advance of the estimated cost of production of the transcript. 
2.  The Hearing Officer shall render written decisions, accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon. Conclusions based on any provision of Chapter 8.24 of this Code shall contain a reference to such provision and shall also contain the reason the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. 
3.  All witnesses may be sworn or affirm their testimony. 
B.  Administrative citation appeal hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an informal exchange of discovery may be required by the Hearing Officer or requested by any party. The request must be in writing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. 
C.  The parties to an administrative citation appeal hearing shall be the responsible party and the City. 
D.  The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative citation appeal hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the Code. 
E.  The standard of proof to be used by the Hearing Officer in deciding the issues at an administrative citation appeal hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.090 - Duties and powers of Hearing Officer. 
A.  The Hearing Officer shall determine whether appeals of administrative citations are valid. In doing so the Hearing Officer shall determine whether the administrative citation under appeal was issued in compliance with the requirements of the City ordinances. In each case the Hearing Officer shall be charged with performing all functions relating to the final factual determinations and procedural orders, and entertaining petitions or motions made in writing. The Hearing Officer may perform those duties and functions necessary and incidental to determining the matter, hearing all evidence and examining all documents. 
B.  In the discretion of the Hearing Officer, parties to the hearing may be required to file a pre-hearing statement before the case is set for hearing. The pre-hearing statement may include: the issues raised by the appeal; agreed and disputed facts; copies of exhibits not previously included in the record; names of witnesses with a brief statement summarizing their testimony; an estimate of the time necessary to present a party's evidence and other matters as requested by the Hearing Officer. 
C.  All hearings or, when an appeal is submitted for determination based on written argument and written facts and figures, all examination of such written petitions and papers shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer assigned to conduct the hearing or to examine the written material submitted. 
D.  The admissibility of evidence shall be encouraged and the Hearing Officer shall consider all evidence of probative value. The Hearing Officer may utilize his or her experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge in the evaluation of evidence presented. 
E.  Copies, photographs and photocopies may be admitted into evidence or substituted in evidence in place of original documents. 
F.  Witnesses intended to give opinion testimony as experts must be qualified as such, and their qualifications should be submitted in advance to the Hearing Officer. 
G.  Whenever it appears that an appeal is not properly before the Hearing Officer, or that the appellant for some other reason lacks jurisdiction or standing, the case may be dismissed on the motion of any party or the Hearing Officer. 
H.  Mailings, notices, computations of time, time limitations, service and filings shall conform to the requirements of particular law or ordinance involved. 
I.  The written decision of the Hearing Officer shall be known as an administrative enforcement order. 
J.  The parties may enter into a stipulated agreement which must be signed by both parties. Upon approval and acceptance by the Hearing Officer, this agreement shall be entered as the administrative enforcement order. Entry of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the right to appeal. 
K.  The Hearing Officer may uphold the administrative citation and all penalties, or dismiss the administrative citation and all penalties, or may conditionally reduce the penalties assessed by the administrative citation. The Hearing Officer may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violation or require payment of any outstanding penalties. 
L.  If the Hearing Officer dismisses the administrative citation and all penalties due to the City's failure to satisfy its obligations under this Chapter, the appellant's thirty-five-dollar processing fee shall be promptly refunded. 
M.  The Hearing Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative citation appeal hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ordering compliance by issuing an administrative enforcement order, ensuring compliance of that order, modifying an administrative enforcement order, or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. The Hearing Officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with the administrative enforcement order. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.100 - False information or refusal prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false statement or refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with the Enforcement Official when in the performance of official duties under the provisions of this Chapter. Any person who willfully makes a false statement or refuses to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with the Enforcement Official shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Chapter 1.16 of this Title. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.110 - Failure to attend administrative citation appeal hearing. 
    Any responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided as required herein. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.120 - Failure to comply with administrative enforcement order. 
    It is unlawful for a responsible party to an administrative enforcement hearing who has been served with a copy of the final administrative enforcement order to fail to comply with the order. Any person who fails to comply with a final administrative enforcement order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Chapter 1.16 of this Title. Prosecution for failure to comply with a final administrative enforcement order shall not commence until the time to appeal such order has lapsed. 
(Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.130 - Penalties assessed. 
A.  If the responsible party fails to correct the violation within the time required as indicated on the notice of violation, or if an additional violation of Chapter 8.24 of this Code is observed within six (6) months of the notice of violation, an administrative citation may be issued to the responsible party indicating a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
B.  If the responsible party fails to correct the violation within the time required as indicated on the administrative citation, or if another violation of Chapter 8.24 of this Code is observed within six (6) months of the date of the first administrative citation, a second administrative citation may be issued to the responsible party indicating a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
C.  If the responsible party fails to correct the violation within the time required as indicated on the administrative citation, or if another violation of Chapter 8.24 of this Code is observed within six (6) months of the date of the second or subsequent administrative citation, a third or subsequent administrative citation may be issued to the responsible party indicating a fine of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00). 
D.  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. 
(Ord. 582-13 1; Ord. 567-13) 
1.17.140 - Failure to pay penalties. 
A.  All penalties assessed shall be payable to the City. Payment of the full amount of the penalty must be received in person or by mail postmarked no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation or administrative enforcement order, or within the time specified on the administrative enforcement order. 
B.  Any such penalty that is not paid within thirty (30) days shall cause such penalty to become a lien against such property, to have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, together with a fifteen-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by the laws of the State. 
C.  The failure of any responsible party to pay the civil penalties assessed by an administrative citation or administrative enforcement order within the time specified on the citation or order, respectively, may result in the imposition of a late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum. 
D.  Any action or other process provided by law may be maintained by the City to recover or collect any amounts, including late fees, penalties, interest and administrative costs, owing under this Chapter, including but not limited to referral of this matter to the Municipal Court by service of a summons and complaint, in which case, notwithstanding the previously imposed penalties, the responsible party shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this Title. The City Manager may also refer the matter for collection by whatever means are available to the City. 
(Ord. 582-13 1; Ord. 567-13) 
CHAPTER 1.20 - Zoning Map 

1.20.010 - Adoption. 
    The official zoning map, filed in the Zoning Department, is adopted as the official zoning map of the City. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 577 84, 1984) 
CHAPTER 1.24 - Payment of Obligations Before Processing or Approving Applications 

1.24.010 - Payment of obligations before application will be processed. 
    No application for a permit, license, or other authorization issued by the City of Evans or any of its departments or related entities or personnel shall be processed unless and until all taxes, fees, assessments, liens, accounts, and other charges of any type owed to the City of Evans by the applicant as well as any of the principals, parent entities, subsidiaries, or other entities or individuals related to the applicant, are paid in full and current. 
(Ord. 592-14, 2014) 
1.24.020 - Payment of obligations before permit, license or other authorization will be approved. 
    No application for a permit, license, or other authorization issued by the City of Evans or any of its departments or related entities or personnel shall be approved unless and until all taxes, fees, assessments, liens, accounts, and other charges of any type owed to the City of Evans by the applicant as well as any of the principals, parent entities, subsidiaries, or other entities or individuals related to the applicant, are paid in full and current. 
(Ord. 592-14, 2014) 
TITLE 2 - Administration and Personnel 
CHAPTER 2.04 - City Council 

2.04.010 - Meeting time. 
    Regular City Council meetings shall begin at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of every month; provided, however, the City Council may by resolution change the time, date and place of any particular regular meeting. 
( Ord. 668-17 , 2017; Ord. 707 88, 1988; Ord. 273, 1973; Ord. 241, 1972) 
2.04.020 - Order of business. 
A.  At each meeting the City Clerk shall call the roll, note those present and absent, announce if a majority of the City Council is present and, if a majority if present, the Mayor, or in his or her absence the Mayor Pro Tem, shall call the meeting to order and proceed with the City's business. 
B.  The City Council shall by resolution approve the order it desires for the agenda, which shall be prepared at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. 
C.  When procedure is not specifically provided for in the Council resolution, Robert's Rules of Order shall be used. 
(Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.04.030 - Compensation for Mayor and Council members. 
    The Mayor shall receive four hundred twenty-five dollars ($425.00) a month, and each Council member shall receive three hundred dollars ($300.00) a month for his or her services. 
(Ord. 243-03, 2003; Ord. 823-91, 1991; Ord. 612 85, 1985; Ord. 430 80, 1980; Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.04.040 - Language for addressing petitions. 
    All petitions, memorials and remonstrances to the City Council shall be addressed: "To the Honorable Mayor and City Council of the City of Evans, State of Colorado." 
(Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.04.050 - Adoption of codes by reference. 
    The following shall be the only requirements necessary to adopt any code by reference in the City: 
A.  The title of the adopting ordinance shall specify the general name of the primary code and every secondary code adopted. 
B.  Not less than three (3) copies of the primary code and of each secondary code shall be on file with the City Clerk from the date the proposed ordinance is passed on first reading. Following adoption of such codes, copies shall be available at cost to the City, plus one dollar ($1.00) as a handling charge. 
C.  The adopting ordinance shall be adopted and published as other ordinances of the City, except that the provisions of such codes need not be published or read at the Council meeting. At least three (3) copies of the codes shall be available for inspection or reading at the Council meeting when the adopting ordinance is voted upon. 
D.  The adopting ordinance shall specify when it will be on the Council agenda for passage the second time, and this shall be considered the public hearing concerning the code or codes to be adopted. 
E.  Amendments to such codes shall be made in the same manner as the adoption of the codes. 
(Ord. 275, 1973) 
CHAPTER 2.05 - Ethics Code 

2.05.010 - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all City officials and employees is adopted. The purpose of this Code is to establish guidelines for standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the City by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the City and by imposing sanctions upon public officers or employees who violate the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
2.05.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Business Entity means any corporation, limited liability company, sole proprietorship, firm, partnership representation, association, venture, trust or corporation for profit. 
    Contract means any express or implied agreement which creates, modifies or terminates a particular relationship with the City and shall include the designation of a depository for public funds. 
    Interest means a pecuniary or valuable benefit accruent to a public officer or employee, individually, as a result of a contract or transaction which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by or with the City, except for such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, a public officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of: 
a.  Any relative; 
b.  Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists with the public officer or employee; 
c.  Any business entity in which the public officer or employee is an officer, director, owner, employee or investor; 
d.  Any business entity in which the stock of, or legal or beneficial ownership of, in excess of five percent (5%) of the total legal and beneficial ownership, is controlled by or owned by the public officer or employee. 
    Official Act means any legislative, administrative or appointive act of any officer or employee of the City, or any agency, board, committee or commission thereof. 
    Public Officer or Employee means any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the City, whether paid or unpaid. 
    Relative means any person related to any public officer/employee by blood or marriage, to include, but not limited to parents, spouses, children, brothers and sisters, parents-in-law, nephews, nieces, aunts, uncles, first cousins, grandparents, grandchildren and children-in-law and a divorce or separation between spouses shall not be deemed to terminate any such relationship. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
2.05.030 - Code of ethics. 
    The following requirements shall constitute a code of ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of public officers and employees of the City: 
A.  No public officer or employee having the power or duty to perform an official act, related to a contract or transaction which is the subject of an official act or action of the City, shall: 
1.  Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or transaction, unless said contract or transaction resulted from the proper bid process for the City; 
2.  Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising, or appearing on behalf of any person involved in such contract or transaction with the City; 
3.  Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction with the City, or; 
4.  Have solicited, accepted, or granted a present or future gift, favor, service, or thing of value from or to a person involved in a contract or transaction with the City, except that provisions of this Paragraph shall not apply to an occasional nonpecuniary gift of twenty dollars ($20.00) in value or less, or to an award publicly presented in recognition of public service. 
B.  No public official or employee shall attempt to influence the hiring, rate of pay, or appointment of any relative by the City. 
C.  No relative shall be hired into a position unless proper notification and advertisement has been made to insure all potential applicants receive an equal opportunity for employment. 
D.  No public officer or employee with respect to any contract or transaction which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action of the City, shall personally acquire an interest in any property which may be affected by such action; nor disclose any confidential information concerning a contract or transaction which may involve the City for the purpose of advancing any private interest. 
E.  No public employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interest when such employment or service would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
F.  No public official shall engage in or accept private employment or render service for private interest when such employment or service would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties, unless, such official discloses the conflict for the public record and abstains from voting on such issue. Furthermore, the official shall remove himself from the room where such discussion and voting takes place. 
G.  No public officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any person, other than himself or herself, his or her spouse, minor children, parents, or grandparents before any City agency. However, a member of the City Council may appear before any City agency on behalf of his or her constituents in the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
H.  No public officer or employee who in his capacity as such officer or employee participates in the making of a contract in which he or she has a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his or her part, shall enter into any contract with the City unless the contract is awarded through proper bid process. 
I.  No public officer shall request or permit the unauthorized use of any City-owned vehicles, equipment, personnel, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit. 
J.  No public officer or employee shall request or grant a special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen in similar circumstances or need. 
K.  A public officer or employee shall not, at any time within two (2) years after his or her termination from his or her position with the City, appear before any board, commission, committee, or agency of the City in relation to or with respect to any matter in which he or she was directly involved in the review, acceptance, policy formulation, or administration of such matter while a City official or employee. 
L.  At any meeting or gathering of three (3) or more members of the City Council or any appointed board of the City, the Council members shall not discuss any public business, nor shall matters pertaining to public business be presented, unless such meeting is open to the general public and prior notice for such meeting has been given. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
2.05.040 - Disclosure and resolution of conflict. 
    A public officer or employee shall remove himself or herself from any conflict as follows: 
A.  Any elected or appointed public official or employee who has an interest in any proposed action before the City Council or a board or commission of which the public official or employee is a member shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, which such disclosure being a matter of public record. 
B.  The public official or employee shall not vote on the proposed action before the City Council, board or commission. 
C.  Said public of official or employee shall not participate in any discussion on the proposed action. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
2.05.050 - Violations; penalty. 
    Any Council member who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall be subject to the following penalties: 
A.  In all cases, the determination of the City Council as to whether there has been a violation shall be final. 
B.  In the case of a Council member, if a violation is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the City Council, such violation shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the City Council. 
C.  In the case of a board or commission member, if a violation is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the City Council, such violation shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the City Council and grounds for termination of such person's appointment to any board or commission of which he or she is a member. If the City Council votes to terminate the appointment of a board or commission member upon such grounds, the City Council may appoint another person to fulfill the term of the individual removed from office. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
2.05.060 - Guideline violations. 
    Any apparent violations of this code may be referred to the City Council for investigation and discussion by any City official, board or citizen of the City. If, upon investigation and discussion, the Council finds that a violation of the guidelines contained in Section 2.05.030 of this Chapter has occurred, the City Council may caution or reprimand the Council member responsible thereof or take such other action as it deems to be in the best interests of the City. 
(Ord. 1113-98, 1998) 
CHAPTER 2.06 - Board and Commissions - Compensation - Expenses 

2.06.010 - Compensation. 
    No member of any board or commission of the City shall receive any compensation for his or her service as a member of such board or commission. 
(Ord. 589 84, 1984: prior code 2.20.010) 
2.06.020 - Expenses. 
    Any member of a board or commission of the City shall be reimbursed for any expenses necessarily and actually incurred in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. 589 84, 1984: prior code 2.20.020) 
2.06.030 - Approval by City Manager. 
    All requests for reimbursement of expenses shall, prior to payment, be approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 589 84, 1984: prior code 2.20.030) 
CHAPTER 2.08 - Department of Finance 

2.08.010 - Finance Office established - duties. 
A.  There is established the Office of Finance, which shall be under the supervision of the Finance Director who shall in turn be under the supervision of the City Manager. 
1.  The Finance Director shall be the treasurer of the City Council as provided for by Section 4.8 of the Charter and shall be appointed and removed by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council. 
B.  The Finance Director shall carry out those functions and duties outlined under Section 4.8 of the Home Rule Charter for the treasurer. In addition to the duties outlined under the Home Rule Charter for the Treasurer, the Finance Director shall assist the City Manager in performing the following duties: 
1.  Recommend an annual budget to the City Council and administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the City Council, and keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. 
2.  Maintain a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by the City Council and which shall conform to generally accepted principals and procedures of governmental accounting. The Treasurer shall submit financial statements to the City Council monthly, or more often as City Council directs. 
3.  Prepare an annual financial report. Copies of such financial reports shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 761-90, 1990; Ord. 721 89, 1989; Ord. 651 86, 1986; Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.08.020 - Checks and disbursements - bonding of officers. 
    All monies shall be disbursed or withdrawn from all City accounts or funds by checks drawn and signed by the Finance Director and the City Manager. Both the Finance Director and City Manager may obtain a fidelity bond as approved by the City Council. Until the City Manager has obtained the proper fidelity bond, the Mayor shall countersign all checks. 
(Ord. 761-90, 1990; Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.08.030 - Bond fees paid by City. 
    The City shall pay the fee for obtaining fidelity bonds required by the City. 
(Ord. 761-90, 1990; Ord. 273, 1973) 
CHAPTER 2.12 - Police Department 

2.12.010 - Established - Chief of Police authority. 
    There is hereby established the Police Department, the Director of which shall be the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.12.020 - Police officers commissioned - enforcement authority. 
    The City Manager shall commission all police officers to perform the functions of the Police Department. All commissioned officers of the Police Department are authorized to enforce the ordinances of the City and the statutes of the State. 
(Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.12.030 - Duties and functions. 
    The duties and functions of the Chief of Police and Police Department shall be the enforcement of City ordinances and resolutions, as directed by the City Council, and the enforcement of state laws as directed by the statutes of the State. The Chief of Police shall also be responsible for the care and custody of the property used by the Police Department. He or She shall also serve as director of all public safety activities other than those that are the responsibility of the Fire District and building inspections. 
( Ord. 678-18 ,  1, 2018; Ord. 273, 1973) 
2.12.040 - Special officers. 
    The Chief of Police is authorized to designate as special police officers those persons appointed by the Fire Chief to serve as fire arson investigators. Such individuals shall be considered to be Peace Officers, Level III pursuant to Title 16, C.R.S., as amended from time to time, for the enforcement of the Fire Code and related state statutes. Any individual designated under this Section shall meet the requirements set forth by the Peace Officers Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.) Board. 
( Ord. 678-18 ,  2, 2018) 
2.12.050 - Community service officers. 
    The Chief of Police is authorized to designate community service officers. Such individuals shall have the authority to issue summonses and complaints for violations of this Code. 
( Ord. 678-18 ,  2, 2018) 
CHAPTER 2.18 - Fire Department 

2.18.010 - Provision of emergency services through Evans Fire Protection District. 
    In November 2011, the City organized the Evans Fire Protection District ("Fire District") to provide fire suppression, fire prevention and public education, extrication and rescue, hazardous materials, ambulance (directly or through a third party) and emergency medical services (collectively, "Emergency Services") to the citizens and property within the City. The Fire District is governed by a five (5) member elected Board of Directors. The Fire District's Fire Chief is responsible for the administration and operation of the Fire District, including fire code enforcement, directly or through a designee. 
( Ord. No. 630-15, 2015 ; Ord. 972-95, 1995) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 630-15,  1(Exh. 1), adopted Oct. 6, 2015, changed the title of  2.18.010 from "Fire department established" to read as set out herein. 
2.18.020 - City's contract with the fire district for emergency services. 
    At the time it organized the Fire District, the City entered into an exclusive provider contract with the Fire District to provide Emergency Services to the City, its citizens and their property. The contract was approved by an overwhelming vote of the City's citizens. The contract sets forth the terms and conditions upon which the Fire District will provide Emergency Services to the City, its citizens and their property. 
( Ord. No. 630-15, 2015 ; Ord. 972-95, 1995) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 630-15 ,  1(Exh. 1), adopted Oct. 6, 2015, changed the title of  2.18.020 from "City may contract for fire protection services" to read as set out herein. 
2.18.030 - Duties and functions. 
    The duties and functions of the Fire Chief and the Fire District shall be the preservation and protection of life and property from and during fires or other emergencies as may occur in the City or the immediate vicinity of the City (mutual aid). 
( Ord. No. 630-15, 2015 ; Ord. 972-95, 1995) 
CHAPTER 2.19 - Volunteer Firefighter Pension Board 
    Repealed by Ord. 541-2012 
CHAPTER 2.20 - Department of Public Utilities 

2.20.010 - Utilities Department established - Director. 
    There is established the Utilities Department, the director of which shall be the Utility Director. The Utility Director shall be appointed by and shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. In the absence of a Utility Director, the City Manager may appoint an acting utility director. 
(Ord. 614-85) 
2.20.020 - Utility Director - responsibilities. 
    The Utility Director shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of the water and sewer systems of the City. The Utility Director shall be responsible for the care and custody of the property used by the Utilities Department. The Utility Director shall further have those duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be given him or her by ordinance or by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 614-85) 
2.20.030 - Public Works and Planning Director - may be same. 
    The same persons may be the director or acting director of the Public Works and Planning Department and the Utilities Department. 
(Ord. 762-90: 614-85) 
CHAPTER 2.22 - Department of Public Works and Planning 

2.22.010 - Public Works and Planning Department established - Director. 
    There is established the Public Works and Planning Department, the director of which shall be the Public Works and Planning Director. The Public Works and Planning Director shall be appointed by and shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. In the absence of a Public Works and Planning Director, the City Manager may appoint an acting public works and planning director. 
(Ord. 762-90: 615-85) 
2.22.020 - Public Works and Planning Director - responsibilities. 
A.  The Public Works and Planning Director shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of the streets, drainage, solid waste disposal, and engineering of the City. He or she shall also be responsible for the care and custody of the property used by the Public Works and Planning Department. The Public Works and Planning Director shall further have those duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be given him or her by ordinance or by the City Manager. 
B.  The Public Works and Planning Director shall also be responsible for administering and enforcing the City zoning code, the comprehensive plan and the subdivision regulations and shall be assisted in this capacity by other employees under his or her direct supervision as well as assistance from the Police Department for violations. 
(Ord. 762-90: 615-85) 
2.22.030 - Utility Director - may be same. 
    The same person may be both the director or acting director of the Utilities Department and the Public Works and Planning Department. 
(Ord. 762-90: 615-85) 
CHAPTER 2.23 - Department of Parks and Recreation 

2.23.010 - Department of Parks and Recreation established - Director. 
    There is established the Department of Parks and Recreation, the director of which shall be the Parks and Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed by and shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. In the absence of a Parks and Recreation Director, the City Manager may appoint an acting parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. 1124-98: 763-90) 
2.23.020 - Parks and Recreation Director - responsibilities. 
    The Parks and Recreation Director shall be responsible for maintenance of the buildings and grounds of the community complex, the museum, parks, and the cemetery, and shall also be in charge of and the senior citizen's programs and City insurance programs. He or she shall also be responsible for the care and custody of the property used by the Department of Parks and Recreation. The Parks and Recreation Director shall further have those duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be given him or her by ordinance or by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1124-98: 763-90) 
CHAPTER 2.24 - Water and Sewer Board 

2.24.010 - Created. 
    There is created the Water and Sewer Board. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.020 - Membership - appointment and qualifications. 
    The Water and Sewer Board shall consist of up to five (5) voting members, appointed by the City Council, at least four (4) of whom shall reside within the City limits. One (1) member may be appointed who resides outside the City limits. The Mayor or City Council Member designated by the Mayor and the City Manager or staff member designated by the City Manager shall be nonvoting members of the board. Any member wishing reappointment to the Water and Sewer Board shall so inform the City Manager by written letter prior to the expiration of his or her term. 
( Ord. 664-17,  1 , 2017; Ord. 663 86: 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.030 - Term of office. 
    The term of office shall be three (3) years, beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the respective years. The existing members of the Water and Sewer Board shall automatically be members of the Water and Sewer Board for the period remaining on their existing terms on the Water Board. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.040 - Attendance. 
    Absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings, or a total of four (4) regular meetings in any twelve (12) consecutive months, without justifiable cause, as determined by the City Council, shall constitute grounds for removal from office. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.050 - Vacancy filling. 
A.  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the unexpired term of vacancy. 
B.  A vacancy exists when a member dies, resigns, is removed by action of the City Council, or if a resident member moves outside the City limits and thus causes there to be less than four (4) residents remaining on the Water and Sewer Board. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.060 - Meetings - rules for operation. 
    The Water and Sewer Board shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each calendar month, the date and time of such meeting to be fixed by the Water and Sewer Board. The Water and Sewer Board is empowered to make rules and regulations for its conduct and operation not inconsistent with state and municipal law and shall fix the manner for holding special meetings and giving notice thereof. A majority of the Water and Sewer Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.070 - Organization and officers. 
    The officers of the Water and Sewer Board shall be a chairperson and a vice chairperson, both of which shall be elected by the members of the Water and Sewer Board. Their duties shall be those customarily performed by such officers and as specified by the rules of the Water and Sewer Board. The officers of the Water and Sewer Board shall hold office for one (1) year or until their successors are elected. A staff person will be provided from the City Manager's office to record minutes of each meeting and conduct correspondence as directed by the chairperson and/or the Water and Sewer Board. 
(Ord. 653 86: 610-85) 
2.24.080 - Powers and duties - water. 
    The Water and Sewer Board shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Annually recommend minimum water rates to the City Council, with the recommendation being returned to the Water and Sewer Board by the Council within thirty (30) days with reasons why the Water and Sewer Board should reconsider its recommendations, if the recommendations are not acceptable to the City Council. Minimum water rates need not be uniform for all classes of users; the minimum rates must be sufficient to include all expenditures for the following: 
1.  All operation and maintenance of the water system; 
2.  All debt service requirements; 
3.  Additions to the reserve account in sufficient amounts to offset depreciation to the water system. Such reserves shall be based on accepted principles of accounting for a water system; 
B.  To act as an appeals board to hear and decide request for relief from or variance from (for reason of unnecessary hardship) the application of water rates or policies established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council as applied to an individual customer; 
C.  Negotiate for the purchase of water rights as needed; 
D.  Set standards for waterline construction, including but not limited to sizes of water mains; 
E.  Set prices to be charged to a customer for items such as water meters; 
F.  Acquire, develop and protect the water supplies decreed, adjudicated, or contracted for the City; 
G.  Make recommendations to the City Manager for expenditures under each current annual budget, and it also shall submit long range plans, and recommend such plans to the City Council; such long range plans shall include not only the ensuing six (6) years of proposed capital budget of the water department for the City, but also longer periods; 
H.  Publish an annual written report of the water department, giving a detailed accounting of all revenues and expenditures; 
I.  Be responsible for taking the steps necessary to insure that adequate fire flows are available throughout the City, present and future; 
J.  Maintain system maps for the entire water system for the purpose of inventory and construction locations; 
K.  Perform such other duties as the City Council may request. 
(Ord. 676 87: 653 86: 610 85) 
2.24.081 - Powers and duties - sewer. 
    The Water and Sewer Board shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Annually recommend minimum sewer rates to the City Council, with the recommendation being returned to the board by the Council within thirty (30) days with reasons why the Water and Sewer Board should reconsider its recommendations, if the recommendations are not acceptable to the City Council. Minimum rates need not be uniform for all classes of users; the minimum rates must be sufficient to include all expenditures for the following: 
1.  All operation and maintenance of the sewer system; 
2.  All debt service requirements; 
3.  Additions to the reserve account in sufficient amounts to offset depreciation to the sewer system. Such reserves shall be based on accepted principles of accounting for a sewer system; 
B.  To act as an appeals board to hear and decide requests for relief from or variance from (for reason of unnecessary hardship) the application of sewer rates or policies established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council as applied to an individual customer; 
C.  Set standards for sewer line construction including but not limited to sizes of sewer mains; 
D.  Set prices to be charged to a customer for any items a customer may request in connection with the sewer system, for items which have not already been established and priced by the City Council; 
E.  Make recommendations to the City Manager for expenditures under each current annual budget, and it also shall submit long range plans and recommend such plans to the City Council; such long range plans shall include not only the ensuing six (6) years of proposed capital budget of the sewer department for the City, but also longer periods; 
F.  Publish an annual written report of the sewer department, giving a detailed accounting of all revenues and expenditures; 
G.  Be responsible for taking the steps necessary to insure that the system and facilities meet federal and state minimum requirements; 
H.  Maintain system maps for the entire sewer system for the purpose of inventory and construction locations; 
I.  Perform such other duties as the City Council may request. 
(Ord. 676 87; 653 86; 610 85) 
CHAPTER 2.28 - Municipal Court 
Article I - Establishment and Organization 

2.28.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter: 
    Municipal Court means a "qualified Municipal Court of record" as defined in Title 13, Article 10, Section 102 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, and as created under Chapter V of the Home Rule Charter of the City. 
    Municipal Judge means and includes the presiding municipal judge and all assistant municipal judges, unless the context of it requires otherwise. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 360-77) 
2.28.020 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter shall apply to and govern the operation of the Municipal Court of the City. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 360-77) 
2.28.030 - Municipal Court established. 
    A Municipal Court in and for the City is created and established. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 360-77) 
2.28.040 - Powers of the Municipal Court. 
A.  The Municipal Judge shall have all judicial powers relating to the operation of the Municipal Court, subject to any rules of procedure governing the operation and conduct of the Municipal Court promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court, the Home Rule Charter of the City, and the statutes of the State, and: 
1.  May impose fines and jail sentences as authorized by the Home Rule Charter and the City code of ordinances and may require useful public service, driving school, alcohol or drug classes or rehabilitation, or counseling or therapy and other similar or alternative sentences; 
2.  May administer oaths, and punish contempts of court by fine or imprisonment; 
3.  May issue search warrants as authorized by law; 
4.  May summons and compel the attendance of jurors and may impose a fine or jail sentence on the failure to so attend; 
5.  May pass upon the competency of evidence; 
6.  May render final judgment on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to the Municipal Court. 
B.  The Municipal Judge shall require that all proceedings and evidence presented within the Municipal Court of the City shall be recorded verbatim by either electric devices or stenographic means. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 782-91; Ord. 360-77) 
2.28.050 - Municipal Judge qualifications. 
    A Municipal Judge shall be an attorney admitted to practice law in the State. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 360-77) 
Article II - Procedure 

2.28.060 - Conflicts in rules of procedure. 
    Any rules of procedure contained herein, or promulgated by the Municipal Judge, that conflict with the Rules of Procedure for Municipal Courts, as promulgated by the State Supreme Court shall be invalid and of no force and effect. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.070 - Procedures for juvenile offenders. 
    The Municipal Judge may promulgate such rules or orders regarding the procedural processing of minor offenders appearing before the Municipal Court as the Municipal Judge may, from time to time, deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 875-93) 
2.28.080 - Violation of City law - commencement of action. 
    An action for the violation of any ordinance of the City shall be brought in the name of the people of the State as plaintiff against the person who is alleged to have violated the ordinances as defendant, and shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint or by the issuance of a summons or citation, or by both summons and a complaint. Each act or series of related acts committed by the same person, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Code, may be consolidated for the purpose of filing a complaint, issuing and serving summons and subpoenas, trial and appeal, but the Municipal Judge shall impose a separate fine or penalty for each offense of which the defendant is convicted. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.090 - Complaint, summons, warrant and subpoena procedures. 
A.  Every complaint or summons shall state the name of the defendant, the number of the chapter and section alleged to have been violated, the type of offense to which each of such sections relates, the date and place of each alleged violation, that the defendant is known or believed to have committed such offense, and that the defendant is required to appear to answer the charge on a date and at a time and place designated in the complaint or summons. The complaint or summons, except as provided herein, shall be signed by the person alleging the violation, and the complaint shall be verified by the complainant unless he is a police officer, a code enforcement officer for code enforcement complaints only (such as, but not limited to weeds, trash accumulation, inoperable vehicles or animal control) or a member of the personnel of the court acting in his or her official capacity. Each warrant shall state the name of the defendant, the section and chapter alleged to have been violated, the date and place of the alleged violation, and that the defendant is alleged to have committed the offense. Each subpoena shall state the name of the case, the name of the witness to whom the subpoena is directed, and that the witness is required to appear to give testimony on the date and at the time and place stated in the subpoena. 
B.  It shall be sufficient to charge a violation of the provisions of this Code in any summons or complaint by reference to the section and subsection, if any, providing for such violation. 
C.  Upon the filing of a verified complaint by a person not a police officer, code enforcement officer, or a member of the personnel of the court acting in his or her official capacity, the Municipal Judge, Court Clerk or any authorized agent of the Municipal Court may issue a summons, or the Municipal Judge may issue a warrant against the defendant named in the complaint. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.100 - Attendance of witnesses. 
    The defendant and the City shall be entitled to compel the attendance of any witnesses, subject to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. Upon a written request to the Municipal Court for the attendance of a witness or witnesses subject to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court, the Municipal Court or Court Clerk shall cause to be served upon such witness a subpoena compelling his or her attendance at a given time in the Municipal Court for the purpose of giving testimony. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.110 - Delivery of summons or subpoena - penalty for failure to appear. 
A.  Any summons or subpoena issued in accordance with this Chapter shall be served in any case by any police officer or code enforcement officer for code enforcement complaints only (such as, but not limited to, weeds, trash accumulation, inoperable vehicles or animal control) in the City, or in any particular case by any person specifically designated by the Municipal Court for that purpose. 
B.  Any person who fails to appear in response to any summons or subpoena served on him or her or in the case of a juvenile defendant, a parent or guardian who has signed a promise to appear in Municipal Court, shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter, and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment, as provided under Chapter 1.16 of this Code, not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 185-02; Ord. 164-02; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.120 - Form of summons - defects and objections. 
    No objection to the form of any summons or complaint shall be considered by the Municipal Court because of any defect, unless such objection was made by the defendant prior to trial of the case on its merits; but trial of the case on its merits shall not waive any objection theretofore made. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.130 - Bond - procedure for arrested persons. 
    Every person arrested for a violation of the provisions of this Code shall have the right to be taken before a municipal court, or a judge thereof, or the Chief of Police, or a police officer designated by the Chief of Police and to be admitted to bail on executing a cash surety or recognizance bond conditioned that he will appear on a day and hour therein mentioned, before the Municipal Court and not depart the Municipal Court, which bond shall be in an amount adjudged sufficient by the Municipal Judge or officer to ensure the appearance of the defendant. Such bond shall be approved by one of the judges of the Municipal Court, and an entry of the filing thereof shall be made in the Municipal Court docket. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.140 - Bond - forfeiture conditions. 
    If any defendant in a case before the Municipal Court of the City fails to appear according to the terms, requirements and conditions of his bond for appearance, or appearing shall depart the Municipal Court without leave, the bond shall automatically be forfeited. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.150 - Bond - proceedings following forfeiture - liability of surety. 
A.  Where a surety bond is forfeited, the surety on the bond shall pay the amount of the bond into the Municipal Court upon the date of forfeiture. If the judgment is not vacated and payment is not made by the one hundred twentieth day after forfeiture, the Municipal Court shall place the agent's name on the Board Master List. If agent's name is on the board for thirty (30) days, the Municipal Court shall send notice to the bail insurance company by certified mail. The insurance company will have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing to satisfy the judgment. If judgment not satisfied within fifteen (15) days, the Municipal Court shall place the bail insurance company on the board. If an insurance company is on the board for fifteen (15) days, the Municipal Court shall order the Division of Insurance to take administrative action against the company. 
B.  If the judgment is not vacated and payment is not made by the one hundred twentieth day after forfeiture, the Municipal Court shall place the agent's name on the Board Master List. If agent's name is on the board for thirty (30) days, the Municipal Court shall send notice to the bail insurance company by certified mail. The insurance company will have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing to satisfy the judgment. If judgment is not satisfied within fifteen (15) days, the Municipal Court shall place the bail insurance company on the board. If an insurance company is on the board for fifteen (15) days, the Municipal Court shall order the Division of Insurance to take administrative action against the company. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.160 - Failure to appear. 
    When any defendant, duly summoned or admitted to bail, or in the case of a juvenile defendant, a parent or guardian who has signed a promise to appear in Municipal Court, fails to appear at the time his or her case is made returnable or set for trial, the Municipal Judge may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defendant or parent or guardian, or the Municipal Judge may hear and examine the testimony offered on the part of the City and may render judgment thereupon by default against the defendant or parent or guardian, and in such amount under the provisions of this Code as the Municipal Court may deem just. 
(Ord. 185-02; Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.170 - Sessions open to the public - exceptions. 
    All cases in Municipal Court shall be open to the public; provided, however, that where the type of offense charged and the nature of the case are such that it would be in the best interests of the witnesses and/or defendant to exclude all persons not directly connected with the case, the Municipal Judge may order that the Municipal Court be cleared of all persons not so directly connected with the case, except qualified representatives of news agencies. This decision shall be solely in the discretion of the Municipal Judge. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.180 - Defendant's rights. 
    At the beginning of each court session, the Municipal Judge shall explain to defendants their rights in Municipal Court; provided, however, that this may be done by pamphlet distributed to each defendant. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.190 - Continuance of cases - conditions. 
    A person who is duly summoned, who cannot be tried on account of the absence of witnesses or for any other good and sufficient cause, may request in open court a continuance of his case. The Municipal Judge may continue the matter upon terms set by him or her. Additional continuances may be granted upon application of the defendant or his or her attorney. However, in no case shall the total continuances exceed thirty (30) days, unless it appears to the Municipal Judge that extreme hardship will result. Where a person on appearance is on bond and a continuance is requested, the Municipal Judge shall have the power to continue the bond for the period of continuance. Nothing herein shall affect the right of the City Attorney to request a continuance. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.200 - Imprisonment or payment of fines. 
    In accordance with state law, the Municipal Court shall have power in all cases of conviction when any fine is imposed to order that the offender be committed to jail there to remain until such fine and costs are fully paid or otherwise legally discharged. Such costs shall mean the docket fee, witness fees, mileage fees, costs of service of process and juror fees. Whenever it is made to appear satisfactorily to the Municipal Judge, after all legal means have been exhausted, that any person who is confined for any fine or costs of prosecution for any ordinance offense has no estate whatever wherewith to pay such fine and costs, or costs only, it shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge to discharge such person from further imprisonment for such fine and costs, which discharge shall operate as a complete release of such fine and costs; provided that nothing in the Section shall authorize any person to be discharged from imprisonment before the expiration of the time for which he or she may be sentenced to be imprisoned as part of his or her punishment. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.210 - Sentence suspension. 
    The Municipal Judge is authorized to suspend the payment of any fine, or any part thereof, assessed for a violation of this Code or any ordinance, and he or she may suspend all or any part of any jail sentence imposed for such a violation. He or she may impose reasonable conditions upon such suspension, and revoke such suspension and reinstate the sentence for a violation of such condition. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.220 - Stay of execution. 
    In the discretion of the Municipal Judge, a stay of execution may be granted to enable a defendant, on good cause, to pay a fine or penalty at a later date or in installments. There shall be no charge for the first stay, which may be granted for up to one (1) month. For each extension of time requested thereafter by a defendant, there shall be imposed a ten-dollar administrative charge. In the event that a defendant does not meet the terms of the stay of execution as required by the Municipal Court, then in that event the Municipal Court may impose an additional penalty in the form of either a fine or jail sentence or both. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 782-91; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.230 - Court costs. 
A.  Municipal Court costs shall be levied against any person who pleads guilty or nolo contendere, or who enters into a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation. Such cost is established by City Council by resolution. 
B.  Where any person, association or corporation is convicted of an offense, the Municipal Court shall give judgment in favor of the City and against the offender for the amount of Municipal Court costs and any fine imposed. Municipal Court costs shall not be suspended by the Municipal Judge. 
C.  The costs assessed pursuant to Subsection B above may include, within the Municipal Judge's discretion: 
1.  The surcharge required by Section 2.28.245 of this Chapter or any other fee or tax required by ordinance to be paid to the Court Clerk; 
2.  The jury fee required by Section 2.28.320 of this Chapter; 
3.  Any fees of the court reporter for all or any part of a transcript necessarily obtained for use in the case; 
4.  The witness fees and mileage paid pursuant to this Chapter; 
5.  Any fees for exemplification and copies of papers necessarily obtained for use in the case; 
6.  Any costs of taking depositions for the preservation of testimony, including reporters fees, witness fees, expert witness fees, mileage for witnesses and sheriff fees for the service of subpoenas; 
7.  Any statutory fees for service of process or statutory fees for any required publications; 
8.  Any fees for interpreters; 
9.  Any item specifically authorized by ordinance to be included as part of the costs; 
10.  On proper motion of the prosecuting attorney, and at the discretion of the Municipal Court, any other reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the prosecuting attorney which are directly the result of the prosecution of the defendant. 
D.  Costs imposed pursuant to this Section are in addition to any other fees imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 876-93) 
2.28.240 - Fines paid to City Finance Department. 
    All fines or other moneys due in the Municipal Court for the violation of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City shall be paid to the Finance Department. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.245 - Surcharge designated. 
    In addition to any Municipal Court costs or other costs imposed by this Section, there shall be assessed a Municipal Court surcharge. The Municipal Court has authority to collect such surcharge from each defendant who is found liable for a traffic infraction, or is guilty or pleads guilty or no contest in the Municipal Court. Such surcharge is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 436-08; Ord. 164-02; Ord. 937-94; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 766-90) 
Article III - Trial by Jury 

2.28.250 - Right to trial by jury. 
    In any action before the Municipal Court in which the defendant is charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance punishable by imprisonment, such defendant shall have a jury trial upon request unless the City Attorney or prosecutor waives the imposition of a jail sentence and the Municipal Court approves the waiver. The jury shall consist of three (3) jurors unless a greater number, not exceeding six (6), is requested by the defendant. Any action before the Municipal Court in which the defendant is charged with a municipal ordinance violation not punishable by imprisonment shall be tried to the Municipal Court. Traffic offenses punishable by imprisonment are defined in Chapter 10.04 of this Code. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 837-92; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.260 - Municipal Judge hearing when. 
    If any defendant pleads guilty or waives his right to a jury trial, or fails to demand a jury trial, the Municipal Judge shall hear the evidence and render a judgment thereon. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.270 - Jurors - qualifications and exemptions. 
    Qualifications and exemptions of jurors shall be the same as provided in Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.280 - Jurors - method of summoning. 
    Upon demand of the defendant for trial by jury jurors shall be summoned from a jury list. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.290 - Jury not to be quashed for certain irregularities. 
    No array or panel of any jury shall be quashed, nor shall any verdict be stayed or averted by reason of any informality or irregularity in the summoning or selecting of the jury which, in the opinion of the Municipal Court, is unimportant and insufficient to vitiate the return of the jury. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.300 - Instruction to jury. 
    At the conclusion of all of the evidence, and before arguments of counsel, the Municipal Judge shall read to the jury the ordinance or code section alleged to have been violated by the defendant, and shall orally instruct the jury as to any points of law that the judge believes to be pertinent to the issues to be determined by the jury. Counsel for either of the parties may submit written instructions to the Municipal Judge, and if he or she believes such instructions to be proper, he or she may read the same to the jury. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.310 - Jury fees - designated. 
    Persons summoned to jury duty pursuant to this Chapter shall be entitled to a juror's fee per day or part of a day for which they are summoned, and the defendant shall in all cases wherein demand for trial by jury is made, tender to the Municipal Court sufficient juror's fees to pay for the number of jurors requested, plus six (6) additional jurors. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.320 - Jury trial - filing of demand - jury fee - costs. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter a defendant waives his right to a jury trial under Section 2.28.250 of this Chapter unless, within ten (10) days after arraignment or entry of a plea, he or she files with the Municipal Court a written jury demand, stating therein the number of jurors requested, and at the same time tenders to the Municipal Court a jury fee to begin the jury selection process, unless the fee is waived by the Municipal Judge because of the indigence of the defendant. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. If the action is dismissed or the defendant is acquitted of the charge, or if the defendant, having paid the jury fee, files with the Municipal Court at least fourteen (14) days before the scheduled trial date a written waiver of jury trial, the jury fee shall be refunded. If, in the fourteen (14) days before the scheduled trial date (including the day of trial), the defendant waives his or her right to trial by jury, pleads guilty or no contest to the charge, pleads guilty to a substituted charge, or fails to appear, the defendant shall pay the actual costs of summoning the jury and jury fees. The Court Clerk shall compute the costs and fees, applying the jury fee tendered by the defendant, and the Municipal Court shall assess the balance to the defendant. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 876-93; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.330 - Jurors - failure to appear - penalty. 
    If any person summoned as a juror fails, neglects or refuses to appear, without reasonable excuse, he or she shall be deemed guilty of contempt, and fined or imprisoned as the Municipal Court may direct. The Municipal Court shall have the power to issue a citation directed to the Chief of Police commanding him or her forthwith to bring such court the body of such juror so failing to attend, and for such juror to show cause why he or she should not be punished for contempt; or, on the appearance of such juror on such citation, it shall be lawful for the Municipal Court to punish him or her for contempt or wholly discharge him or her if satisfactory excuse is made. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
2.28.340 - Verdict and sentencing. 
    Upon a jury returning a verdict of guilty, the Municipal Judge shall record the same and shall proceed to fix or determine the punishment, penalty or sentence, and to render judgment upon such verdict for the punishment, penalty or sentence so determined by him or her; but if the jury returns a verdict of not guilty, the defendant shall be discharged. 
(Ord. 164-02; Ord. 239-72) 
CHAPTER 2.32 - City Cemetery 

2.32.010 - Established - statutory authority. 
    The authority for the establishment and regulation of the cemetery is provided in Section 31-25-701, et seq., C.R.S. 
(Ord. 675-87) 
2.32.020 - Operation and maintenance - rules and regulations. 
A.  The operation and maintenance of the Evans Cemetery shall be under the general supervision and control of the director of parks and recreation. 
B.  The City Council may adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations for the cemetery and may, by resolution, amend such rules. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 675-87, 1987) 
2.32.030 - Record keeping requirements. 
    The City Clerk shall keep all records of burials, the sale of cemetery lots and prepare deeds for signature of the City Clerk and Mayor. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 675-87, 1987) 
2.32.040 - Cemetery Endowment Fund established - authorized disbursement. 
    There shall be established a trust fund called the Cemetery Endowment Fund. Such trust shall consist of a combination of the present Henry F. Behrens Cemetery Trust and the Weld County Cemetery Trust. The City is further empowered to accept any additional donations to enhance the corpus of the trust. The corpus (principal) of the trust shall not be depleted, but the earnings from the trust may be used, buy only for the following purposes: 
A.  For the purchase of additional cemetery space for the enlargement of the cemetery at the discretion of the City Council; 
B.  For investments, and the interest therefrom shall be used for the general care of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 675-87, 1987) 
2.32.050 - Deposit of collected funds. 
    All funds received from cemetery lot sales, grave openings and closings, donations, interest from the cemetery endowment fund, and similar receipts shall be deposited in the City's general fund. 
(Ord. 675-87, 1987) 
2.32.060 - Perpetual care fund. 
    There is created and established a special fund, to be known as the "Evans Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund." The City Council may, by resolution, provide for the collection of a fee: (1) from the sale of cemetery lots, (2) for the interment of opening/closing of a grave, and/or (3) by an annual assessment on cemetery lots. Such fees shall be deposited in the perpetual care fund to be used only for the following purposes: 
A.  For the care and maintenance of the cemetery grounds; 
B.  For the capital improvements necessary for upkeep of the cemetery; 
C.  For equipment necessary for maintenance of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 675-87, 1987) 
CHAPTER 2.36 - Social Security 

2.36.010 - Participation declared. 
    The City is a participant in the social security system, and the benefits of old-age and survivor's insurance is extended to its employees and officers. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
2.36.020 - Execution of agreement. 
    The proper administrative officers of the City are authorized to execute and deliver to the State Department of Employment Security the plan and agreement required under the provisions of Section 5 of Chapter 237, 1957 Session Laws and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this City, and to do all other things necessary to that end. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
2.36.030 - Authorization of payments. 
    The proper officers are authorized to make all required payment into the contribution fund established by Section 6 of Chapter 237, 1957 Session Laws, and to establish such system of payroll deductions from salaries of officers and employees as may be necessary to their coverage under the old-age and survivors' insurance system. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
2.36.040 - Appropriations for contributions. 
    The City Council hereby appropriates from the proper fund or funds of the City the amounts necessary to pay into the contribution fund, as provided in Section 5(c)(1) of Chapter 237, 1957 Session Laws, and in accordance with the plan or plans and agreement. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
2.36.050 - Compliance agreement. 
    The proper officials of the City shall do all things in accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement necessary to the continued implementation of the old-age survivors' insurance system. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
2.36.060 - Effective date. 
    The City is a participant in the social security system effective as of July 1, 1956. 
(Ord. 120, 1956) 
CHAPTER 2.38 - Unclaimed Property 

2.38.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the City. 
(Ord. 840-92) 
2.38.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Director shall mean the City Manager or designee thereof. 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this City, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City. 
    Unclaimed property means any intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful changes, that is held by or under the control of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of time of "presumed abandonment" as provided under the Unclaimed Property Act, C.R.S. 38-13-101, et seq. 
(Ord. 483-10; Ord. 840-92) 
2.38.030 - Procedure for disposition of property section. 
A.  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the Director shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the City department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and, when available, the location where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the director with written notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
B.  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, and no known address of owner, the Director shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Director with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
C.  If the Director receives no written claim within the above sixty-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
D.  If the Director receives a written claim within the sixty-day claim period, the Director shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or part. The Director may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
E.  In the event that there is more than one (1) claimant for the same property, the Director may, in the Director's sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
F.  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
G.  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the director shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the Director pursuant to the order of the Municipal Court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
H.  The Director is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this Chapter, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Ord. 844-92; Ord. 840-92) 
2.38.040 - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
    Sale or disposition of any unclaimed property held by the City shall be disposed of at the City Manager's discretion. 
(Ord. 840-92) 
2.38.050 - Lost and confiscated property provisions. 
    All provisions of Chapter 2.40 of this Title, concerning lost and confiscated property, shall remain in full force and effect and nothing contained within this Chapter shall vary the terms thereof. 
(Ord. 840-92) 
CHAPTER 2.40 - Lost and Confiscated Property 

2.40.010 - Items to be delivered to police - records required. 
    All lost property found, all stolen property seized and remaining unclaimed, and all property confiscated according to law and not otherwise disposed of, remaining in the possession of the police of the City shall, immediately upon taking, be delivered to the Police Department, as custodian thereof, who shall keep a record of all such property, together with the date when and the place from which the same was taken, which shall be a permanent record open to the inspection of the public. 
(Ord. 483-10; Ord. 347-77) 
2.40.020 - Sale or other disposition of property - perishables. 
    Any property seized or taken possession of as aforesaid (except currency) which is not claimed by and possession surrendered to the rightful owner (except if the possession of the property is unlawful or that the owner of the property was a party to the creation of a public nuisance as defined under Section 16-13-301, et seq., C.R.S., or for the sale or purchase of an alcoholic beverage for and on behalf of a minor) thereof shall be subject to sale at public auction or by "online auction" (i.e., eBay, etc.), in the following manner: 
A.  The Police Department shall publish in a newspaper in the City, or on City's website, instructions on where to find the description of each article of property so seized or taken, which has been in possession of the police for more than thirty (30) days, and give notice that if such property is not claimed by the rightful owner or owners within ten (10) days from the last date of such publication, such property will be sold at such public or "online" auction at the place and in the manner as in such notice prescribed. If within ten (10) days from the last publication of such notice no claim for the property described in the notice shall have been made and determined by the rightful owner thereof, the Police Department shall proceed to sell such property at public or "online" auction in the manner and upon the terms named in the notice. The Police Department may adjourn such auction from time to time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, by giving oral or posted notice of such continuance at the time and place advertised for the holding of such auction sale. 
B.  The proceeds of any sale or sales so made, after deducting therefrom the cost of storage, advertising and selling, etc., shall be paid to the City Clerk, to be placed into the general fund of the City; provided, however, that if any property seized or taken possession of by the police as aforesaid shall be of a perishable nature or of such nature as to make it inadvisable, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, to retain possession thereof for the length of time herein above specified, he or she may cause such property to be forthwith advertised for sale at auction, stating in his or her notice therefor its perishable nature or reason for the immediate sale thereof, and the time and place of such sale, and in not less than three (3) days after such advertisement, he or she may proceed to sell such property at public auction; provided, further, that nothing contained in this Section shall refer to any impounded animals as may be provided for in any City ordinance. 
C.  As an alternative to the sale of such property, if it is determined that the City can use such property in its regular operations or trade it for other usable property or services, or donate such property to a nonprofit organization, the City may do so, but only with the written authorization of the City Manager. Such disposition shall not relieve the City, however, from the notification requirements of Subsection A above prior to converting such property to City use. 
D.  Unclaimed property having little or no significant value or which would be illegal to possess or distribute may be disposed of by appropriate protocol established by the Police Department. 
(Ord. 516-11; Ord. 483-10; Ord. 905-94; Ord. 805-91; Ord. 347-77) 
2.40.030 - Return to finder - exception. 
A.  Lost property deposited with the Police Department by the finder may be returned to the finder after thirty (30) days upon the application of the finder to the Chief of Police if such item has not been claimed by the true owner. If the finder is a member of the Police Department or an employee of the City, the lost property shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.40.020 above. 
B.  Upon surrender of found property to the Police Department, the finder may, at his or her discretion, execute a finder's claim which shall contain his or her name, address, and telephone number, if any. Failure to notify the Police Department of any change to the information to the finder's claim during the thirty-day waiting period set out in this Section shall act as an abandonment of his or her finder's claim. 
C.  Records shall be maintained by the Police Department on the disposition of all unclaimed property to include, as a minimum: 
1.  A description of the item; 
2.  The date of disposition; 
3.  To whom it was disposed; and 
4.  The amount of any money received. 
(Ord. 483-10) 
2.40.040 - Property and proceeds - barred to owner after sale. 
    After the disposition of such personal property, as set out in Section 2.40.020 above, the owner or persons entitled to same shall be forever barred from any and all claim or right to such property, or to the proceeds thereof. 
(Ord. 805-91; Ord. 347-77) 
2.40.050 - Property seized that is unlawful to possess or where owner was party to creation of public nuisance. 
    If the property has been seized by the Police Department and the possession of such property is unlawful or the owner of the property was a party to the creation of a public nuisance, such property shall not be returned to the owner, but must be disposed of by sale or other disposition as provided in Section 2.40.020 of this Chapter or, in the event that such property is currency, may be converted to the ownership and use of the City as may be determined by the City Manager, provided that the owner of such property be given at least ten (10) days written notice prior to the disposition of such property. Such notice shall be given to the last known address of the owner or, if no such address is known, then by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. In the event that the owner of such property shall contest such action, then he or she shall file, within ten (10) days of notice of the disposition of such property, a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk, and such appeal shall be heard by the City Council or a designated hearing officer within sixty (60) days of the filing of such notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 516-11) 
CHAPTER 2.42 - Disposition and Sale of City-Owned Real Property 

2.42.010 - Surplus property. 
    Whenever the City owns real property not presently used for municipal purposes, nor projected in the foreseeable future to be used for municipal purposes, such property may be declared to be surplus property and be disposed of as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 893-93, 1993) 
2.42.020 - Appraisal required. 
    Prior to the disposition of any City-owned real property, an appraisal shall be required unless the City Council finds that due to exigent or other circumstances, an appraisal would not be in the best interest of the City. An appraisal would not be by a MIA Certified Appraiser but may be made by anyone properly qualified to do appraisals of real property. 
(Ord. 893-93, 1993) 
2.42.030 - Ordinance required. 
    All dispositions of real property shall only be by ordinance, properly passed pursuant to Chapter VII of the Home Rule Charter. Notwithstanding the provisions of 3.15 of the Home Rule Charter, concerning Executive Sessions, all terms, provisions and conditions of any agreement to transfer or sell real property shall be made public. Such terms, provisions and conditions of such contract shall be reduced to writing and attached to the ordinance approving such sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 893-93, 1993) 
2.42.040 - Bid not required. 
    Unless the City Council finds that a publicly advertised bid is in the best interest of the City, public bids on real property to be sold by the City shall not be required. 
(Ord. 893-93, 1993) 
2.42.050 - No election required. 
    Unless the City Council finds that it would be in the best interest of the citizens of the City or unless a petition or referendum is properly presented, pursuant to the Home Rule Charter, no election approving the sale or disposition of real property in the City shall be required. 
(Ord. 893-93, 1993) 
CHAPTER 2.52 - Planning Commission[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 433-08 ,  1, adopted March 18, 2008, repealed Ch. 2.52 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 2.52,  2.52.010-2.52.080, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 654 86, adopted in 1986. 

2.52.010 - Created. 
    There is created the City of Evans Planning Commission, which may be referred to as the "Planning Commission" or "Planning and Zoning Commission." 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.020 - Membership-Appointment and qualifications. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be qualified electors and residents of the City appointed by the City Council, none of whom shall hold any other position with the City. The Director of Planning or his appointed designee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Planning Commission. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.030 - Term. 
    The term of office for Planning Commission members shall be five (5) years. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.040 - Attendance. 
    Absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings, or a total of six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) consecutive months, without justifiable cause, as determined by the City Council after consultation with the Planning Commission, shall constitute grounds for removal from office. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.050 - Vacancy filling. 
A.  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
B.  A vacancy exists when a member dies, resigns, is removed by action of the City Council, or if a member moves outside the city limits and thus is no longer a qualified elector residing in the City. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.060 - Meetings-Rules for operation. 
    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each calendar month. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine. All meetings and records of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public. The Planning Commission or City staff shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its official actions. A majority of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Planning Commission is empowered to make rules and regulations for its conduct and operation not inconsistent with state and municipal law. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.070 - Organization and officers. 
    The officers of the Planning Commission shall be a chairperson and a vice chairperson, both of whom shall be elected by majority vote of the members of the Planning Commission. Their duties shall be those customarily performed by such officers and as specified by the rules of the Planning Commission. The Director of Planning shall provide a staff person to record minutes of each meeting and conduct correspondence for the Planning Commission. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
2.52.080 - Powers and duties. 
    Subject to review and final approval by the City Council, the Planning Commission shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Make, amend and add to the master plan for the physical development of the City as defined in Chapter 12, Section 12.6 of the City Charter; 
B.  Exercise control over platting or subdividing land with the City, as defined in Chapter 12, Section 12.7 of the City Charter; 
C.  Draft for the City Council an official map of the City and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such map; 
D.  Make and recommend as provided in Chapter 12, Section 12.9 of the City Charter, a zoning plan for the City and recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such plan; 
E.  Make and recommend as provided in Chapter 12, Section 12.10 of the City Charter, plans for the clearing and rebuilding of slum district and blighted areas within the City; 
F.  Request information which shall be furnished within a reasonable time from the other departments of the City government in relation to its work; 
G.  Make and adopt plans for the replanning, improvements and redevelopment of neighborhoods; 
H.  Any additional powers and duties required to be exercised by the Planning Commission under state law or the Evans Municipal Code. 
( Ord. 433-08 ,  1, 2008) 
CHAPTER 2.56 - Zoning Board of Appeals 

2.56.010 - Created. 
    There is created the City Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
2.56.020 - Membership - appointment and qualifications. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be qualified electors appointed by the City Council, none of whom shall hold any other position with the City. 
(Ord. 809-91, 1991; Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
2.56.030 - Term of office. 
    The term of office shall be five (5) years, except that of the members first appointed they shall be appointed one (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5) years. Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the City Council for cause, and if a hearing is requested by such member within five (5) days of notification of removal, after public hearing. 
(Ord. 809-91, 1991; Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
2.56.040 - Vacancy filling. 
A.  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
B.  A vacancy exists when a member dies, resigns, is removed by action of the City Council, or if a member moves outside the City limits and thus is no longer a qualified elector in the City. 
(Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
2.56.050 - Meetings - rules for operation. 
    All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. All meetings and records of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its official actions. Every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. Three (3) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to make rules and regulations for its conduct and operations not inconsistent with state and municipal law. 
(Ord. 809-91, 1991; Ord. 655 86, 1985) 
2.56.060 - Organization and officers. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The chairperson's duties shall be those customarily performed by such officer and as specified by the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The chairperson shall hold office for one (1) year or until a successor is elected. The City Manager shall provide a staff person to record minutes of each meeting and conduct correspondence for the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
2.56.070 - Powers and duties. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and determine appeals from refusals of building permits and to permit exceptions to or variations from the zoning regulations in accordance with the principles, conditions, and procedures specified in the ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall exercise other powers and duties as may be required by state law. The findings and determinations of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be reviewed, modified, affirmed, or reversed by five (5) votes of the Council upon its own motion, or upon the application therefor by any interested person within thirty (30) days after such findings or determination has been made and entered upon its record. 
(Ord. 655 86, 1986) 
TITLE 3 - Revenue and Finance 
CHAPTER 3.04 - Sales and Use Tax 
Article I - General Provisions 

3.04.010 - Title. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be known and cited as the Evans Sales and Use Tax and Licensing Code. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.020 - Purpose and interpretation. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the imposition, administration, enforcement, and collection of sales and use taxes by the City. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to effect uniformity of imposition, administration, enforcement and collection of taxes, and to establish uniform procedures, but shall not be construed to extend or increase the application, rate, or amount of any tax levied or imposed herein; provided, however, that the imposition of a penalty, interest, or both penalty and interest shall be lawful and shall not be construed as an extension or increase of the application, rate or amount of tax. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be interpreted as constituting any tax policy change directly causing a net tax revenue gain or decrease from sales and use tax imposed or authorized to be imposed by the City as of 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2010. 
C.  Whenever in this Chapter reference is made to any provision of the Colorado Revised Statutes ("C.R.S."), that reference shall mean those provisions and all regulations promulgated thereunder, in effect as of 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2010. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, changes in state law and/or regulations or definitions effective on or after 12:00 a.m. on January 1, 2011, may be added to this Chapter only by subsequent amendment to this Chapter by ordinance. 
D.  The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the power necessary to exercise effectively the right to raise revenue that is essential to home rule and self-government. Regardless of any similarities or any reference to state statute, the provisions contained herein are matters of solely local concern. 
E.  It is the intent of the City in enacting this ordinance to codify the existing body of law, including applicable state statutes and regulations and City ordinances, as such law applied to the imposition, administration, and collection of the tax hereunder as in effect at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2010, and all questions of interpretation shall take into account such law as in effect as of that time. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the definitions of words, terms or phrases contained in this Chapter and not otherwise defined herein shall be as defined in Title 39, Chapter 26, C.R.S., any other statutory provisions referenced thereunder or herein, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
B.  Words, terms and phrases used in this Chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall be defined as follows: 
    Accommodations means the furnishing of space in any campgrounds, auto camp, trailer court or park, under concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or any other agreement by or through which any such space may be used or occupied. Accommodations are exempt from taxation if rented for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
    Attachments mean any equipment or machinery added to an exempt farm tractor or implement of husbandry that aids or enhances the performance of such tractor or implement. 
    Auction means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such personal property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
    (The auctioneer at any sale defined in this Section, except when acting as an agent for a duly licensed retailer or vendor or when selling only tangible personal property that is exempt under the provisions of this Chapter, is a retailer or vendor as defined in this Section and the sale made by the auctioneer is a retail sale as defined in this Section, and the business conducted by said auctioneer in accomplishing such sale is the transaction of a business as defined in this Section.) 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: (1) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and (2) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    City Manager means the City Manager of the City appointed by the City Council or such person appointed to act as City Manager. 
    City Treasurer means the City Treasurer as provided by Section 4.8 of the Home Rule Charter and who also serves as City Treasurer pursuant to Section 2.08.010 of this Code or person appointed to act as City Treasurer. 
    Claim for recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
    Closely held subsidiary corporation means a corporation in which the parent corporation owns stock possessing at least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Code means the Municipal Code of the City of Evans, Colorado, as amended. 
    Coins means monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future, or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign nation. 
    Collection costs shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Compromise means a settlement of differences by mutual concessions; an agreement reached by adjustment of conflicting or opposing claims, principles, etc., by reciprocal modification of demands. 
    Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, contractor also includes subcontractor. 
    Cooperative direct mail advertising means advertising for one (1) or more businesses which is in the form of discount coupons, advertising leaflets, or other printed advertising which are delivered by mail in a single package or bundle to potential customers of such businesses participating in such advertising. 
    Dairy equipment means any item that is used at a farm dairy in connection with the production of raw milk and not at a commercial dairy in connection with the production of pasteurized, separated milk products for retail sale, including without limitation milking claws, shells, inflators, pulsators, meters, cow identification systems, transponders, automatic takeoffs, piping, receiver jars, pumps, filter assemblies, milk containment tanks, cooling compressors, wash vats, clean in place assemblies, wash lines, wash control units, pulsator controls, milking system controls, programmable logical control systems, vacuum pumps, vacuum distribution tanks, backflush and related valves, rubber and similar hoses, rubber and similar gaskets, and any other similar or related item used in any farm dairy facility or farm dairy operation or in the production of raw milk, regardless of whether or not the item has become a fixture. To the extent the farm dairy is also involved in the production of pasteurized, separated milk products for retail sale, only the equipment used exclusively in the production of raw milk constitutes dairy equipment for purposes of this Section. 
    Direct mail advertising materials means discount coupons, advertising leaflets, and other printed advertising, including but not limited to accompanying envelopes and labels. 
    Distraint warrant means a warrant served by an authorized officer of the Police Department, the sheriff or authorized agent, indicating the amount due and date to be paid by and requiring that the delinquent taxpayer not remove or destroy any property in the business. If taxes are still not paid, property could be seized, advertised and sold for the amount of taxes and expenses due. 
    Engaged in business in the city means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the city. Engaged in business in the city includes, but is not limited to, any one (1) of the following activities by a person: (1) directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; (2) sends one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; (3) maintains one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; (4) owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or (5) makes more than one (1) delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve-month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
    Fabricating means an operation which changes the form or state of tangible personal property. 
    Factory-built housing means a manufactured home or modular home. 
    Factory-built housing means a manufactured home or modular home. 
    Farm equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this Paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, farm equipment does not include: 
a.  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
b.  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
c.  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
d.  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
a.  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
b.  Livestock; 
c.  Milk; 
d.  Honey; and 
e.  Poultry and eggs. 
    Food means food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 U.S.C.  2012(k), (2014) as amended, for purposes of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 U.S.C.  2012(t), as amended; and includes without limitation carbonated water marketed in containers, chewing gum, seeds and plants to grow foods, prepared salads and salad bars, packaged and unpacked cold sandwiches, deli trays, and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services within the City. 
    Gross taxable sales means the total amount received in money, credits or property, excluding the fair market value of exchanged property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or other consideration valued in money from sales and purchases at retail within this City, and embraced within the provisions of this Chapter. The taxpayer may take credit in this report of gross sales for an amount equal to the sale price of property returned by the purchaser when the full sale price thereof is refunded whether in cash or by credit. The fair market value of any exchanged property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, if included in the full price of a new article, shall be excluded from the gross taxable sales. On all sales at retail, valued in money, when such sales are made under conditional sales contract, or under other forms of sale where the payment of the principal sum thereunder is extended over a period longer than sixty (60) days from the date of sale thereof, only such portion of the sale amount thereof may be counted for the purpose of imposition of the tax imposed by this Chapter as has actually been received in cash by the taxpayer during the period for which the tax imposed by this Chapter is due and payable. Taxes paid on gross taxable sales represented by accounts found to be worthless and actually charged off for income tax purposes, as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax provided in this Chapter, but if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the taxpayer, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts so collected. 
    Internet means the international computer network consisting of federal and nonfederal, interoperable, packet-controlled, switched data networks. 
    Internet access services means services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing phone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of internet access services. 
    Jeopardy audit or jeopardy assessment means an audit or assessment completed or issued in an expedited manner in order to assure the collection of sales or use taxes due under this Chapter. 
    License or City license means a City business license required under and issued pursuant to this Chapter, which license also constitutes a sales tax license for persons who are vendors. 
    Livestock means cattle, horses, mules, burros, sheep, lambs, poultry, swine, ostrich, llama, alpaca and goats, regardless of use, and any other animal which is raised primarily for food, fiber or hide production. Livestock shall include alternative livestock , as defined in State law, but shall not include under Section 35-41.5-102, C.R.S., a pet animal as defined under Section 35-80-102(10), C.R.S. 
    Long-term power purchase agreement means an agreement executed between one (1) or more independent power producers and a provider of retail electric service for a term of no less than ten (10) years, pursuant to which the independent power producer or producers agree to sell all of the production offered for sale from a particular power generation facility for a specified price over a specified term. 
    Manufactured home means any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition(s) under Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, and which person holds a valid "registry identification card" issued by the State of Colorado pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14. 
    Mobile home means a manufactured home built prior to the adoption of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.  5401, et seq. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle required to be registered under C.R.S., Title 42. 
    Newspaper means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term newspaper does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Occasional sales means retail sales of tangible personal property by a charitable organization, including concessions, for fund-raising purposes if: 
a.  The sale of tangible personal property or concessions by a charitable organization which takes place no more than twelve (12) days, whether consecutive or not, during any one (1) calendar year; 
b.  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales are retained by the organization to be used in the course of the organization's charitable service, and 
c.  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) during any one (1) calendar year. 
    Person means any individual, firm, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Practitioner means a person authorized by law to prescribe any drug or device, acting within the scope of such authority. 
    Precious metal bullion means any precious metal, including but not limited to gold, silver, platinum and palladium, that has been put through a process of refining and is in such a state or condition that its value depends upon its precious metal content and not its form. 
    Prepress preparation material means all materials used by those in the printing industry including, but not limited to, airbrush color photos, color keys, dies, engravings, light-sensitive film, light-sensitive paper, masking materials, mylar, plates, proofing materials, tape, transparencies, and veloxes, which are used by printers in the preparation of customer specific layouts or in plates used to fill customers' printing orders, which are eventually sold to a customer, either in their original purchase form or in an altered form, and for which a sales or use tax is demonstrably collected from the printer's customer, if applicable, either separately from the printed materials or as part of the inclusive price therefor. Materials sold to a printer which are used by the printer for the printer's own purposes, and are not sold, either directly or in an altered form, to a customer, are not included within this definition. 
    Prescription drugs for animals means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C.  301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "RX only," and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C.  301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "RX only," and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price means: 
a.  The price to the purchaser, the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal or state government or by this Chapter, and in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, if: 
(1)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
(2)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including but not limited to vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
b.  In the case of the sale or transfer of wireless telecommunication equipment as an inducement to a purchaser to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are subject to sales tax, purchase price means and shall be limited to the monetary amount paid by the purchaser and shall not reflect any sales commission or other compensation received by the retailer as a result of the purchaser entering into or continuing a contract for such telecommunication services. Nothing in this Subparagraph shall be construed to define "purchase price" as it applies to the amount a retailer collects from a purchaser who defaults or terminates a contract for telecommunication services. 
c.  Price or purchase price also includes: 
(1)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits; 
(2)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business; 
(3)  Any consideration valued in money, such as trading stamps or coupons whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange; 
(4)  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated is not part of the purchase price; 
(5)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated; 
(6)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser; 
(7)  Indirect federal manufacturer's excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock; and 
(8)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Prosthetic devices for animals means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for animal use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchaser means a person that purchases, uses, stores or consumes property or services taxable under this Chapter. 
    Retailer means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: (1) auctioneer; (2) salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; (3) charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; (4) retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Retail sale means all sales made within the City except wholesale sales. 
    Sale or purchase and sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, or sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
a.  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
b.  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
c.  Performance of taxable services; or 
d.  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
    The terms purchase and sale do not include: 
a.  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
b.  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
c.  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
d.  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
e.  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
f.  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
g.  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
h.  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty (80%) percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
i.  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this paragraph (11) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph (11), a closely held subsidiary corporation is one (1) in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty percent (80%) of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    School means a public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through 12th grade or any portion thereof. 
    Separable means transportation charges that are performed after the taxable property or service is offered for sale and the seller allows the purchaser the option either to use the seller's transportation services or use alternative transportation services, including but not limited to the purchaser picking up the property at the seller's location. The fact that transportation charges are separately stated does not, in and of itself, mean the charges are a separable charge. 
    Separately stated means set forth separately in a written sales contract, retailer's invoice, or other written document issued in connection with the sale. 
    Software program means a sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g., a computer, tablets, smart phones) regardless of the means by which it is accessed or the medium of conveyance. Software program includes: (1) custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; (2) pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf ("cots")," "mass produced" or "standardized;" (3) modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and (4) the generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
    Special sales event means any sales event, which includes more than three (3) vendors, taking place at a single location, for a limited period of time not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Special sales event license means the license issued in accordance with this Chapter for any special sales event. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Taxable service means services subject to tax pursuant to this Chapter. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
    Transportation charges means carrying, handling, delivery, mileage, freight, postage, shipping, trip charges, stand-by, and other similar charges or fees. 
    Vendor means a retailer, merchant, jobber, dealer or any other person selling articles of tangible personal property or taxable services to purchasers, as defined herein. 
    Wholesaler means a person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business, and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale and not for storage use consumption or distribution. 
    Wholesale sale means a sale by a wholesaler to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or purchasers not for resale, and the latter sales shall be deemed retail sales and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 564-2013 1, 2; Ord. 500-10; Ord. No. 684-18  1, 2018) 
3.04.040 - Violations and judicial enforcement. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person subject to the tax levied by this Chapter to fail to obtain and maintain any license required hereunder, to refuse to make any return required to be made by this Chapter, or to make any false or fraudulent return, or any false statements in any return, or to fail or refuse to make payment to the City of any taxes collected or due the City, or in any manner to evade the collection and payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this Chapter, or to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof, or to otherwise violate any of the provisions of the Chapter, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed hereunder. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this Code for any purchaser or taxpayer not to pay the sales or use tax levied by this Code or to fail to pay the tax levied where the status of exemption is disputed. 
C.  Pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager has the authority of a peace officer, as such term is defined under the Colorado Municipal Court Rules, to cause to be issued and served summons into the City's Municipal Court to any person who may be in violation of this Chapter. 
D.  Nothing contained in this Section shall limit the City's authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter by any other lawful means. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.050 - Liability for payment; taxes held in trust. 
A.  All sums of money paid by the purchaser to any taxpayer, including any vendor or person holding or obligated to hold a license under this Chapter, as taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be and remain public money, the property of the City, in the hands of such person and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City, until paid to the City, and for any failure to so pay to the City, such person shall be punished as provided by law. 
B.  Every taxpayer, including any vendor or person holding or obligated to hold a license under this Chapter, shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to the amount of the tax imposed by this Chapter computed on the total of all sales made by them of tangible personal property or taxable services as specified herein. 
C.  Every person obligated to pay and/or remit use tax under this Chapter shall be liable and responsible for the payment of such tax. 
D.  Any statute of limitations provided in this Chapter does not apply to collections of public money in the possession of any taxpayer, including any vendor or person holding or obligated to hold a license under this Chapter, and such moneys are collectable at any time after their due date upon demand of the City Manager or the City Treasurer. Bankruptcy will not excuse unremitted taxes collected in trust. 
E.  Any taxpayer, including any vendor or person holding or obligated to hold a license under this Chapter, who executes any form or report required by this Chapter to be submitted to the City shall be personally responsible for the payment of any taxes required under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.060 - Sales and use tax constitutes lien. 
A.  In addition to the provisions set forth in Section 3.04.320 of this Chapter, any sales or use tax imposed by this Chapter, together with the interest and penalties herein provided, and the cost of collection, shall be a first and prior lien upon: 
1.  The goods, stock-in-trade, and business fixtures of or used by any taxpayer under lease, title-retaining contract or other contractual arrangement; and 
2.  The real and personal property owned or leased by any such taxpayer, including personal property affixed to real property, and shall take precedence on all such property over other claims and mortgages. 
B.  This lien shall arise upon the day the tax becomes due and payable and shall be extinguished by operation of law when the tax is paid in full, including any interest, penalty and collection costs. 
C.  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this Chapter shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property or other taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Chapter and for which said person is in any way liable under the terms of this Chapter, shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of said person, and no police officer, sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this Chapter under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the City Treasurer the amount of any taxes due and payable under this Chapter. If there are any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of any moneys to judgment creditors or other claims of whatsoever nature. 
D.  At any time a tax has accrued but is unpaid, the City Manager or City Treasurer may issue a notice of tax lien, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, or other person the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the City claims a first and prior lien on the real and tangible personal property of such person. Said notice may be filed in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of any county in the State in which the person owns real or tangible personal Property. Issuance of such notice and filing thereof shall be at the discretion of the City Manager or City Treasurer and shall not affect the priority or validity of the lien provided by this Chapter, which arises by operation of law when the tax accrues and is payable. 
E.  Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the County Clerk and Recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest covered thereby, shall be released by the City Manager or City Treasurer in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.070-3.04.190 - Reserved. 
Article II - Imposition of Sales Tax 

3.04.200 - Imposition and rate of sales tax. 
A.  There is levied and shall be collected a sales tax under this Chapter at the rate of three and one-half percent (3.5%) on the purchase price paid upon the sale of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of taxable services, as provided herein. 
B.  Every retailer engaged in business in this City and making sales of tangible personal property for the storage, use, or consumption in the City which are not exempt from taxation as provided in this Section shall collect the tax imposed by this Section from the purchaser and give the purchaser a receipt therefor, which receipt shall identify the property taxed, the date that such property was sold or ordered, and the amount of tax collected and paid. 
(Ord. 564-2013 1, 2; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.210 - Sales tax - taxable property and services. 
    The sales tax as set forth in Section 3.04.200 above shall be levied upon the following: 
A.  Tangible personal property. On the purchase price paid or charged upon the sale of tangible personal property at retail, including without limitation, food. 
B.  Exchanged property. In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property if such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or is a vehicle as provided under the provisions of Subsection 3.04.420(c) of this Chapter. 
C.  Telephone and telegraph services: 
1.  Upon telephone and telegraph services, including two-way paging, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises for all intrastate telephone and telegraph service. Mobile telecommunications service shall be subject to the tax imposed by this Section only if the service is provided to a customer whose place of primary use is within the City and the service originates and terminates within the City. In accordance with the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C.  116-126, as amended, mobile telecommunications service provided to a customer whose place of primary use is outside the borders of the City is exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
2.  a. If a customer believes that a tax, charge, or fee assessed by the City in the customer's bill for a mobile telecommunications service is erroneous, or that an assignment of place of primary use or taxing jurisdiction on said bill is incorrect, the customer shall notify the home service provider in writing within two years after the date the bill was issued. The notification from the customer shall include the street address for the customer's place of primary use, the account name and number for which the customer seeks a correction, a description of the alleged error, and any other information that the home service provider may require. 
b.  No later than sixty (60) days after receipt of notice from a customer pursuant to Subparagraph a. above, the home service provider shall review the information submitted by the customer and any other relevant information and documentation to determine whether an error was made. If the home service provider determines that an error was made, the home service provider shall refund or credit to the customer any tax, fee, or charge erroneously collected from the customer for a period not to exceed two (2) years. If the home service provider determines that no error was made, the home service provider shall provide a written explanation of its determination to the customer. 
c.  Any customer that believes a tax, charge, or fee assessed by the City in the customer's bill for mobile telecommunications services is erroneous, or that an assignment of place of primary use or taxing jurisdiction on said bill is incorrect, may file a claim in the appropriate district court only after complying with the provisions of this Subparagraph. 
3.  As used in this Subparagraph, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Act means the federal Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C.  116-126, as amended. 
    Customer means customer as defined in section 124 (2) of the Act. 
    Home service provider means home service provider as defined in section 124 (5) of the Act. 
    Mobile telecommunications service means mobile telecommunications service as defined in section 124 (7) of the Act. 
    Place of primary use means the place of primary use as defined in section 124 (8) of the Act. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means taxing jurisdiction as defined in section 124 (12) of the Act. 
4.  For telephone and telegraph services when nontaxable services are aggregated with and not separately stated from taxable services, the provider of such services shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter only on intrastate telephone and telegraph services. The provider of such services shall maintain for thirty-six (36) months documentation of the services provided that are taxable and nontaxable. Such documentation is subject to audit, and the service provider shall be liable for any uncollected tax. A service provider shall notify the City Treasurer of the percentages of taxable and nontaxable services in a package of aggregated services within thirty (30) days of use on any invoice. If this is not done, the entire price will be subject to sales tax. 
D.  Gas and electric service. For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public, or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for commercial consumption and not for resale, upon steam when consumed or used by the purchaser and not resold in original form whether furnished or sold by municipal, public, or private corporations or enterprises. 
E.  Food and drink served. Upon the amount paid for food or drink served or furnished, in or by restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, hotels, drugstores, social clubs, nightclubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers, coffee shops, carryout shops, and other like places of business at which prepared food or drink is regularly sold, including sales from pushcarts, motor vehicles, and other mobile facilities. Cover charges shall be included as part of the amount paid for such food or drink. However, meals provided to employees of the places mentioned in this Subsection at no charge or at a reduced charge shall only be subject to tax on the amount actually paid. Nothing herein affects the tax due upon the amount paid for food sold at retail. 
F.  Warranties and maintenance. On the purchase price paid for warranty and maintenance agreements which are mandatory and which are parts of the purchase price of the item covered by such agreement. Maintenance and warranty agreements which are optional and are sold to a purchaser as a separate item are not subject to tax but the retailer must pay sales tax on the cost of materials used in performing the maintenance or warranty work. Not including items of tangible personal property upon which the sales tax is imposed upon the full purchase price, every retailer or vendor conducting a business in which the transaction between the retailer and the purchaser consists of the supplying of tangible personal property and services in connection with the maintenance or servicing of same shall be required to pay the taxes levied under this Chapter upon the full contract price, unless prior approval is granted by the City Treasurer to use a ratio of the tangible personal property included in the consideration as it bears to the total of the consideration paid under said combination contract or sale which is subject to sales tax. 
G.  Software programs, except custom software. 
H.  Labor or service. On the purchase price paid or charged for manufacturing, producing, fabricating, and processing tangible personal property which has been made to order or tailor-made for the purchaser. Manufacturing, producing, fabricating or processing is usually deemed to have occurred when tangible personal property is created, transformed or reduced to a different state, quality, form, property or thing. Transformation may occur by hand, machine, art, chemical action or natural means. An operation which restores a used or worn item of tangible personal property to its essentially original form and use is not considered manufacturing, producing, fabricating or processing within the meaning of this Subsection. The amount charged the purchaser for labor or services rendered in installing and applying purchased tangible personal property is not subject to tax; provided that such amount is separately stated and such separate statement is not to avoid the tax upon the actual sales price of tangible personal property. Any person making a sale subject to this Paragraph must be licensed and may purchase tax free all chapters of tangible personal property which enter into and become a component part of the chapter sold. Purchases of all other chapters of tangible personal property not becoming an ingredient or component part of the finished product are taxable. In connection with the transactions referred to in Subparagraph 3.04.030(B)49.k., the sales tax is imposed only on the amount of any increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor corporation. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection, the sales price is the gross value of all materials, labor, and service, and the profit thereon, included in the price charged to the user or purchaser. 
I.  Rooms or accommodations. On the entire amount charged to any person for the furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, or person acting in a representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known, to a person who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 684-18  1, 2018) 
3.04.220 - Tax on credit sales. 
A.  In case of a sale upon credit, or a contract for sale wherein it is provided that the price shall be paid in installments and title does not pass until a future date, or a chattel mortgage or a conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment, that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears in relation to the total purchase price. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subsection, a retailer doing business wholly or partly on a credit basis may, at his election, make a return, and remit sales tax on credit sales, on the basis of the aggregate amount of cash received during the month from taxable credit sales. The retailer shall determine the tax to be remitted on the basis of the aggregate amount of tax which he has collected from his credit customers during the month. 
B.  If a retailer transfers, sells, assigns, or otherwise disposes of an account receivable, he or she shall be deemed to have received the full balance of the consideration for the original sale and shall be liable for the remittance of the sales tax on the balance of the total sale price not previously reported; except that such transfer, sale, assignment, or other disposition of an account receivable by a retailer to a closely held subsidiary shall not be deemed to require the retailer to pay the sales tax on the credit sale represented by the account transferred prior to the time the customer makes payment on said account. 
3.04.230 - Sales - where consummated. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the City, or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the City. If legal title to the tangible personal property sold is transferred to the purchaser, or his or her agent, prior to delivery to a destination outside the limits of the City, the place of taxation is deemed within the City. 
3.04.240 - Credit for tax previously paid to another municipality. 
    The City sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another municipality equal to, or in excess of, the rate imposed under this Chapter. A credit shall be granted against the City's sales tax imposed hereunder with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the sales tax imposed by the City under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.250 - Tax as a separate and distinct item. 
A.  Except as provided in Subsection B below, retailers shall add the tax imposed hereby, or the average equivalent thereof, to the purchase price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and provide the purchaser with a receipt showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the purchaser to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
B.  Any retailer selling malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors by the drink, or any vendor selling individual items of tangible personal property through coin-operated vending machines, or any special sales event vendor may include in his or her sales price the tax levied under this Chapter. No such retailer or vendor shall gain any benefit from the collection or payment of such tax except a permitted vendor allowance as defined in Section 3.04.550 of this Chapter. 
C.  It is unlawful for any vendor or retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public, or any purchaser, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax, or any part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or will not be added to the selling price or that any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.260 - Sales tax - exempt property and services. 
    There shall be exempt from sales tax hereunder the following: 
A.  tangible personal property exemptions: 
1.  Any right to the continuous possession or use for three (3) years or less of any article of tangible personal property under a lease or contract, if the lessor has paid to the City sales or use tax on such tangible personal property upon its acquisition. The City Treasurer may permit a lessor of tangible personal property leased for a period of three (3) years or less to acquire the property free of sales or use tax if the lessor agrees to collect sales tax on all lease payments received on the property. 
2.  The transfer of tangible personal property without consideration, other than the purchase, sale or promotion of the transferor's product, to an out-of-City vendee for use outside of this City in selling products normally sold at wholesale by the transferor; 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property for testing, modification, inspection, or similar type of activities in this City if the ultimate use of the property in manufacturing or similar type of activities occurs outside of this City and if the test, modification, or inspection period does not exceed ninety (90) days; and 
4.  All sales and purchases of tangible personal property by a manufacturer that uses the property as a component part of goods that it manufactures, including but not limited to high technology goods, and that donates such goods to the United States government; the State or any department, institution, or political subdivision thereof; or any organization exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to the extent that the aggregate value of the goods included in a single donation exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
B.  sales made to government organizations. All sales to the United States government and to the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only. 
C.  Charitable organizations: 
1.  All sales made to charitable organizations, in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; except that any veterans' organization that qualifies as a charitable organization shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this Chapter only for the purpose of sponsoring a special event, meeting, or other function in the City that is not part of the organization's regular activities in the City; 
2.  All occasional sales by a charitable organization; and 
3.  A sale by an association or organization of parents and teachers of public school students that is a charitable organization, if the association or organization uses the funds raised through the sale for the benefit of a public school or an organized public school activity or to pay the reasonable expenses of the association or organization. For purposes of this exemption, public school means a public school of a school district in this State or an institute charter school. 
D.  sales made to schools: All sales made to schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or corporate profit. 
E.  Exchanged property. All transactions specified in Subsection 3.04.210.B of this Chapter in which the fair market value of the exchanged property is excluded from the consideration or purchase price because the exchanged property is covered by Subsection 3.04.210.B or by Subsection 3.04.420.C of this Chapter and in which, because there is no additional consideration is involved in the transaction, there is no purchase price within the meaning of such a term. 
F.  Newspapers and preprinted newspaper supplements that become attached to or inserted in and distributed with such newspapers. The sale of newspapers shall be exempt from taxation under this Chapter. This exemption may not be extended to include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising pamphlets, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing service or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, book or pocket editions of books or other newspapers not otherwise qualifying under the definition of newspaper. 
G.  Internet access services. All sales and purchases of internet access services, e-mail services, web site hosting and domain name registration. 
H.  Refractory materials. All sales and purchases of refractory materials and carbon electrodes used by a person manufacturing iron and steel for sale or profit and all sales and purchases of inorganic chemicals used in the processing of vanadium-uranium ores. 
I.  Precious metal bullion and coins: All sales of precious metal bullion and coins. 
J.  Articles furnished for use with tangible personal property for consumption. Any sale of any article to a retailer or vendor of food, meals, or beverages, which article is to be furnished to a purchaser or user for use with articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail, if a separate charge is not made for the article to the purchaser or user, if such article becomes the property of the purchaser or user, together with the food, meals, or beverages purchased, and if a tax is paid on the retail sale. 
K.  Container or bag for packing tangible personal property for consumption. Any sale of any container or bag to a retailer or vendor of food, meals, or beverages, which container or bag is to be furnished to a purchaser or user for the purpose of packaging or bagging articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail, if a separate charge is not made for the container or bag to the purchaser or user, if such container or bag becomes the property of the purchaser or user, together with the food, meals, or beverages purchased, and if a tax is paid on the retail sale. 
L.  Food if purchased with food stamps. For purposes of this exemption, food shall have the meaning provided in 7 U.S.C.  2012(g) as such section existed on October 1, 1987 or is thereafter amended. 
M.  Food if purchased with funds provided by the special supplemental food program for women, infants and children under 42 U.S.C.  1786. For purposes of this exemption, food shall have the meaning provided in 42 U.S.C.  1786 as such section existed on October 1, 1987 or is thereafter amended. 
N.  Construction and building materials: 
1.  All sales of construction and building materials to contractors for use in the building, erection, alteration, or repair of structures, highways, roads, streets and other public works owned and used by: 
a.  The United States government, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only; 
b.  Charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; or 
c.  Schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or corporate profit. 
2.  On application by the purchaser or seller, the City shall issue to a contractor or subcontractor a certificate of exemption indicating that the contractor's or subcontractor's purchase of construction and building materials is for a purpose stated in this Subsection and is, therefore, free from sales tax. The City shall provide forms for the application and certificate and shall have the authority to verify that the contractor or subcontractor is, in fact, entitled to the issuance of the certificate prior to such issuance. 
O.  Railroads: 
1.  The sale of construction and building materials to a common carrier by rail operating in interstate or foreign commerce for use by the common carrier in construction and maintenance of its railroad tracks. 
2.  The sale of tangible personal property that is to be affixed or attached as a component part of a locomotive, a freight car, railroad work equipment or other railroad rolling stock. 
3.  The sale of locomotives, freight cars, railroad work equipment, and other railroad rolling stock used or purchased for use in interstate commerce by a railroad company. 
P.  Aircraft: 
1.  The sale of aircraft used or purchased for use in interstate commerce by a commercial airline. 
2.  The sale of tangible personal property that is to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
3.  The sale of a new or used aircraft if: 
a.  The aircraft is sold to a person who is not a resident of the City; 
b.  The aircraft will be removed from the City within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the date of the sale; 
c.  The aircraft will not be in the City for more than seventy-three (73) days in any of the three (3) calendar years following the calendar year in which the aircraft is removed from the City pursuant to Subparagraph b. above; 
d.  Any purchaser of an aircraft claiming the exemption of this Paragraph shall, at the time of purchase, provide to the seller an affidavit that the purchaser is not a resident of the City and that the purchaser agrees to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter if the purchaser fails to comply with the requirements of Subparagraphs b. and c. above. 
Q.  Agriculture and livestock: 
1.  The sale of special fuel used for the operation of farm vehicles when such vehicles are being used on farms and ranches. As used in this Subsection, special fuel means diesel engine fuel, kerosene, liquefied petroleum gas, and natural gas used for the generation of power to propel a motor vehicle on the highways of this State, but does not include gasoline , which is defined as any flammable liquid used primarily as a fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles, as such definition is further refined in Section 39-27-101(12), C.R.S. 
2.  All sales and purchases of farm equipment. 
3.  Any farm equipment under lease or contract, if the fair market value of the equipment is at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and the equipment is rented or leased for use primarily and directly in any farm operation. The lessor or seller of such farm equipment shall obtain a signed affidavit from the lessee, renter, or purchaser affirming that the farm equipment will be used primarily and directly in a farm operation. 
4.  All sales and purchases of livestock, all sales and purchases of live fish for stocking purposes, and all farm close-out sales. 
5.  All sales and purchases of feed for livestock. 
6.  All sales and purchases of seeds and orchard trees. 
7.  All sales and purchases of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock or poultry. 
R.  Drugs and medical and therapeutic devices: 
1.  All sales of prescription drugs for humans, all sales of insulin in all its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed physician, all sales of glucose useable for treatment of insulin reactions, all sales of urine- and blood-testing kits and materials, all sales of insulin measuring and injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes and needles, all sales of prosthetic devices for Humans, all sales of wheelchairs and hospital beds, all sales of drugs or materials when furnished by a doctor as part of professional services provided to a patient, and all sales of corrective eyeglasses, contact lenses, or hearing aids. 
2.  All sales of therapeutic devices for humans, appliances, or related accessories, with a retail value of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), that are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
3.  All sales of therapeutic devices for humans, appliances, or related accessories, with a retail value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, that are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
4.  The exemption also applies to prescription drugs and prosthetic devices for animals. 
S.  Bingo equipment: All sales of equipment, as defined in Section 12-9-102 (5), C.R.S., to a bingo-raffle licensee, as defined in Section 12-9-102 (1.2), C.R.S. 
T.  Manufactured homes: Forty-eight percent (48%) of the purchase price of factory-built housing, as such housing is defined in Section 3.04.030 of this Chapter, shall be exempt from the imposition of sales tax except that the entire purchase price in any subsequent sale of a manufactured home, after such manufactured home has been once subject to the payment of sales tax by virtue of this Chapter, shall be exempt from imposition of sales tax hereunder. 
U.  Components used to produce energy from a renewable energy source: 
1.  All sales of components used in the production of alternating current electricity from a renewable energy source, including but not limited to wind, shall be exempt from imposition of sales tax hereunder. Components used in the production of alternating current electricity from a renewable energy source shall include, but shall not be limited to, wind turbines, rotors and blades, solar modules, trackers, generating equipment, supporting structures or racks, inverters, towers and foundations, balance of system components such as wiring, control systems, switchgears, and generator step-up transformers, and concentrating solar power components that include, but are not limited to, mirrors, plumbing, and heat exchangers. Components used in the production of alternating current electricity from a renewable energy source shall not include any components beyond the point of generator step-up transformers located at the production site, labor, energy storage devices, or remote monitoring systems. 
2.  Through June 30, 2017, sales of components used in solar thermal systems shall be exempt from imposition of sales tax hereunder. 
a.  Components used in solar thermal systems shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Solar collectors, including flat-plate collectors, evacuated tube collectors, solar air collectors, and concentrating solar thermal collectors; 
(2)  Tanks for the storage of gases or liquids that have been heated or cooled by solar-generated energy; 
(3)  Pumps, impellers, and fans for the circulation of gases or liquids that have been heated or cooled by solar-generated energy; 
(4)  Heat exchangers used to transfer solar-generated energy; 
(5)  Support structures, racks, and foundations for any components listed in Subparagraphs (1) to (4) above; and 
(6)  Any other system components such as piping, valves, gauges, fittings, insulation and controls for any components listed in Subparagraphs (1) to (4) above. 
b.  Solar thermal system means a system whose primary purpose is to use energy from the sun to produce heat or cold for: 
(1)  Heating or cooling a residential or commercial building; 
(2)  Heating or cooling water; or 
(3)  Any industrial, commercial, or manufacturing process. 
V.  Sales that benefit a state school: 
1.  A sale that benefits a state school if the sale is made by any of the following: 
a.  A school; 
b.  An association or organization of parents and school teachers; 
c.  A booster club or other club, group or organization whose primary purpose is to support a school activity; or 
d.  A school class or student club, group, or organization. 
2.  As used in this exemption only: 
a.  Parent means a parent of a student as defined in Subparagraph (D) of this Subsection. 
b.  Sale that benefits a Colorado school means a sale of a commodity or service from which all proceeds of the sale, less only the actual cost of the commodity or service to the person or entity described in Subparagraph (i), are donated to a school or a school-approved student organization. 
c.  School means a public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through twelfth grade or any portion thereof. 
d.  Student means any person enrolled in a school as defined in Subparagraph (C) above. 
W.  Sale of rooms or accommodations to permanent residents. The transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or person acting in a representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known, to a person who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court or park, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement for occupancy of a room or accommodations for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
X.  All sales of pre-press preparation printing materials which are used by a printer for a specific printing contract, where the printed product is sold at retail to a customer accepting delivery within this City. 
( Ord. No. 684-18  1, 2018) 
3.04.270-3.04.290 - Reserved. 
Article III - Imposition of Use Tax Other Than on Motor Vehicles 

3.04.300 - Imposition and rate of use tax. 
    Unless otherwise exempted pursuant to Article II above, there is levied and there shall be paid a use tax at the rate of three and one-half percent (3.5%), upon the privilege of using or consuming within the City any construction and building materials and upon the privilege of storing, using or consuming within the City any articles of tangible personal property or taxable services purchased at retail, from outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.310 - Collection of use tax other than on construction and building materials and motor vehicles. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, every person who uses, stores, or consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, which property or service is purchased outside the City and is subject to the use tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.04.300 above and who has not paid the sales tax imposed by this Chapter to a retailer, shall make a return and remit the use tax imposed by Section 3.04.300 to the City Treasurer on forms prescribed by the City Treasurer, showing in detail the tangible personal property or taxable service stored, used or consumed by such person within the City in the preceding period covered by the remittance and on which property the sales or use tax has not been paid. 
B.  Every person subject to the provisions of Section 3.04.300 above shall maintain monthly records of the amount of use tax due and shall make a return and remit the use tax due in accordance with Section 3.04.530 of this Chapter. Any such return shall be subscribed by the taxpayer or his or her authorized agent and shall contain a written declaration that it is made under the penalties of perjury. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.320 - Collection of construction and building materials use tax. 
A.  The contractor, property owner/lessor, and lessee are jointly and severally liable for any tax due under this Section. 
B.  Every contractor, property owner or lessee engaged in construction projects in the City who purchases construction and building materials needed therefor, and to whom a building, fence, right-of-way, development (which includes any land use), building, zoning or similar permit or sign permit is issued by the City's Planning and Development, Land Use or Public Works Department or similar departments, shall remit, at the time of permit issuance, a use tax deposit to the City prior to the issuance of any such permit, such deposit to insure and indemnify the City for the amount of use tax due within thirty-six (36) months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the project or the date of the final inspection of the project by the City ("use tax deposit"). The use tax deposit shall be calculated by multiplying the City use tax rate, as set forth in Section 3.04.300 above, on construction and building materials by fifty percent (50%) of the total valuation of the construction project. Total valuation for the purposes of the use tax deposit shall be determined by the City Treasurer and/or the City's building department or official. Use tax due on the actual cost of construction and building materials may be subsequently determined and adjusted through audit. Upon payment of the use tax deposit, the City shall issue to the taxpayer a receipt identifying the property that is the subject of the use tax deposit and the permit number. 
C.  Within thirty-six (36) months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the project or the date of the final inspection by the City of the project, if it is determined by the City that the actual cost of the construction and building materials for the project is greater than the estimate therefor and that the amount of the use tax deposit is not sufficient to provide for full payment of the use tax, then the additional use tax due must be received by the City Treasurer within thirty (30) days of such determination. If it is determined by the City that the use tax deposit is sufficient to pay for the use tax due, then the use tax deposit shall be used to pay the amount of the use tax due, and any excess amount of the use tax deposit shall be refunded to the person who made the use tax deposit within thirty (30) days of such determination. 
D.  Every contractor, property owner or lessee engaged in construction projects in the City who purchases construction and building materials needed therefor and who does not apply for and have issued a permit as described in Subsection A above, or every contractor, property owner or lessee engaged in construction projects in the City who seeks and obtains prior approval of the City Treasurer to remit use taxes in accordance with this Subsection shall, on or before the twentieth day of each succeeding month following the start of such construction, file a return with the City Treasurer attaching all statements and invoices required to be kept under Section 3.04.520 of this Chapter, along with a summary sheet for the construction and building materials purchased the previous month, and shall thereupon pay to the City the full amount of the use tax due thereon for the preceding month or months. Any failure to make such return and payment of such use tax shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and, upon conviction thereof, shall subject the violator to the penalties provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 564-2013 3; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.330 - Unpaid use tax on construction and building materials shall constitute lien. 
    The full amount of any use tax due and not paid for construction and building materials, together with penalties and interest thereon as herein provided, shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by the improvements upon which the construction and building materials were used or consumed for the amount of the tax. The City Treasurer, with prior approval of the City Manager, may then certify the balance due to the County City Treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.340 - Credit for lawfully imposed tax paid to others. 
A.  In the event that a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule city or county has been legally imposed on the purchaser or user on the purchase of tangible personal property or taxable services or construction and building materials equal to or in excess of the use tax imposed by this Chapter, the use tax imposed hereunder shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of such tangible personal property or taxable services or use or consumption of construction and building materials. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this Chapter with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the City of tangible personal property or taxable services or use or consumption of construction and building materials purchased by him or her elsewhere; the amount of the credit being equal to the tax actually paid by reason of the imposition of a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule city or city and county on purchase or use thereof. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this Chapter. 
B.  It is the intent of this Chapter for all City taxes to be paid at the time a building permit is issued. Once such permit is issued, contractors, property owners or lessees engaged in construction projects in the City are considered to be the end users of construction and building materials in the City and must not pay municipal sales tax to a vendor in another jurisdiction for construction and building materials to be used or consumed at a location in the City. No refund or credit of another municipality's tax will be allowed. 
C.  If a contractor, property owner/lessor or lessee engaged in construction projects in the City purchases such construction and building materials from City vendors possessing a valid city license, then such contractor, property owner/lessor or lessee may submit invoices or statements reflecting the purchase thereof and make application to the City Treasurer within sixty (60) days directly following the determination by the City of the use tax due, which determination shall be made within thirty-six (36) months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the project or date of the final inspection by the City of the project, for credit or refund of any amount paid as sales taxes to the City, in which event it shall be the duty of the person making such application to furnish all necessary bills and invoices evidencing the payment of the tax. If the City Treasurer is satisfied that there has been such payment, then the City Treasurer shall either credit the account of the taxpayer if the use tax has not been levied, or refund the amount if the use tax has been paid through a use tax deposit within sixty (60) days after such application shall have been received by the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.350 - Refunds, penalties and interest, recovery and enforcement of obligations. 
A.  Refunds on use tax overpayment on construction and building materials or on tangible personal property or taxable services subject to such tax shall be issued in accordance with Section 3.04.710 of this Chapter. The right of any person to obtain a refund pursuant to this Chapter shall not be assignable. 
B.  Penalties and interest for late remittances or failure to remit the full amount of use tax due hereunder shall be assessed and imposed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 3.04.820 through 3.04.840 and 3.04.870 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.360 - Exemptions to use tax imposed on construction and building materials. 
    The use tax on construction and building materials imposed under this Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  In addition to the provisions in Subsection B below, the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property or taxable services if the sale of such is exempt from sales tax hereunder. 
B.  Any of the exemptions set forth in Section 3.04.260 of this Chapter not otherwise set forth in this Section which are allowed on the use and consumption of construction and building materials under state law as of December 31, 2010. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.370-3.04.390 - Reserved. 
Article IV - Imposition of Sales and Use Tax on Motor and Other Vehicles 

3.04.400 - Imposition and rate of sales and use tax on motor vehicles. 
    Unless otherwise exempted, there is levied and there shall be paid a sales or use tax at the rate of three and one-half percent (3.5%), upon the sale, storage, use, or consumption within the City of any motor vehicle and other vehicle purchased at retail on which registration is required under state law. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.410 - Collection of sales or use tax on motor vehicles. 
A.  Any resident of the City who purchases a motor vehicle, whether new or used, for use within the City must pay the City sales tax on the purchase price of any motor vehicle upon purchase or use tax upon registration of said vehicle in the county if no City sales tax was collected. Any use tax imposed shall be paid by the purchaser and collected by the agent of the Weld County Clerk's office at the time of such registration, licensing or obtaining of a certificate of title and the proceeds of such use tax shall be paid to the City periodically in accordance with state law and any agreements between the State Department of Revenue and the City, or Weld County and the City. If the authorized agent of the Weld County Clerk's office fails to collect any use tax imposed, then the City Treasurer and/or City Manager shall collect such use tax in accordance with the collection and enforcement proceedings set forth in this Chapter. 
B.  No registration shall be made of a motor vehicle or other vehicle for which registration is required and no certificate of title shall be issued for such motor vehicle by the Weld County Clerk or the Colorado Department of Revenue or their authorized agents until any tax due hereunder on the sale, storage, use or consumption of such vehicle has been paid. 
C.  To facilitate collection of taxes as provided in this Section, the City Council shall certify to the Weld County Clerk's Office and the Colorado Department of Revenue its current sales and use tax ordinance and any subsequent changes therein. 
D.  In the case of a seller-financed sale in which the seller has added the sales tax due on the sale to the financed purchase price of the motor vehicle and the purchaser has defaulted or otherwise failed to make payments due to the seller, the seller shall be entitled to deduct all portions of the unreceived payments that are attributable to the sales tax due on the sale from the next City sales tax return made by the seller pursuant to these provisions governing imposition of tax on motor vehicles and other vehicles. If the amount to be deducted pursuant to this Subsection exceeds the amount of sales tax to be remitted by the seller to the City for the next reporting period, the seller may carry forward the remaining amount of the deduction to future sales tax returns. In no event shall this Subsection be construed to create a right to a refund or any other payment by the City to the seller. For purposes of this Subsection, seller-financed sale means a retail sale of a motor vehicle by a seller licensed pursuant to Part 1 of Chapter 6 of Title 12, C.RS., in which the seller, or a wholly-owned affiliate or subsidiary of the seller, collects all or part of the total consideration paid for the motor vehicle in periodic payments and retains a lien on the motor vehicle until all payments have been received. The term does not include a retail sale of a motor vehicle in which a person other than the seller provides the consideration for the sale and retains a lien on the motor vehicle until all payments have been made. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.420 - Exemptions on sales and use tax on motor vehicles. 
    The following shall be exempt from the sales and use tax imposed on motor vehicles: 
A.  Any exemptions applicable to motor vehicles set forth in Section 3.04.260 of this Chapter. 
B.  sales to non-resident. The sale, storage, use or consumption of a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon which registration or licensing is required to a purchaser who is a nonresident of the City and who purchases such motor vehicle or other vehicle for use outside this City and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and the owner registered, titled and licensed said motor vehicle outside this City. 
C.  Exchanged property: 
1.  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property if: 
a.  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
b.  Such exchanged property is a motor vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of the State, including but not limited to vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. 
2.  The exchange of three or more vehicles of the same type by any person in any calendar year in transactions subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged in the business of selling vehicles of the type involved in such transactions and that he is thereby subject to any licensing requirements necessary to engage in such activity. 
D.  Trailers and trucks. 
1.  The sale, storage, use, or consumption of a new or used trailer, semitrailer, truck, truck tractor, or truck body manufactured within this City if such vehicle is purchased from the manufacturer for use exclusively outside this City or in interstate commerce and is delivered by the manufacturer to the purchaser within this City, if the purchaser drives or moves such vehicle to any point outside this City within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery, and if the purchaser furnishes an affidavit to the manufacturer that such vehicle will be permanently licensed and registered outside this City and will be removed from this State within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery; and 
2.  The sale or storage or use of a new or used trailer, semitrailer, truck, truck tractor, or truck body if such vehicle is purchased for use exclusively outside this State or in interstate commerce and is delivered by the manufacturer or licensed Colorado dealer to the purchaser within this State, if the purchaser drives or moves such vehicle to any point outside this State within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery, and if the purchaser furnishes an affidavit to the seller that such vehicle will be permanently licensed and registered outside this State and will be removed from this State within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery. 
3.  The storage or use of a new or used trailer, semitrailer, truck, truck tractor, or truck body if the vehicle has been relocated within the State, was used in interstate commerce and the owner can provide evidence of the vehicle being previously registered in another state for at least six (6) months. 
E.  Emission standard qualified motor vehicles. The sale or storage, use or consumption of any motor vehicle, power source for any motor vehicle, or parts used for converting the power source for any motor vehicle, if the gross vehicle weight rating of the motor vehicle is greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds and if the motor vehicle, power source, or parts used for converting the power source are certified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or any state as provided in the "Federal Clean Air Act" as meeting an emission standard equal to or more stringent than the low-emitting vehicle emission standard. For purposes of this exemption: 
1.  "Motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle required to be licensed or subject to licensing for operation upon the highways of Colorado, including a vehicle that uses a hybrid propulsion system. 
2.  "Parts used for converting" shall mean the wiring, fuel lines, engine coolant system, fuel storage containers, fuel control system, and other components associated with reducing the emissions characteristics of an engine or motor. 
3.  "Power source" means the engine or motor and associated wiring, fuel lines, engine coolant system, fuel storage containers, and miscellaneous components. 
F.  Full use dealer plates. Any motor vehicle purchased and held for resale in this City by a licensed motor vehicle dealer, as defined in Section 12-6-102 (13), C.R.S., who meets the eligibility requirements to receive a full-use dealer plate set forth in Section 42-3-116(6)(a)(I), C.R.S., shall be considered to be in the regular course of business and shall not be subject to use tax. A motor vehicle shall be considered to be purchased and held for resale if: 
1.  The manufacturer's certificate of origin or certificate of title for the motor vehicle is assigned to the motor vehicle dealer; 
2.  The motor vehicle is included in a current list of vehicles for retail sale that is prepared by the motor vehicle dealer in the ordinary course of business; and 
3.  At any given time, the motor vehicle is available to be purchased and delivered to a retail customer within three (3) business days. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.430-3.04.490 - Reserved. 
Articles V & VI - Obligations and Responsibilities 

3.04.500 - Licensing obligations. 
A.  License required. It shall be unlawful (1) for any person to fail to obtain a license required by this Chapter if such person engages in any business within the City, which consists, without limitation, of the selling of goods, wares or merchandise or the performance or rendering of any service for charge or the carrying on or engaging in any occupation or (2) for any person engaged in business as such term is defined in this Chapter to fail to obtain a license required by this Chapter. 
B.  Failure to obtain a license when so required by this Chapter shall be a violation of this Chapter punishable under the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
C.  Application contents. Every person required to obtain a license hereunder shall submit an application in writing to the City that provides the following information on a form approved by the City: 
1.  Applicant's name; 
2.  Personal address; 
3.  Business name; 
4.  The character and/or type of business. Each and every type of business must be specifically identified and listed; 
5.  Applicable federal taxpayer identification number; 
6.  State of Colorado sales tax license number of the business; 
7.  Physical location of the business; 
8.  Physical location phone number; 
9.  Applicable contact phone number, fax, and email address; 
10.  Other facts as may be required by the City such as, but not limited to, driver's license number of an officer or owner of the Business; and 
11.  Information which provides proof that the applicant is: 
a.  Not in default under provisions of this Chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the City except for current taxes. 
b.  In compliance with all applicable building, fire, and zoning codes and ordinances. 
c.  __________ 
D.  Application must be signed. The application must be signed and dated under penalty of perjury by an owner or officer of the business. A valid digital signature or the equivalent thereof, on a license application transmitted electronically over the Internet or transmitted via other similar means is acceptable and shall be held as a written signature. A signature on a license application sent via facsimile is acceptable and shall be held as a written signature. 
E.  Obligation to report changes. Any time any information on a license application is no longer current, the holder of the License shall report such changes to the City within thirty (30) days. 
F.  Each retail establishment to be licensed. In case business is transacted at one (1) or more separate places by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. Each owner of a different business located at the same location must obtain a separate license for each business. 
G.  Subcontractor licensing requirement. A subcontractor working under a general contractor who has a valid unexpired license, shall be exempt from obtaining a license. 
H.  License form. Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name of the person holding the license, physical location address, mailing address, character of business, the expiration date of the license. 
I.  License carrying or posting required. No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any retail trade, profession or business for which the license was granted; however, if such trade or business is operated, conducted, or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such License shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the place of business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when requested to do so by the City Treasurer or City Manager. 
J.  Nontransferable. No license shall be transferable. 
K.  License fee. Each application for a license and renewal of a license shall be accompanied by payment of fee in the amount, if any, as may be determined by City Council by resolution. The application fee is not refundable regardless of whether the application for a license is granted or denied. 
L.  Expiration, renewal and renewal fees. All licenses issued shall be annual, commencing on January 1st and expiring on December 31st of each calendar year. On or before December 31st of the calendar year in which the license is expiring, the holder of a license may apply for renewal to the City for the next ensuing calendar year period. A license issued for a new business issued on or after November 15th of any calendar year shall be valid for the next complete calendar year subject to the renewal provisions of this Section and subject further to the licensee's compliance with this Chapter. All applications for renewal shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Manager in consultation with the City Treasurer. Failure to obtain a renewal by the December 31st expiration date shall result in payment of an increased renewal fee in accordance with a schedule as may be adopted by City Council by resolution. 
M.  Duties of licensees. Every person holding a license under this Chapter shall: 
1.  Permit all reasonable inspections of the licensed business; 
2.  Ascertain, and at all times comply, with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed business; 
3.  Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions which do, or may affect, the public health, morals or welfare; 
4.  Not operate the licensed businesses on premises after expiration of the license or during any period in which a license is revoked or suspended; or 
5.  Not loan, sell, give or assign, to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage, remove, or to have in his possession, except as authorized by the by law, a license which has been issued to such person holding a license. 
N.  Right of entry authorized when. All persons authorized by this Chapter to inspect licenses and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without search warrants, at all reasonable times the following premises: 
1.  Those for which a license is required; 
2.  Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspection, are operating under such license; 
3.  Those for which a license has been revoked or suspended. 
O.  Revocation of license: 
1.  The City Manager may, on reasonable notice and after hearing, revoke the license of any person found to have violated any provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  Any findings and order of the City Manager revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the District Court upon application of the aggrieved party in accordance with Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
3.  The City Manager may adopt rules and regulations governing the hearings contemplated by this Subsection. 
P.  Temporary business license. Upon submission of an application for a license by a person engaged in business, the City Manager shall have discretionary authority to issue such applicant a temporary license. The temporary license shall authorize the applicant to operate his business as would otherwise be permitted under a license issued pursuant to this Section, subject to compliance with all of the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant has filed with the City, on forms provided by the City, an application for a license. Such application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the information listed in Subsection C. above and shall be signed in conformance with Subsection D above. 
2.  The application for a temporary license shall be accompanied by a fee as may be set by the City Council by resolution. The application fee is not refundable regardless of whether the application for the temporary license is granted or denied. 
3.  If a temporary license is issued, the applicant shall comply with the obligations contained in Subsections I and M above, and shall be subject to inspections as provided in Subsection N above. 
4.  A temporary license shall be valid only until such time as the application for the license is granted or denied or for a period of ninety (90) days, whichever occurs first. If the application is not granted or denied within the ninety-day period and the applicant establishes good cause, the City Manager may, in his or her discretion, extend the temporary license for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
5.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a temporary license may be canceled, revoked or summarily suspended if the City Manager determines that there is probable cause to believe that the licensee has violated any provisions of this Chapter or if the City Manager determines, in his discretion, that cancellation, revocation or suspension is otherwise warranted. 
6.  If an applicant continues to operate his business upon the cancellation, revocation, suspension or expiration of a temporary license, the applicant shall be in violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1.6 of this Code. 
7.  A temporary license is not transferable. 
(Ord. 564-2013 4; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.510 - Obligation to obtain special sales event license and remit taxes. 
A.  No special sales event shall occur without the issuance of a special sales event license to the organizer of the event, the cost of which shall be in accordance with a schedule as may be adopted by City Council by resolution. 
B.  No later than two (2) days before the start of a special sales event, the special sales event organizer shall provide the City Treasurer with a list of the names and addresses of all vendors of the special sales event, and a list of all license numbers of vendors who have licenses and are remitting the tax to the city individually. 
C.  Taxes collected at a special sales event shall be remitted as follows: 
1.  The organizer shall remit all taxes collected by all vendors at the special sales event; or 
2.  Individual vendors holding licenses may remit taxes due hereunder in accordance with this Chapter and the organizer shall remit taxes collected by all other vendors. 
D.  As provided in Subsection C above, vendors or organizers of a special sales event shall remit the sales tax due hereunder and complete a tax schedule on a form provided by the City Treasurer. The tax schedule and remittance is due fifteen (15) days after the special sales event ends. Only the organizer will be permitted to take the deduction for the vendor allowance as provided in Section 3.04.550 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.520 - Obligation to retain records for audits. 
A.  Taxpayer's retention of records. It shall be the duty of every person liable to the City for collection of any tax or for payment of any tax under this Chapter to keep and preserve for a period of at least thirty-six (36) months all original source documents, books, accounts and records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax liability. Every contractor, property owner/lessor or lessee engaged in construction projects in the City shall keep and preserve for at least thirty-six (36) months following the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection all suitable records as described herein, including, without limitation, invoices and statements along with a summary sheet showing such purchases, which will allow the accurate determination of the use tax due. For all construction and building materials and supplies subject to the use tax which are not used or consumed in a project for which a certificate of occupancy or final inspection is required to be obtained, all suitable records as described herein shall be kept and preserved for at least thirty-six (36) months after the date of the taxable transaction. 
B.  Records to be made available for audit. All such books, databases, accounts and records, together with all bills, receipts, invoices, cash register tapes, or other documents of original entry supporting the entries in the books, shall be maintained by the taxpayer and shall be open for examination at any time by the City Treasurer and/or City Manager. 
C.  Costs of travel required to perform audit. In the case of a person which does not keep the necessary books, accounts and records within the City, it shall be sufficient if such person produces within this City such books, accounts and records or such information as shall be reasonably required by the City Manager or City Treasurer for examination by the City Manager or City Treasurer. In lieu of producing such records within the City, said person shall pay all reasonable costs of the City associated with traveling to the location where the records are kept in order to perform an examination or audit of such records. Costs may be required to be paid in advance, or as otherwise approved by the City Manager or City Treasurer. 
D.  Any failure to preserve such statements and invoices shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable under the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.530 - Obligation to file return and remit tax due; filing due date. 
A.  All persons obligated to collect and remit or pay a sales and/or use tax under this Chapter must make and file such returns and/or reports and remit such tax as required hereunder. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Chapter punishable under the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
B.  All taxpayers who collect or are obligated to collect any sales tax in accordance with this Chapter must file a sales tax return and remit the sales tax collected for the filing period in accordance with this Chapter and any taxpayer obligated to remit use tax hereunder must also file a return and remit the use tax for the filing period. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Chapter punishable under the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
C.  All taxpayers selling at retail who collect or are obligated to collect any sales tax in accordance with this Chapter and any person obligated to make a return and remit use tax hereunder shall file a return in accordance with Subsection 3.04.540.C below and as otherwise prescribed herein with the City Treasurer on or before the twentieth day of the month for the preceding month or months under report and remit the amount of use tax imposed by this Chapter or sales tax computed on the gross taxable sales and also the amount of any excess tax collections, less any vendor allowance allowed under this Chapter. Persons holding a license must file a required return regardless of whether retail sales are made for the reporting period; however, in the event tax due in any reporting period is less than a minimum amount as set by City Council by resolution, such person may carry such amount forward into the subsequent filing periods and remit upon such amount meeting the minimum amount set by City Council by resolution, without penalty or interest. 
D.  Returns and payments that are mailed shall be deemed and evidenced as timely remitted only if bearing a postmark or cancellation placed by the United States Postal Services with a date of the due date or earlier, and "postmark" as used herein shall specifically not include a date stamp from a private postage meter imprinted other than by the United States Postal Service. As the United States Postal Service does not usually postmark metered mail, in order to comply with the filing deadline herein, it is incumbent on any taxpayer or taxpayer agent who uses a private postage meter to ensure that the returns and payment are actually received by the City on the due date. 
E.  For purposes of this Section, any tax return filed before the last day prescribed by law or by regulation promulgated pursuant to law for the filing thereof, shall be considered as filed on such last day. 
F.  Any due date, payment date, or deadline for paying tax due, paying the license renewal fee, providing information, or taking other action, which falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, recognized by either the federal government or the state, shall be extended to the first business day following such weekend or holiday. 
(Ord. 564-2013 5; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.540 - Contents, consolidation and reporting periods for tax returns. 
A.  Tax return content, form, and signatures. The returns to be filed hereunder shall contain such information and be completed in such manner and upon such forms as the City Treasurer may prescribe. When a return filed by a taxpayer does not include a signature, a correct license number, when applicable, or any other information required by the City Treasurer, the City Treasurer has the right to reject the same and send the return back to the taxpayer for correction and further remittance. A valid digital signature, or the equivalent thereof, on a filed return transmitted electronically over the internet or transmitted via other similar means is acceptable and shall be held as a written signature. A signature on a return sent via facsimile is acceptable and shall be held as a written signature. 
B.  Consolidation of returns. Upon prior approval of the City Treasurer, a taxpayer conducting business in two (2) or more places or locations, whether in or out of the City, and collecting taxes hereunder, may file one (1) return covering all such places or locations, when accompanied by a supplemental report showing the gross sales and gross taxable sales and taxes collected thereon for each location within the City. 
C.  Reporting periods. Taxpayers shall report and remit tax due in accordance with a resolution that may be adopted by City Council. If any such person who has been granted permission to file returns and pay tax on other than a monthly basis becomes delinquent, or if the average amount of remittance increases above the threshold set forth herein, authorization for such alternate method of reporting may be revoked by the City Treasurer. Upon such revocation, the taxpayer shall file returns and pay tax on a monthly basis. Taxpayers may be allowed to carry forward the remittance requirement hereunder and remit upon reaching a minimum remittance amount in accordance with a resolution that may be adopted by City Council. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.550 - Vendor allowance. 
    All taxpayers selling at retail who collect or are obligated to collect any sales tax in accordance with this Chapter may retain a percentage of the amount of sales taxes to be paid under this Chapter, if any, subject to any maximum limitations on such retained amount, if any, as may be set by City Council by resolution, to cover the expense of collection and remittance of the sales tax for the reporting period ("vendor allowance"), but if any such taxpayer is delinquent in remitting said sales tax other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer, such taxpayer shall not be allowed to retain any vendor allowance, and an amount equivalent to the full tax shall be remitted to the City Treasurer by any such delinquent taxpayer. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.560 - Street locator guide. 
    The City shall make available to any requesting taxpayer a map or location guide showing the boundaries of the City. The requesting taxpayer may rely on such map or location guide and any update thereof in determining whether to collect sales or use tax or both. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against a taxpayer who in good faith, complies with the most recent map or location guide. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.570 - Taxpayer's obligation to provide information upon request. 
    The City Treasurer or City Manager may require any person, by regulation or notice served on such person, to make such return, render such statement, or keep and furnish such records, or make such information reports as the City Treasurer or City Manager may deem sufficient to show whether or not such person is liable under this Chapter to obtain a license or for payment or collection of the tax imposed herein. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.580 - Obligation to remit excess collections and disputed amounts. 
A.  Excess collections. If any, taxpayer shall, during any reporting period, collect as a tax an amount in excess of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of all total gross taxable sales, such taxpayer shall remit to the City Treasurer the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess as might have been collected. The retention by the taxpayer of any excess collections or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the City Treasurer the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this Chapter, is hereby declared to be a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Disputes between purchaser and seller. Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, service, or commodity is exempt from taxation under this Chapter, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay the tax and the seller shall issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the City Treasurer, showing the names of the seller and the purchaser, the items purchased, the date, purchase price paid, amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. A refund may be allowed if the sale is exempt in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 3.04.710.A. 
3.04.590 - Burden of proving exemption. 
    The burden of proving that any person is exempt from collecting or paying the sales tax upon any goods sold or purchased or the use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be on such person under such reasonable requirements of proof as the City Treasurer or City Manager may prescribe, which may include, in the City's discretion, an audit in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.04.700 and related sections. 
(Ord. 564-2013 6; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.600 - Obligation to update address with City; notice by mail. 
A.  All taxpayers shall at all times have the burden of ensuring that its, his or her correct mailing address, e-mail address, and fax number is on file with the City Treasurer. 
B.  Any notice required to be given to any person pursuant to this Chapter or the agent or personal representative of the estate of any such person shall be sufficient if mailed, postpaid by first-class mail to the last-known address of the person or the agent or personal representative of the estate of such person. The first-class mailing of any notice under the provisions of this Chapter creates a presumption that such notice was received within three (3) days of mailing by the person to whom addressed, or the agent or personal representative of the estate of such person. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.610 - Obligations on sale or purchase of business or property; lien. 
A.  New license required. Any sale, transfer, or purchase of an interest in a business enterprise by any person, where the respective interest of the person purchasing or selling as a result of the transaction has changed in any degree, requires, the issuance of a new license. 
B.  Must file final return. Any taxpayer who shall sell out his or her business or stock of goods or all the assets of a business to another person or any person or taxpayer who quits business, shall make out the return as required by this Chapter and remit all taxes due within fifteen (15) days after the business or stock of goods is sold, or the taxpayer quits business. The purchaser and seller are jointly and severally responsible. 
C.  Tax due on business property. Tax imposed hereunder shall be remitted by the purchaser on the sales or purchase price paid for tangible personal property that is acquired with the purchase, transfer of title, or transfer of possession of a business, with the exception of items to be resold in the ordinary course of business operations of the new business. The tax shall be based on the price paid for such chattels as recorded in the bill of sale or agreement and constituting a part of the total transaction at the time of the sale or transfer, provided the valuation is as great as or greater than the fair market value of such merchandise or chattels. Where the transfer of ownership is a package deal made by a lump-sum transaction, the tax shall be paid on the book value if no determination has been made. When a business is taken over in return for the assumption of outstanding indebtedness owed by former owners, the tax shall be paid on the fair market value of all taxable tangible personal property acquired by the purchaser. A bona fide gift of tangible personal property is not a "sale". Any such "gift" shall be documented in writing by the person making the gift and acknowledged by the person receiving the gift. 
D.  All prior taxes are due. Taxes due upon the sale of a business or stock of goods include all sales taxes which were collected or should have been collected prior to the sale, and all use taxes accruing or payable prior to the sale. 
E.  Purchaser to withhold payment until tax paid. The purchaser or successor to the business, stock of goods, or assets shall withhold a sufficient portion of the purchase money to cover all of said taxes until such time as the former owner produces a receipt from the City Treasurer showing that all taxes have been paid in full. 
F.  Purchaser liable for prior owner's unpaid tax. Purchasers of a business are liable for any unpaid tax of a predecessor. Taxpayers having outstanding accounts on which sales or use tax has not been remitted must compute and pay the tax at the time of sale or purchase. 
G.  Seller and seller's agent liable for tax. The seller or his or her agent will be held liable for tax remittance on the sale of a business in the event the purchaser fails to remit the tax due on the purchase. 
H.  Seller and purchaser both liable. Until all taxes due under this Chapter are paid in full, both the former owner and the purchaser shall jointly and severally remain personally liable thereon and subject to all collection proceedings available under this Chapter. Action by the City against the former owner shall not prevent the exercise by the City of all remedies provided herein against the purchaser or successor owner. 
I.  Delinquent taxes are a lien on the property. Any person who takes or purchases personal or real property under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale, or otherwise, takes the same subject to the lien for any delinquent taxes owed by the original owner and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent taxes, interest, penalty and collection costs of such prior owner, not however, exceeding the value of the property so taken or acquired. Any person who takes title to or possession of any real property upon which a tax is owed takes said property subject to the lien for said delinquent tax and shall be liable for the payment thereof to the extent of the tax, interest, penalties and collection costs. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.620 - Obligations on settlement and distribution of assets. 
A.  Satisfaction of liability. For the purpose of facilitating the settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary relationships, and corporations in the process of dissolution or which have been dissolved, the City Treasurer may agree with the fiduciary or surviving directors upon the amount of taxes due from the decedent, or from the decedent's estate, the trust, receivership, or other fiduciary relationship, or corporation, for any of his or her or its taxable periods, under the provisions of the taxes covered by this Chapter and except upon a showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation or mutual mistake of a material fact, payment in accordance with such agreement shall be full satisfaction of the taxes for the taxable periods to which the agreement related. 
B.  Personal liability. Except as provided in Subsection D below, any personal representative of a decedent, or of the estate of a decedent, or any trustee, receiver, or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any authorized officer of a corporation in the process of dissolution or which has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund in his or her control without having first paid any taxes covered by this Chapter due from such decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership, or corporation, covered by this Chapter and which may be assessed within the time limited by this Chapter, shall be personally liable to the extent of the property so distributed, for any unpaid taxes of the decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation, covered by this Chapter and which may be assessed within the time limited by this Chapter. 
C.  Notification of liability. Distribution does not extinguish the lien on property distributed. The distributee of a decedent's estate, or a trust estate or fund or the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund, or corporation, shall be liable to the extent the decedent, trust estate, fund, or corporation was liable for tax under this Chapter. Notice to such distributee or stockholder shall be given in the same manner and within the time limit which would have been applicable had there been no distribution. 
D.  Limitation of liability: 
1.  In case tax covered by this Chapter is due from a decedent, or of his or her estate, or by a corporation, in order for personal liability under Subsection B above to remain in effect, determination of the tax due shall be made and notice and demand shall be issued within thirty-six (36) months after written request for such determination, filed after the filing of the decedent's final return or filed after the filing of the return of the decedent's estate with respect to which such request is applicable, by any personal representative of such decedent, or by the corporation, filed after the filing of its return; but a request under this provision shall not extend the period of limitation otherwise applicable. 
2.  This Subsection will not apply in the case of a corporation unless: 
a.  Such request notifies the City Treasurer that the corporation contemplates dissolution at or before the expiration of such thirty-six-month period; 
b.  The dissolution is begun in good faith before the expiration of such thirty-six (36) month period; and 
c.  The dissolution is completed. 
3.  Upon the expiration of said thirty-six-month period, without determination being made and notice and demand being issued, the personal representative or representative of the decedent and the director of the corporation no longer will be liable under the provisions of Subsection B above. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.630-3.04.690 - Reserved. 
Article VII - Refunds 

3.04.700 - Burden of proof for refunds. 
    The burden of proving that sales, services, and commodities, or the storing, using or consuming of tangible personal property or taxable services or the using or consuming of construction and building materials or the payment of tax upon a motor vehicle pursuant to this Chapter on which tax refunds are claimed, were not at retail or are otherwise exempt from taxation shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the City Treasurer may prescribe. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.710 - Refunds. 
A.  Taxpayer right to refund. In accordance with this Division, a taxpayer may be allowed a refund or a credit where there is an overpayment by the taxpayer to the City with a return that is the result of a mathematical error in remittance of tax to the City, but no refund shall be allowed the taxpayer as a result of failing to credit an exemption or otherwise improperly imposing the tax on a purchaser unless the taxpayer provides such reasonable proof as the City Treasurer may prescribe sufficient to show that the purchaser who overpaid the tax has been refunded the amount sought for credit or refund by the taxpayer. 
B.  Disputes between purchaser and seller; refund allowed if exempt. 
1.  In the event of a dispute between the purchaser and seller as set forth in Subsection 3.04.580.B of this Chapter, a refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption under this Chapter provided such refund shall be made by the City Treasurer after compliance with all the following conditions precedent: 
a.  Applications for refund must be made within sixty (60) days after the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed. 
b.  Applications for refund must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller. 
c.  Applications for refund must be made upon forms prescribed and furnished by the City Treasurer, which forms shall contain such information as the City Treasurer shall prescribe. 
2.  Upon receipt of such application, the City Treasurer shall examine same within a reasonable period of time and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his or her decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants may petition the City Treasurer for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in Section 3.04.890 of this Chapter. 
C.  City's discovery of overpayment of taxes by taxpayer. Whenever the City Treasurer discovers from the examination of a return or pursuant to an audit of a taxpayer's records that the taxpayer has overpaid taxes due the City, the City Treasurer shall issue a refund of the overpaid taxes to the taxpayer, unless the overpayment is applied to offset other tax due. The City Treasurer shall keep a record of said refund and also a statement which sets forth the reason why such refund was ordered. If the refund totals less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the refund amount shall be credited to the taxpayer's tax account, unless the taxpayer requests payment of the refund. 
D.  Taxpayer's discovery of overpayment of tax. Subject to the limitations period set forth in Section 3.04.170 of this Chapter, a taxpayer may apply in writing for a refund of overpaid taxes within sixty (60) days after discovery of the overpayment. The City Treasurer may deny such refund by issuing a written denial of refund upon a finding that the taxpayer did or reasonably should have discovered the overpayment more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the application for a refund. The taxpayer may petition the City Treasurer for a hearing on the claim in the manner and in the timeframe provided in Section 3.04.890 of this Chapter. In no event shall such application be made later than three (3) years after the date of overpayment. 
E.  Refund to offset previous tax due. Whenever it is established that any taxpayer has, for any period, overpaid a tax imposed by this Chapter, and that there is an unpaid balance of tax, penalty and/or interest accrued according to the records of the City Treasurer, owing by such taxpayer for any other period, so much of the overpayment of tax, penalty and/or interest allowable thereon as does not exceed the amount of such unpaid balance, shall be credited thereto and any excess of the overpayment shall be refunded. 
F.  Refund of overpayment of use tax on construction and building materials. Application for refund by persons paying a use tax deposit, as defined in Subsection 3.04.320.B of this Chapter, shall be made within thirty-six (36) months after the date of the certificate of occupancy or date of purchase, whichever is sooner. The City Treasurer may require data to accompany the application and may require an audit to be done before refund is paid. 
(Ord. 564-2013 7; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.720 - Statute of limitations on claims for refund. 
    With the exception of a written application of refund submitted to the City that tolls the running of the statute of limitations, no refund shall be allowed or paid under any circumstances more than thirty-six (36) months after the City's receipt of sales or use taxes in question. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.730 - Refunds not assignable. 
    The right of any person to a refund under this Chapter shall not be assignable. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.740 - Interest on overpayments and refunds. 
A.  Interest allowance basis. No interest shall be paid upon any overpayment of sales or use tax unless: 
1.  Such overpayment was made under protest, and 
2.  The taxpayer has requested a refund in writing within sixty (60) days after the tax was paid. 
B.  Payment of interest: 
1.  Calculated interest that would be credited if allowed may be applied against interest owed by the taxpayer on an audit. 
2.  Interest paid on an eligible overpayment of taxes pursuant to Subsection A above under protest shall be allowed at the rate set forth by City Council resolution. 
3.  Interest shall accrue only from the date of the taxpayer's application for a refund. If the refund is to be applied against other taxes owed by the taxpayer, interest shall not be paid on the refund for the period after the due date of the amount against which the credit is taken. 
C.  Refund erroneously made to bear interest. Any portion of a sales or use tax, or any interest, assessable penalty, additional amount, or additional tax which has been erroneously refunded, shall bear interest at the rate set forth by City Council resolution from the date of the payment of the refund. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.750 - False or fraudulent refund claims. 
A.  Violation to make false statements. Any applicant for refund under the provisions of this Chapter, or any other person who shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Action to recover fraudulent claims. If any person is convicted of violation of Subsection A above, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully and the City Treasurer, with prior approval from the City Manager, is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate collection proceedings for recovery of such refunds. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.760-3.04.790 - Reserved. 
Articles VIII & IX - Collection and Enforcement 

3.04.800 - Mathematical error on tax returns. 
    In the event that the amount of tax is understated on the taxpayer's return due to a mathematical or other error, the City Treasurer shall notify the taxpayer by issuance of a written notice of deficiency, which notice shall contain the amount of tax in excess of that shown in the return which is due and has been assessed. The taxpayer shall have no right of protest or appeal as in the matter of other assessments but shall pay the tax due and assessed or file an amended return to show the true amount of tax due within fifteen (15) days of the date that such assessment is sent by the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.810 - Limitations period. 
A.  When there is a failure to make a return, when a false or fraudulent return is filed with intent to evade tax, or when tax is collected by any retailer and not remitted to the City, tax together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. 
B.  Except as described in Subsection A or when the City and taxpayer agree in writing to extending the limitations period hereunder, the taxes for any period, sales and/or use, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this Chapter shall not be assessed, nor credit taken, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than thirty-six-months after the date on which the tax was or is payable, nor shall any lien continue after such period, except that when taxes are assessed before the expiration of such period and notice of lien with respect thereto has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, such lien shall continue after the filing of notice thereof. 
C.  For use taxes due on construction and building materials, the thirty-six-month period shall commence on the date on which the tax was due or the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever is later. 
D.  The commencement of collection proceedings, including the mailing of a notice of audit, shall toll the running of the limitations period set forth in Subsections B and C above. 
E.  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed in this Section for the assessment of tax, both the City Treasurer and the taxpayer have consented in writing to any assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon or by the commencement of collection proceedings made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. Interest, calculated in accordance with Sections 3.04.830 and 3.04.840 below, may continue to accrue on any and all unpaid tax. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.820 - Failure to file return or pay tax due and penalty - estimate. 
A.  If a person, taxpayer or vendor obligated to collect and/or to remit any tax in accordance with this Chapter neglects or refuses to make a return as required in this Chapter or fails to pay any sales or use tax as required by this Chapter, the City Treasurer may make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty as set forth by City Council resolution and provide written notice to the taxpayer of estimate, penalty and interest imposed along with a demand for payment and such notice shall, in clear and conspicuous type, contain notification, of the time limit to file a protest to the notice by requesting a hearing before the City Manager or a designated hearing officer and that the taxpayer has a right to elect a hearing on the notice of deficiency pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S., within thirty (30) days of the date that the taxpayer has exhausted local remedies as provided in this Chapter by timely requesting a local hearing before the City Manager or designated hearing officer and the City either fails to hold the hearing or the City has issued a final decision following the hearing. 
B.  In the event such an estimate of taxes due is made and penalty assessed, a taxpayer may be excused from imposition of such estimate and/or penalty if the person shows that its failure to comply fully with this Chapter is due to reasonable cause at a hearing requested by the person pursuant to the manner and timeframe set forth in Section 3.04.890 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.830 - Interest on late filing. 
    Interest on sales or use tax filed after the date due will be set forth in a resolution to be adopted by City Council. The interest on delinquent tax combined with Penalty Interest as described in Section 3.040.840 below will be included in the City Council resolution setting rates. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.840 - Penalty interest. 
    An additional interest component may be imposed. Interest imposed on taxes which are delinquent more than thirty (30) days may be imposed at the rate set by City Council resolution and shall be deemed a penalty ("Penalty Interest"). 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.850 - Audit. 
A.  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount of total sales tax or total use tax liability, all records required to be maintained by any taxpayer under this Chapter shall be open for examination and audit at any time by the City Treasurer. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested by the City Treasurer, the City Treasurer may either estimate tax due based upon such information as is made available or issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or such taxpayer's representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
B.  The City Treasurer may conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. 
C.  During the course of any audit, the City Treasurer may utilize a representative sample of the person's records to project the amount of tax deficiency or over payment, if any. 
D.  Shall be unlawful for any taxpayer to fail to comply with a subpoena issued pursuant to this Section. 
3.04.860 - Coordinated audit. 
A.  The City may conduct an audit in conjunction with one (1) or more other municipalities at its own discretion. 
B.  Any taxpayer holding a license and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
C.  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the City Treasurer, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which such person holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the person will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time based limitation upon this City's right to recover tax owed by the, taxpayer for the audit period. 
D.  Except as provided in Subsection A above, any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of any limitation period, if required, may be audited by this City during the twelve (12) months after request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
E.  If this City desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to this Section, the City Treasurer shall so notify the appropriate official of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the person's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the person's request for a coordinated audit. The City Treasurer shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
F.  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this City, the City Treasurer shall facilitate arrangements between this City and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The City Treasurer shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
G.  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this City, the City Treasurer shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between this City and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The City Treasurer shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
H.  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this Section shall not apply: 
1.  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
2.  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this Section; 
3.  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of limitation; or 
4.  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in Subsection C of this Section. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.870 - Assessment; penalties and interest. 
A.  Assessment, assessment notice and due date. If the City Treasurer determines that any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused: 
1.  To collect all taxes due; 
2.  To make a return and pay all taxes due; 
3.  To remit the proper amount of tax due; 
4.  To pay in full all taxes due because of negligence, fraud or on a regular basis; or 
5.  To remit taxes due pursuant to an audit, special assessment or special audit assessment, penalties and interest shall be assessed and the City Treasurer shall issue to the delinquent taxpayer, a written notice of final determination and assessment and demand for payment which notice shall state the full amount of taxes, penalties and interest due, and shall be served personally, by mail or email, which assessment of deficiency amount will be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the date that such notice is sent by the City Treasurer. The written notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, of the time limit to file a protest to the notice by requesting a hearing before the City Manager or a designated hearing officer and that the taxpayer has a right to elect a hearing on the notice pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S., within thirty (30) days of the date that the taxpayer has exhausted local remedies as provided in this Chapter by timely requesting a local hearing before the City Manager or designated hearing officer and the City either fails to hold the hearing or the City has issued a final decision following the hearing. 
B.  Estimated assessment. If the City Treasurer is unable to audit the records of a taxpayer either due to such person's refusal or lack of cooperation, due to time constraints, or due to other reasons which the City Treasurer may reasonably determine, the City Treasurer shall make an estimate based upon such information as may be available and shall issue an assessment as provided herein. If a taxpayer neglects or refuses to make a return, the City Treasurer shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the taxes due for the period for which such person is delinquent. 
C.  Penalty for fraud. If any deficiency in taxes paid is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added, instead of the penalty prescribed in Section 3.04.820 of this Chapter, a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency to the assessment required by Subsection A above. Interest on such deficiency shall accrue at the rate set by City Council by resolution. 
D.  Special penalty for repeated enforcement. In any assessment issued to a taxpayer against whom enforcement proceedings have been commenced in the past, a special penalty, in addition to all others provided in this Chapter, shall also be assessed. This special penalty shall be at the rate set by City Council by resolution. For purposes of this Subsection, enforcement proceedings shall mean: 
1.  Issuance of a distraint warrant; or 
2.  Filing of an action at law in the district or county court; or 
3.  Three (3) occurrences of the revocation of the taxpayer's license by the City Manager or issuance of a summons to Municipal Court for the nonpayment of taxes or a combination of revocations and summonses. 
E.  City Manager may waive penalty. The City Manager, in consultation with the City Treasurer, is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as provided in this Chapter. If the City Manager, in consultation with the City Treasurer, finds that a person has, in good faith, paid tax to a vendor, then the City Manager, in consultation with the City Treasurer, is hereby authorized to abate the penalty and penalty interest, as defined in Section 3.04.840 above in part or in its entirety. 
F.  Interest and penalty assessment. Interest and penalties prescribed under this Chapter shall be paid upon notice and demand, and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is or they are applicable. If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest or penalty shall be imposed under this Section on the portion of the tax so satisfied. 
(Ord. 564-2013 8; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.880 - Jeopardy assessment. 
A.  Jeopardy enforcement. If the City Treasurer finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay, in the City Treasurer's discretion, the City Treasurer, with prior approval of the City Manager, may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue notice and demand for payment thereof; and, having done so, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith, and the City Treasurer may proceed immediately to collect such tax by distraint as provided in Section 3.04.930 of this Chapter. 
B.  Immediate enforcement action. In any other case wherein it appears that the revenue is in jeopardy, the City Treasurer, with prior approval of the City Manager, may immediately issue demand for payment; and, regardless of the provisions of Section 3.04.890 and Section 3.04.900 below, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith, and in the City Treasurer's discretion, with prior approval of the City Manager, the City Treasurer may proceed immediately to collect said tax by distraint as provided in Section 3.04.930 of this Chapter. 
C.  Security for payment. Collection under either Subsection A or B above may be stayed if the taxpayer gives such security for payment as shall be satisfactory to the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.890 - Hearings. 
A.  Request for hearing. Within thirty (30) days of the date that a written notice of deficiency, assessment, or denial of refund is placed in the mail in accordance with Subsection 3.04.600.B of this Chapter by the City Treasurer, any taxpayer may request a hearing on any proposed tax, penalty or interest that the City seeks to impose as set forth in such notice by making written application for a hearing to the City Manager, which application must be actually received by the City Manager within such thirty-day period. The request for hearing shall set forth the taxpayer's reasons for and the amount of the requested changes in the written notice of deficiency, assessment or denial of refund. 
B.  Hearing time and place. The hearing and the issuance of a final decision thereon shall be held within one hundred eighty (180) days after the City Manager's receipt of request for a hearing pursuant to Subsection A above. This period may be extended by written agreement as provided in Sections 29-2-106.1(2)(c) and 29-2-106.1(8)(b), C.R.S. In addition, the taxpayer and City may agree in writing that either no hearing shall be held or no final decision shall issue in accordance with and meeting the requirements of Sections 29-2-106.1(2)(c) and 29-2-106.1(8)(b), C.R.S. The City Manager shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the time and place for such hearing at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing, unless the taxpayer requests shorter notice or an extension of time. 
C.  Pre-hearing conference. If the City, through the City Treasurer, and the taxpayer so agree, a pre-hearing conference prior to the hearing to be provided under Subsection A above shall be conducted in any manner acceptable to the taxpayer and the City with the purpose of settling the outstanding issues between the parties. If no settlement is reached, the hearing shall be held as scheduled. 
D.  City Manager or designated hearing officer to conduct hearing. The hearing shall be held before the City Manager or before a hearing officer designated by the City Manager pursuant to rules and regulations for the conduct of such hearing as are promulgated by the City Manager. At the hearing, the taxpayer shall be present and shall assert any facts, make any arguments, and file any briefs and affidavits he or she believes pertinent to his case. The City Manager or designated hearing officer may request the City and or the taxpayer to file written briefs or statements prior to or at the hearing in the discretion of the City Manager or designated hearing officer. 
E.  Hearing based on written brief. At any time before ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, any taxpayer may request that the hearing be based on written brief only in lieu of the hearing provided under Subsection D above. If the taxpayer elects such hearing based on brief, the taxpayer shall file a written brief and such other written materials or documents as he shall deem appropriate on or before the hearing date and shall request that the City Manager or designated hearing officer reconsider the deficiency without a hearing. The City Manager or designated hearing officer shall proceed to reconsider the deficiency in the same manner as if the written material submitted had been presented at a hearing pursuant to this Section. The submission of written material shall be considered for all purposes the same as a request for and submission of the material at a hearing. The City staff and/or agents shall be permitted to respond in writing to the submittals of the taxpayer. Rebuttal submissions may be permitted at the discretion of the City Manager or designated hearing officer. 
F.  Designated hearing officer. The taxpayer may request that the City Manager designate a hearing officer rather than serve as hearing officer for either a hearing or to determine a matter submitted only on written brief. If the taxpayer makes such request, the City Manager shall select a hearing officer and all reasonable costs to the City for engaging a hearing officer shall be paid by the taxpayer requesting the hearing if the hearing officer determines no change in the tax due as set forth in the final notice of final determination and assessment and demand for payment or denial of refund on which the hearing is based. 
G.  Passage of time limitation on a request for hearing without taxpayer action. After the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date that the written notice of final determination and/or assessment and demand for payment or denial of refund is sent, if the tax has not been paid or if no written request for hearing has been received or no written brief has been filed by the taxpayer, then the written notice of final determination and/or assessment and demand for payment previously sent shall constitute a final assessment of the amount of the tax specified, together with interest and penalty, or shall constitute a final denial of refund, as the case may be. The City Treasurer may promptly take necessary steps to collect all amounts owed. 
H.  Adjustment of tax under question. Based on the evidence presented at any hearing or filed in support of the taxpayer's contentions, the City Manager or designated hearing officer may modify or abate in part or in full the tax and the interest and penalty related to such tax at issue at the hearing or may approve a refund. 
I.  Formal hearing determination notices. After a formal hearing, upon rejection in whole or in part of the claim for refund or upon the finding by the City Manager or hearing officer, if designated, that upon hearing the evidence an assessment in whole or in part has been made against the taxpayer validly, the City Manager or hearing officer shall issue and send a written hearing determination notice to the taxpayer setting forth the amount of claim for refund denied or the amount of deficiency assessment of taxes found due, stating therein the grounds for allowance or rejection in whole or in part. 
J.  Tax due date after hearing. Unless an appeal is filed as provided in Section 3.04.900 below, the tax, together with interest thereon and penalties, if any, shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the written hearing determination notice is issued and sent to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. 564-2013 9; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.900 - Appeals. 
    The taxpayer may appeal the written hearing determination notice issued pursuant to Section 3.04.890 above within thirty (30) days of the date that such determination notice is issued by the City Manager or designated hearing officer, as the case may be. Such appeal shall be conducted by the method of appeals set forth in Section 29-2-106.1, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 564-2013 10; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.910 - Remedies in event of nonpayment. 
A.  So long as a final assessment remains unpaid, the City may take any or all of the following enforcement procedures against the defaulting taxpayer pursuant to this Chapter: 
1.  Take such action as deemed necessary to revoke the taxpayer's license. 
2.  Issue a summons to the delinquent taxpayer to appear in the Municipal Court on charges of violating this Code. 
3.  Issue a distraint warrant. 
4.  File a complaint in county or district court to collect all amounts owed. 
B.  Regardless of the collection or enforcement procedures invoked by the City pursuant to this Chapter, all unpaid taxes, penalties and interest shall be secured by a lien arising by operation of law as provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.920 - Lien; certificate of discharge. 
A.  Certificate of discharge of property subject to lien. If any property, real or personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any tax due the City, the City Treasurer may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if he or she finds that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to the lien is at least double the amount of the liability remaining unsatisfied in respect to such tax and the amount of all prior liens upon such property. 
B.  Discharge in event of partial satisfaction. If any property, real or personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any tax due the City, the City Treasurer may issue a certificate of partial discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if there be paid over to the City Treasurer partial satisfaction of the liability in respect to such tax as the amount determined by the City Treasurer. 
C.  How values determined. In determining such values, the City Treasurer shall give consideration to the fair market value of the part to be so discharged and to such liens thereon as have priority to the lien of the City. 
D.  Certificate of release conclusive. A certificate of release or of partial discharge issued under this Section shall be held conclusive that the lien of the City upon the property released therein is extinguished, but shall not extinguish, nor release, any portion of the lien nor property not specified in the release. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.930 - Collection by distraint. 
A.  Distraint warrant. The City Manager, upon application therefor received from the City Treasurer, may cause to be issued a Distraint Warrant under his or her own hand directed to any agent of the City, including the sheriff of any County of the State, commanding him to distrain, seize, and sell the personal property of the taxpayer, except such personal property as is exempt from execution and sale by any provision of this Chapter, for the payment of the tax due together with penalties and interest accrued thereon and collection costs: 
1.  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice of final determination and assessment and demand for payment therefor and no hearing has been requested within said period; or 
2.  When any other amount of tax, penalty or interest is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the assessment and demand for payment thereof; or 
3.  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of a written hearing determination notice and no appeal from such determination has been made pursuant to Section 3.04.900 above; or 
4.  Immediately upon making of a Jeopardy Assessment or of the issuance of a demand for payment, as provided in Section 3.04.880 of this Chapter. 
B.  Distraint seizure: 
1.  The agent charged with the collection shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, a copy of which, signed by the agent making such distraint, shall be left with the owner or possessor, or at his or her usual place of abode with some member of his or her family over the age of eighteen (18) years, or at his or her usual place of business with his or her stenographer, bookkeeper, or chief clerk, or if the taxpayer is a corporation, shall be left with any officer, manager, general agent, or agent for process, with a note of the sum demanded and the time and place of sale. If said notice cannot be served on the taxpayer within thirty (30) miles of the City, it shall be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address, return receipt requested. 
2.  The agent shall forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale, together with a description of the property to be sold, in some newspaper within the county wherein distraint is made, or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the City Manager, the agent or sheriff shall cause such notice to be publicly posted at the court house of the county wherein such distraint is made, and copies thereof to be posted in at least two (2) other public places within said county. 
3.  The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such notices. Said sale may be adjourned from time to time by said agent or sheriff if he deems it advisable, but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is advertised for sale under distraint, the agent or sheriff making the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the same at not less than a fair minimum price, including the expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale, and if the amount bid for the property at the sale is not equal to the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent or sheriff conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased by him for the City. The property so purchased may be sold by the agent or sheriff under such regulations as may be prescribed by the City Manager. 
4.  In any case of distraint for the payment of taxes, the real property, goods, chattels or effects so distrained shall be restored to the owner or possessor, if prior to the sale, the amount due is paid, together with the fees and other charges or may be redeemed by any person holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession. 
C.  Certificate of sale and evidence of purchase. In all cases of sale under this Section, the agent or sheriff making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each purchaser, and such certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the right of the agent or sheriff to make such sale, and the conclusive evidence of the regularity of his or her proceedings in making the sale; and shall transfer to the purchaser all right, title and interest of such delinquent taxpayer in and to the property sold; and where such property consists of certificates of stock in the possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be notice, when received, to any corporation, company or association of said transfer, and said certificate of such sale shall be authority for such corporation, company, or association to record the transfer on its books and records; and where the subject of sale is securities or other evidences of debt, in the possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be good and valid evidence of title in the person holding the same, as against any other person. Any surplus remaining above the taxes, penalties, interest, all costs, and all expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale, shall be returned to the owner, or such other person having a legal right thereto, and, on demand, the City Manager shall render an account in writing of the sale. Expenses of a seizure include all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City in enforcing collection by distraint, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and all personnel costs of the City. 
(Ord. 564-2013 11; Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.940 - Civil action for recovery of unpaid tax. 
A.  Action at law. In addition to all other remedies set forth herein, the City Manager, upon application therefor from the City Treasurer, may also treat any taxes, penalties, or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City from the taxpayer personally. In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the City Manager upon application therefor from the City Treasurer, may receive at law the amount of such taxes, penalties, interest and collection costs in such county or district court of the county wherein venue may be proper under the applicable rule of civil procedure. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City Treasurer as herein provided shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
B.  Writs of attachment. Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff and in any such proceedings, no bond shall be required of the City Treasurer or the City Manager nor shall any sheriff require of the City Treasurer or City Manager an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment, or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings; and the City Treasurer or City Manager may prosecute appeals or writs of error, in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. The City Attorney, when requested by the City Manager, in consultation with the City Treasurer, may commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this Chapter. 
C.  Civil action to enforce lien against real property. In any case where there has been a refusal or neglect to pay any tax due the City, the City Manager, in consultation with the City Treasurer and with the prior approval of City Council, may cause a civil action to be filed in the district court of the county in which is situated any real property which is subject to said tax, to enforce the lien of the City for such tax upon the real property situated in that county or in any other county in the State which may be subject to such lien or to subject any real property or any right, title or interest in real property to the payment of such tax. The Municipal Court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale, according to the findings of the Municipal Court in respect to the interest of the parties and of the City. The proceedings in such action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from such sale and the execution of deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the Municipal Court may appoint a receiver of the real property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
D.  Exhaustion of administrative remedies. No action to recover amounts as set forth in this Section may be filed by the City until the time for the taxpayer to exercise his or her administrative remedies or to file an appeal has expired. This remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies available to the City. No de novo trial of the facts shall be permitted if such person has had a hearing before the City Manager or designated hearing officer or has had the opportunity for such a hearing, but failed to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.950 - Compromise. 
A.  Compromise limitation. After an assessment has become final because the taxpayer has waived any right to a hearing or because the City Manager or designated hearing officer has issued his or her final decision, the City Manager may compromise any collection proceeding arising under this Chapter. 
B.  Compromise record. Whenever a compromise is made by the City Manager, there shall be placed on file in the office of the City Manager and City Treasurer the opinion of the City Manager with the reasons therefor, which may include financial inability of such person to pay a greater amount, with a statement of: 
1.  The amount of tax assessed; 
2.  The amount of penalty, interest and/or penalty interest imposed by law on the person, vendor or taxpayer against who the tax is assessed; and 
3.  The amount paid in accordance with the terms of the compromise. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.960-3.04.990 - Reserved. 
Article X - Administration 

3.04.1000 - Duties and powers of the City Manager and City Treasurer. 
    The administration of the City sales and use tax and the licensing provisions of this Chapter is hereby vested in the City Treasurer and City Manager. The City Treasurer shall have the authority to prescribe forms and the City Manager shall have the authority, in consultation with the City Treasurer, to formulate and promulgate appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter, in conformity with this Chapter and subject to other provisions of law relating thereto, for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment, and collection of the taxes imposed and for the proper administration and enforcement thereof, and to provide uniform methods of adding the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the purchase price. The City Manager in consultation with the City Treasurer shall have power and authority to add, enact, promulgate, amend, and rescind rules and regulations to this Chapter that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Regulations adopted, amended, or rescinded by the City Manager shall be effective in the manner and at the time prescribed by the City Manager, subject to the provisions of the Chapter. The City Manager may delegate to any employee, agent, representative or contractor of the City such power and authority as deemed reasonable and proper for the effective administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.1010 - City Treasurer to examine returns. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the purpose of making an estimate of the tax due from any taxpayer, the City Treasurer shall have power to examine or cause to be examined by an employee, agent, representative, or contractor designated by the City Treasurer for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda bearing upon the matters required to be included in the return. Subject to the provisions of the Chapter, the City Treasurer is authorized to prescribe the duties and powers of such officers, accountants, experts, and other persons as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duty. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.1020 - Preservation, production and confidentiality of tax reports, returns and license applications. 
A.  City's preservation of records. All reports and returns of taxes received by the City covered by this Chapter shall be preserved until the City Clerk orders them destroyed. 
B.  Confidential nature of license applications and returns. Except in accordance with judicial order, consent of the taxpayer, or as otherwise provided by law, the City, to include the City Treasurer, City Manager and the City Attorney and their authorized representatives, subject to the Colorado Open Records Act, shall not divulge or make known in any way financial information disclosed in any document, report, or return filed in connection with any of the taxes covered by this Chapter. The City officials charged with the custody of such documents, reports and returns shall not be required to produce them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the City, at the direction of the City Manager, in an action or proceeding under the provisions of any such taxing or open record statutes when the report of facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the Municipal Court may require the production of, and may admit into evidence, so much of said reports, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. 
C.  Taxpayer request for records. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his or her duly authorized representative of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his or her tax, and such copies may be certified by the City Treasurer, and when so certified shall be evidence equally with and in like manner as the originals and may be received by the courts of this State as evidence of the contents. 
D.  Publication of statistics. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof. 
E.  Records available to authorized jurisdictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the City Manager or City Treasurer in his or her discretion may furnish to the executive director of the Colorado Department of Revenue and his or her authorized personnel, to the taxing officials of the State political subdivisions, to the taxing officials of any other state and its political subdivisions, and to the United States of America, any financial information contained in tax returns and related schedules and documents filed pursuant to this Chapter, or in the report of an audit or investigation made with respect thereto provided, provided that such financial information is to be used only for tax purposes. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.1030 - Interjurisdictional claims for recovery. 
    The intent of this Section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the City. 
A.  When it is determined by the City Treasurer that sales and use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another municipality, the City shall promptly notify the taxpayer that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice such person must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
B.  The City may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the City, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer. The decision to make a claim for recovery lies in the sole discretion of the City. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from such person and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the City submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
C.  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the City shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim of recovery may only be made for good cause. 
D.  The City may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
E.  The period subject to a claim of recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. This period may be extended only if a written document was approved by the City Treasurer and taxpayer to toll the running of this thirty-six-month period. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.1040 - Joint sales and use tax collection, administration and enforcement. 
    The City may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with another city or city and county for the joint collection, administration and enforcement of sales tax, use tax or both sales and use taxes. 
(Ord. 500-10) 
3.04.1050-3.04.1990 - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 3.08 - Public Accommodations Tax 

3.08.010 - Legislative intent. 
    The legislative intent of the City Council in enacting the ordinance codified in this Chapter is that every person who, for consideration, leases or rents any hotel room, motel room or other accommodation located in the City, shall pay, and every person who furnishes, for lease or rental any such accommodation shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982: prior code 3.10.010) 
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter: 
    Person means an individual, partnership, society, club, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any other group or combination of individuals acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the State of Colorado, and any political subdivision thereof; and the plural as well as the singular. 
    Rental or leasing of hotel or motel rooms or other accommodations means the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any person to any other person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel, motel, apartment hotel, lodging house, guesthouse, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or other accommodation. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.020) 
3.08.030 - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    On and after January 1, 1983, there is levied and shall be paid and collected an excise tax of three percent (3%) on the price paid for the leasing or rental of any hotel room, motel room or other accommodation located in the City. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.030) 
3.08.040 - Exempt transactions. 
    The following entities and transactions are exempt from the duty to pay tax under this Chapter, but not the duty to collect and remit the tax levied hereby. 
A.  The leasing or rental of hotel rooms, motel rooms, or other accommodations to any occupant who is a permanent resident or who has entered into an agreement for occupancy or a room or rooms or accommodations for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days; and 
B.  The United States Government, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof, including the City, when acting in their governmental capacities and performing governmental functions and activities; and 
C.  Religious, charitable and quasi-governmental organizations, but only in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable and quasi-governmental capacities, and only if such organizations are exempt under state law from the payment of real property taxes or state sales tax. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.060) 
3.08.050 - Liability for payment of tax. 
A.  It is unlawful for any lessee or renter of a hotel room, motel room or other accommodation located in the City to fail to pay, or for any lessor or renter of such accommodation to fail to collect the tax levied by this Chapter. 
B.  The burden of proving that any transaction is not subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be upon the person upon whom the duty to collect the tax is imposed. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.040) 
3.08.060 - Collected moneys held in trust. 
    All sums of money paid by a person who leases or rents any hotel room, motel room or other accommodation, as the public accommodations tax imposed by this Chapter, are public moneys that are the property of the City. The person required to collect and remit the public accommodations tax shall hold such moneys in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paying them to the City. The accommodation tax must be shown in a separate liability account in the books and records of the lessor. 
(Ord. 720 89, 1989; Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code s;;3.10.050) 
3.08.070 - Licensing and reporting procedure. 
A.  Every person with a duty to collect the tax imposed in this Chapter shall obtain a license to collect the tax, and shall report such taxes collected, on forms prescribed by the City Clerk, and remit the taxes to the City on or before the twentieth day of the month for the preceding month. 
B.  The City Clerk shall issue a public accommodations tax license to persons who pay five dollars and fifty cents ($5.50) and complete an application therefor stating the name and address of the person and the business, and such other information as the City Clerk may require. The license shall be numbered, show the name, residence, place and character of the business of the licensee, and be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which it is issued. No public accommodations tax license is transferable. The license shall be in force and effect until the thirty-first day of December of the year of issued, unless sooner revoked. 
C.  It is the duty of each such licensee, on or before January 1st of each year during which the licensee remains in the business of providing public accommodations, to obtain a renewal of the license, after paying the license renewal fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
D.  Whenever a business entity that is required to be licensed under this Chapter is sold, purchased or transferred, so that the ownership interest of the purchaser or seller changes in any respect, the purchaser shall obtain a new public accommodations tax license. 
E.  The license may be revoked by the City Clerk, with the approval of the City Manager, for failure to collect or pay over the tax, as required by this Chapter, or for any other violation of this Chapter. 
1.  No revocation shall be effective until thirty (30) days after the City Clerk has given notice of such revocation. 
2.  The licensee, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, may request in writing a hearing before the City Council, and the suspension shall not be effective until the hearing is held and the decision of the City Council made. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.070) 
3.08.080 - Returns, reports and records maintenance and preservation. 
A.  The City Clerk may require any person to make such return, render such statement, or keep and furnish such records as the City Clerk may deem sufficient and reasonable, to demonstrate whether or not the person is liable under this Chapter for payment or collection of the tax imposed herein. 
B.  Any person required to make a return or file a report under this Chapter shall preserve those reports for a period of not less than three (3) years. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982: prior code 3.10.080) 
3.08.090 - Interest on unpaid taxes. 
    In addition to any other penalties imposed herein for violation of this Chapter, a person shall be liable in an amount equal to one percent (1%) per month for all moneys which should have been paid to the City from the date the moneys should have been paid until paid, whether or not the sums were collected. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982: prior code 3.10.090) 
3.08.100 - Refunds. 
    Overpayments and refunds shall include interest at one percent (1%) per month, from the date application for such overpayment or refund is received by the City. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982: prior code 3.10.100) 
3.08.110 - Hearings and appeals. 
A.  After receiving a notice of license suspension or notice of assessment and demand for payment, a taxpayer may request a hearing before the City Council. 
B.  Such request must be in writing and be received by the City within ten (10) days after the notice is mailed. 
C.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Council shall set a hearing date and hold a hearing. The City Council may affirm, reject, or modify the City Clerk's determination. 
D.  An aggrieved taxpayer may appeal the City Council's determination to the District Court of Weld County pursuant to Rule 106, Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 551 82, 1982: prior code 3.10.110) 
3.08.120 - Enforcement - collection by action at law when. 
A.  The public accommodations tax imposed by this Chapter is a first and prior lien on tangible personal property in which the person responsible to collect and remit the tax has an ownership interest, subject only to other taxes that may have a prior lien right pursuant to state or federal law. 
B.  The tax liability may be collected in an action at law. 
C.  Failure to pay such tax within a period of thirty (30) days shall cause such tax to be certified by the City Clerk to the county City Treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by the laws of the State. 
(Ord. 730 89, 1989; Ord. 720 89, 1989; Ord. 551 82, 1982; prior code 3.10.120) 
3.08.130 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 551 82, 1982) 
CHAPTER 3.12 - Telephone Occupation Tax 

3.12.010 - Title - legislative intent. 
A.  This Chapter shall be known and cited as the "Evans Telephone Occupation Tax." 
B.  The City Council declares that its intent, in the enactment of this Chapter, is to tax, subject to any law of the State now in force or hereafter to be enacted, the occupation of providing local telephone service in the City, pursuant to power granted to the City by Section 31 15 501(1)(c), C.R.S.; and the City Council further declares that its intent, in the enactment of this Chapter, is not to levy either an income tax or a sales tax. 
(Ord. 765-90, 1990; Ord. 406 78, 1979) 
3.12.020 - Tax defined. 
    Tax means the tax on the privilege of engaging in the occupation of providing local telephone service in the City. The amount of the tax levied hereby shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per year upon any person providing, supplying, furnishing, distributing and selling local telephone service within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 765-90, 1990; Ord. 406 78, 1979) 
3.12.030 - Payment dates and procedures. 
    The telephone occupation tax provided for in this Chapter shall be due on the first day of January of each year following the enactment of the ordinance codified herein. The occupation tax shall be payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments for any year during which or during any part of which the taxpayer provided local telephone service within the City. Such monthly installment may be distributed to the City on a quarterly basis at the option of the telephone utility. The total annual occupation tax herein provided shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly installment due for any month during the entire period of which no local telephone service is provided within the City. 
(Ord. 765-90, 1990; Ord. 406 78, 1979) 
3.12.040 - Tax deemed debt - continuation of liabilities and offenses. 
    All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be treated as though all prior applicable ordinances and amendments thereto were in full force and effect, for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. All taxes, the liability for which has been accrued under the terms and provisions of Ord. 357 77, on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, shall be and remain unconditionally due and payable, and shall constitute a debt to the City payable in conformity with the terms and provisions of Ord. 357 77 prior to the adoption of Ord. 406 78; and all the terms and provisions of Ord. 357 77 shall be and remain in full force and effect for the purpose of the collection and payment of any and all such taxes due and payable thereunder, notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 406 78, 1979) 
3.12.050 - Violation - penalty. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or company which is subject to the provisions of this Chapter fails, neglects or refuses to make any monthly installment payment in the manner herein prescribed, such officer, agent or manager shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), provided, that each day after such monthly installment becomes delinquent during which such officer, agent or manager fails, neglects or refuses to make such installment payment shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 406 78, 1979) 
CHAPTER 3.20 - Impact Fees 

3.20.010 - Title. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be known and cited as the Evans Impact Fee Code. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.020 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  The purpose of this Chapter is to: 
(1)  Provide a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth-related costs associated with growth and development and the expansion of transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, and police protection services through Capital Facilities made necessary by development. 
(2)  Ensure that the impact fees established by this Chapter are established at a level no greater than necessary to defray such impacts directly related to proposed development. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.030 - Imposition and purpose of specific impact fees. 
A.  Any Developer who seeks an approval for a Development which impacts or may impact Capital Facilities for transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, or police protection services, who has not already dedicated land or Capital Facilities to fully satisfy anticipated impacts of the proposed development, shall pay an impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this Chapter. Such fees shall not apply to or be imposed in connection with the reconstruction of a Development which was in existence prior to the enactment of this Chapter that is destroyed in whole or in substantial part by a cataclysmic natural disaster or act of God such as flood, fire, tornado, or earthquake, provided that the application for reconstruction or rebuilding of the Development has been submitted to the City within twenty-four (24) months from the date of such natural disaster affecting the property or the declaration of an emergency and diligently pursued to completion to the same or less impact as it existed immediately prior to the natural disaster. 
B.  In order to provide or to assist in providing the financing required to develop, maintain, and provide Capital Facilities for transportation, parks recreation and trails, fire/rescue services, and police protection services, the impact fees in the amounts set forth below shall be paid to defray the projected impacts on Capital Facilities caused by the proposed development. 
( Ord. 665-17,  1 , 2017; Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.040 - Impact fee amounts. 
A.  Transportation Impact Fees 
Single Unit $4,328 per housing unit 2+ Unit $3,520 per housing unit Manufactured Home $4,328 per housing unit Commercial $5.62 per square foot of floor area Office/Institutional $2.43 per square foot of floor area Industrial/Flex $1.53 per square foot of floor area  
B.  Park Facility Impact Fees 
Single Unit $4,594 per housing unit 2+ Unit $3,587 per housing unit Manufactured Home $3,569 per housing unit Commercial $0.00 per square foot of floor area Office/Institutional $0.00 per square foot of floor area Industrial/Flex $0.00 per square foot of floor area  
C.  Fire Rescue Services Impact Fees 
Single Unit $930 per housing unit 2+ Unit $726 per housing unit Manufactured Home $723 per housing unit Commercial $1.00 per square foot of floor area Office/Institutional $0.39 per square foot of floor area Industrial/Flex $0.25 per square foot of floor area  
D.  Police Protection Services Impact Fees 
Single Unit $274 per housing unit 2+ Unit $214 per housing unit Manufactured Home $212 per housing unit Commercial $0.28 per square foot of floor area Office/Institutional $0.11 per square foot of floor area Industrial/Flex $0.07 per square foot of floor area  
(Ord. No. 659-16 , 2016; Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.050 - Alternative calculation study. 
    In lieu of computation of the Impact Fee in accordance with the schedules adopted pursuant to Section 3.20.040 above, the Developer may prepare and submit, to the Evans City Manager, a site-specific Fiscal Impact Fee Study and calculation for the Development. The Fiscal Impact Fee Study submitted shall show the basis upon which the site-specific Impact Fee Study calculation was made, and such calculation shall reflect the same level of service and standards contemplated by the TischlerBise Fiscal Impact Fee Study. The site-specific Fiscal Impact Fee Study and calculation shall be prepared and presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The Evans City Manager or their designee shall consider the documentation submitted by the Developer. If the City Manager or their designee determines that an acceptable site-specific Fiscal Impact Fee Study and calculation has not been presented, the Developer shall pay the Impact Fee based upon the schedule set forth in Section 3.20.040 above. Determinations made by the City Manager or his designee pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the determination by the City Manager or their designee. Following the submittal of such request, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to determine prior to Development approval, the amount of the Impact Fee that shall be paid. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.060 - Time for payment of impact fees, entity to whom payment shall be made. 
    The owner of property shall pay the Impact Fees at the time a building permit is issued. All Impact Fees shall be paid to the Evans City Treasurer. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.070 - Deposit and use of impact fees. 
    All Impact Fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited by the City or the Fire District in an interest-bearing account that clearly identifies the category, account, or fund of capital expenditure for which such charge was imposed. Each such category, account, or fund shall be accounted for separately. Any interest or other income earned on moneys deposited in said interest-bearing account shall be credited to the account. All Impact Fees shall be used exclusively for Capital Facilities for which they were collected. No Impact Fees shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance, personnel costs, or operational expenses. All Impact Fees will be collected and deposited in accordance with Part 8 of Article 1 of Title 29 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.080 - Credit for improvements. 
    The City Manager shall calculate the amount of any credit that shall be granted to any Developer for the amounts due or to become due for Capital Facilities installed, purchased, and paid for by such Developer when such Capital Facilities offset the need or amount of the Impact Fee that would otherwise be required. Any credit granted shall not exceed the total amount the Developer would have had to pay under the existing fee schedule. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.090 - Additional guidelines for park credit determinations. 
    By way of illustration and not limitation, in making a determination of whether to grant credit for park facilities provided by a Developer, the City Manager may consider the following as non-binding guidelines: 
A.  Whether the park Capital Facilities utilize acceptable design and construction methods approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
B.  Whether the park Capital Facilities adhere to the applicable sections of Chapter 16.42 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
C.  Whether the park Capital Facilities conform to the standards and criteria as outlined in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.100 - Additional guidelines for transportation credit determinations. 
    By way of illustration and not limitation, in making a determination of whether to grant credit for transportation facilities provided by a Developer, the City Manager may consider the following as non-binding guidelines: 
A.  Whether the Developer has dedicated land for rights-of-way and the value of such dedication, which may be based on the most recent assessed value of the County Assessor or the fair market value of the property as established by an appraiser or by other reliable means. 
B.  Whether the Developer has constructed or agreed to construct transportation Capital Facilities and the value of such Capital Facilities based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and construction costs estimates, or by other reliable means. 
C.  Whether the Developer has contributed to or agreed to contribute to the cost of transportation Capital Facilities and the value of such contribution based on actual construction costs or an estimate prepared by a professional engineer or other reliable means. 
D.  Whether the Developer has entered into an agreement with the City to construct off-site transportation Capital Facilities to the City's system and the value of such facilities. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.102 - Additional guidelines for fire/safety determinations. 
A.  As part of the City's development permit application process, the developer of any proposed new development within the Evans Fire Protection District boundaries shall confer with the District regarding whether, under the Impact Fee Schedule (or any updated impact Fee schedule), a Fire/Rescue Services Impact Fee is owed and, if owed, the amount of the Fee. The developer and the District may mutually determine whether an in-kind contribution will be made by the developer in lieu of paying a Fire/Rescue Services Impact Fee ("In-Kind Contribution"). 
B.  All Fire/Rescue Impact Fees collected by the City shall be paid to the District pursuant to the provisions of an agreement between the City and the District. 
(Ord. No. 659-16 , 2016) 
3.20.110 - Appeal of credit determinations. 
    Determinations made by the City Manager or his designee pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the determination by the City Manager or their designee. Following the submittal of such request, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to determine prior to Development approval, the amount of credits to be granted. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.120 - Unpaid impact fees. 
    The City reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates, or other approvals for any land or building for which the payment of Impact Fees is delinquent. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.130 - Prior conditions and/or agreements. 
    Any Developer who, prior to the effective date of this Chapter, agreed as a condition of development approval to pay Impact Fees shall be responsible for the payment of the fees under the terms of any such agreement, and the payment of such fees by the Developer will be offset against any Impact Fees due pursuant to the terms of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.140 - Adjustment and review of impact fees. 
    The amount of all Impact Fees shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows: 
A.  Annually, the Impact fees for transportation, parks, recreation, and trails will be updated and adjusted, by resolution, to reflect inflation utilizing the most recent factor in the most recent period for which figures are available from the Consumer Price Index for the Denver-Boulder-Greeley area. Annually, the Impact fees for police protection services and fire/rescue services will be updated to reflect inflation, as reflected in the Engineering News Record Construction Index. 
B.  The City Council shall, annually, in conjunction with the presentation of Evans's proposed budget, consider any further adjustments to the Impact Fees. 
C.  City Council is encouraged to authorize and cause to be performed future Fiscal Impact Fee Studies on a regular basis to review the City's impact fees. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.150 - Application. 
    The requirements of this Chapter shall apply only within the jurisdiction and boundaries of the City of Evans. Only applicants who submit applications for development after adoption of the Impact Fee will be assessed such fee. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
3.20.160 - Judicial review. 
    The Developer may seek a declaratory judgment to determine whether any Impact Fee assessed complies with state law requirements for the imposition of impact fees. The City shall allow the Developer, upon payment of the Impact Fee, to proceed with development of their property pursuant to the Development approval while the court reviews the validity of the Impact Fee. 
( Ord. No. 642-16, 2016 ) 
CHAPTER 3.32 - Reserve Increases 

3.32.010 - Reserves from excess revenues. 
    Revenues from sources not excluded from fiscal year spending by Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, which exceed fiscal year spending shall be reserved to the extent necessary to maintain or maximize fiscal year spending limits. 
(Ord. 897-93, 1993) 
3.32.020 - Reserve increases to be part of current fiscal year spending. 
    Such reserve increases shall be part of current fiscal year spending and shall be a separate reserve from Emergency Reserves required by Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 897-93, 1993) 
3.32.030 - Reserves determined from audit. 
    The specific amount of the current fiscal year reserve increase shall be determined as a part of year-end and audit procedures. 
(Ord. 897-93, 1993) 
CHAPTER 3.34 - City Revenues 

3.34.010 - Revenue changes. 
    Pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, the qualified electors of the City authorize the City and the City thereby shall collect, retain, and expend the full proceeds of the City's sales and use tax, accommodations tax, all available non-federal grants, fees and other revenues, notwithstanding any state restriction on fiscal year spending, including without limitation the restrictions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution from the date of January 1, 1993 and thereafter. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to authorize any increase in the rate of taxation of the sales and use tax, or the accommodations tax, without a vote of the people if and when required pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 908-94, 1994) 
TITLE 5 - Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations 
CHAPTER 5.08 - Alcoholic Beverages 
Article I - Local Licensing Authority Definition 

5.08.010 - State law applicable. 
    Title 44, Articles 3, 4 and 5, C.R.S., the rules and regulations of the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado, as the state licensing authority, shall apply to the licensing of fermented malt beverages and malt, vinous and spirituous liquors within the City, where applicable. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  1, 2019; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.020 - Licensing authority established. 
    There is established a liquor licensing authority with the duty and authority to grant, renew or refuse licenses for the sale of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages as provided by law, to conduct investigations as are required by law, and to suspend or revoke such licenses for cause in the manner provided by law. The liquor licensing authority shall consist of all members of the City Council, and the term of each member shall be coincident with his or her term on the City Council. Such authority shall have the powers and authority of the liquor licensing authority set forth in Title 44, Articles 3, 4 and 5, C.R.S. All decisions are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  2, 2019; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.025 - Administrative Review Team. 
    There shall be created an Administrative Review Team (ART) which shall include the City Clerk's Office, City Attorney's Office, Building Inspection Department, Fire Department and Police Department of the City who shall assist the state/liquor licensing authority by acting as the Administrative Review Team for all requests for renewals, special events permits, manager registrations, modification of premises and reports of changes. Each department will review these applications to assure that they are complete in every detail and will look for such things as appropriate fees, complete and signed application, possession of premises and applicable code compliance, police activity calls for establishment site and any other items deemed necessary to completely review the application. 
(Ord. 295-04) 
5.08.030 - Definitions. 
    Certain terms and expressions used herein shall have the following meanings: 
    Administrative Review Team means the City Clerk's Office, City Attorney's Office, Building Inspection Department, Fire Department and Police Department; 
    Applicant means and includes: 
1.  If an individual, that person making an application for a license under this Chapter; 
2.  If a partnership, all the partners of the partnership who are making application for license under this Chapter; 
3.  If a corporation, any officer, director, manager or any stockholder therein holding more than ten percent (10%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation; 
4.  If a limited liability company, any member thereof. 
    Authority or Licensing Authority means the local liquor licensing authority of the City. 
    Manager means and includes that person or those persons who manage, direct, supervise, oversee and administer the acts, transactions and acts of servants of the establishments governed by this Chapter. 
    Person includes a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, organization, or manager, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
All other words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings attached by the state statutes regulating the sale of liquor and fermented malt beverages, or if not otherwise defined by law, are used in their common, ordinary and accepted sense and meaning. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
Article II - Licenses 

5.08.040 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or to offer for sale at retail within the City any fermented malt beverage or any malt, vinous and spirituous liquors, as those terms are defined by state law, without first having been granted and issued a license so to do by the City. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.050 - City Clerk - Secretary of the Authority. 
    The City Clerk shall receive all applications for licenses and shall issue all licenses granted by the Authority upon receipt of such license fees and taxes as are required by law and this Chapter. The City Clerk shall serve as the official Secretary of the Authority and shall designate a person or persons to provide the necessary secretarial and reporting services for the Authority. All public notices by publication in a newspaper and by the posting of signs, as required by the Colorado Liquor Code of 1935, as amended, shall be accomplished by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.060 - Application. 
    The applicant shall fully complete an application for license as required by the state licensing authority and any application forms required by the local licensing authority. No application for a new license or for the renewal of an existing license or for the transfer of location or ownership of an existing license shall be processed or considered until the application has been completed in all respects. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.070 - Documents to accompany application. 
    The City Clerk shall accept no application that is not complete in every detail. If any application deposited with the City Clerk is found upon examination to contain any omission or error, it shall be returned to the applicant for completion or correction without further action by the City Clerk, ART or the Authority. No application shall be deemed complete unless accompanied by the following: 
A.  An oath or affirmation that all information submitted has been given fully, accurately, truthfully and without concealment of any material fact or facts; 
B.  All forms required by the state licensing authority and the City, complete in every detail; 
C.  Payment in full of the city, state and any other applicable license fees; 
D.  Plans and specifications of an existing building or proposed building, including points of ingress and egress, storage, bar location, fixed equipment and dimensions of area to be licensed; 
E.  Lease, deed or contract of sale, showing possession of the premises to be licensed for period to cover term of the liquor license; 
F.  Release of information. An authorization for applicant's financial institutions to release information to the City; and 
G.  Such other information or evidence as may from time to time be required by the Licensing Authority for the purpose of insuring that the premises to be licensed will be lawfully operated and that the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community will not be adversely affected should the license be issued. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.075 - Elimination of hotel/restaurant licenses from five-hundred-foot distance restrictions. 
    As authorized by Section 44-3-313(d)(III), C.R.S., the Licensing Authority hereby eliminates the distance restriction for hotel/restaurant licenses. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  3, 2019; Ord. 295-04; Ord. 049-00) 
5.08.080 - Applicants to be fingerprinted. 
    Each individual applicant, all general partners of a partnership, all limited partners owning ten percent (10%) or more of a partnership; all officers and directors of a corporation, all stockholders of a corporation owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of such corporation; all limited liability company managing members, or other limited liability company members with a ten percent (10%) or more ownership interest in such company and all managers of a tavern and hotel and restaurant license. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.090 - False application basis for revocation. 
    Any information furnished to the Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article which is done with the intent to mislead or misrepresent the true state of facts to the City shall be a basis for denial of application or suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. 1067-97, 1997; Ord. 687 87, 1987) 
5.08.100 - Persons prohibited from obtaining license. 
    A license may not be issued to or held by any person as defined in 44-3-307 C.R.S. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  4, 2019; Ord. 1067-97, 1997; Ord. 687 87, 1987) 
5.08.110 - License application - procedure. 
A.  The procedures set forth in Title 12 , Articles 3, 4 and 5, C.R.S., and the regulations that may from time to time be adopted by the state licensing authority, shall be followed in all liquor license application hearings before the Licensing Authority. 
B.  The date of receipt of a completed application, including the documents to be submitted with the application, shall be the date deemed as the date of filing (or receipt) of the application for the purposes set forth in state law. For the purpose of establishing boundary limits for the applicant to canvass a defined neighborhood in order to determine the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood for the type of license for which application has been made and the desires of the adult inhabitants within the defined neighborhood, a one (1) mile radius from the site proposed for selling fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous and spirituous liquors shall be used. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the boundary limits to be used for petitioning. 
C.  Upon receipt of a completed application, a public hearing shall be held upon the application not less than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the completed application. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  5, 2019; Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.120 - Renewal provisions - fees. 
A.  All applications for renewal of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors and fermented malt beverages licenses shall be on forms provided by the state licensing authority and completed applications must be submitted to the City Clerk's office no later than forty-five (45) days prior to the license expiration date, together with the required license fees, as well as a renewal fee as set by City Council. For good cause, the City Clerk's office may waive this time requirement. 
B.  Upon receiving the completed renewal application, the City Clerk will forward it to the ART for review of appropriate fees, completeness, changes from the previous renewal application, legal possession of the premises, police activity summary, including an inspection of the premises, and any other relevant matter. 
C.  If no concerns arise through the ART process, the application will be administratively approved, signed by the City Clerk and forwarded to the State for consideration. 
D.  If concerns arise through the ART process, the application will be forwarded to the Licensing Authority for review and consideration. The applicant will be requested, in writing, to be present to address said concerns or questions. 
E.  A licensee whose license has been expired for not more than ninety (90) days may file a late renewal application upon the payment of a nonrefundable late application fee, to each the State and City. No state or local licensing authority shall accept a late renewal application more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of a licensee's permanent annual license. Any licensee whose permanent annual license has been expired for more than ninety (90) days must apply for a new license and shall not sell or possess for sale any alcohol beverage until all required licenses have been obtained. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 739-89; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.125 - Authorizing retail or liquor-licensed drug stores to conduct alcoholic beverage tastings. 
    Pursuant to Section 44-3-301(10)(a), C.R.S., the City hereby authorizes alcoholic beverage tastings for licensed retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drug stores within the City, subject to the limitations contained in Section 44-3-301(10), C.R.S., with the following conditions: 
A.  The licensee of a retail liquor license or liquor-licensed drug store must file with the City Clerk an application for an alcohol beverage tastings permit prior to conducting its initial alcoholic beverage tasting. This permit will run concurrently with the licensee's liquor license and will be required to renew this permit in conjunction with its liquor license. 
B.  A valid alcohol beverage tastings permit must be posted prominently on the licensed premises during all tastings events. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  6, 2019; Ord. 402-07) 
5.08.130 - Fees. 
A.  There are assessed local fees to be paid to the City Clerk prior to consideration by the Licensing Authority. Such fees are established by City Council by resolution. 
B.  No rebate of any fees paid for any license issued shall be made except upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the Licensing Authority. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 739-89; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.135 - Designation of hearing officer. 
A.  The Licensing Authority is hereby authorized to delegate its authority with regard to taking adverse actions on any license to an impartial and independent hearing officer. 
B.  Whenever the Licensing Authority determines that a notice of adverse action on any license issued by the City may be taken against such license, the Licensing Authority may appoint an impartial and independent hearing officer to determine if the allegations contained in the notice are substantiated or not substantiated. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner without strict regard to the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, but shall insure that any licensee is afforded substantial due process before any adverse action is taken against any licensee. If any allegations contained in any notice to a licensee are substantiated, the hearing officer may consider all relevant evidence, including the gravity of the violation and the circumstances of prior operation of the licensee, in making a determination as to adverse action against a licensee. 
C.  Any hearing officer conducting a hearing on behalf of the Licensing Authority shall, after hearing the evidence and making appropriate findings, have the authority to revoke, suspend or deny a requested renewal of a license, and in making any such determination, shall base his or her decision upon the Colorado Liquor Code and the regulations applicable to such Code promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue and other relevant law. The hearing officer is authorized to impose such penalties with regard to revocation, suspension, fine in lieu of suspension, denial, summary suspension or any other remedies authorized by the Colorado Liquor Code. 
D.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and any appeal of any order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review by the District Court of the 9th Judicial District of the State of Colorado upon application by the aggrieved party. The procedure for such review shall be in accordance with Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure and the applicable Colorado common law. 
E.  The City Council, acting as the liquor licensing authority, specifically reserves to itself the duties relating to the granting or denial of an application for a new license and the right to issue a summary suspension, but may delegate such duties and any other duties to the hearing officer as the Authority may determine prudent. The Authority reserves to itself the duty to determine whether a notice to show cause to any licensee should be issued. 
F.  The Authority may appoint any impartial person as hearing officer, but shall consider the use of the Municipal Judge or a licensed attorney. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1121-98) 
5.08.140 - Authority of licensing authority to suspend or revoke licenses. 
    In addition to any other penalties prescribed in this Code and the laws of the State, the licensing authority of the City shall have the power on its own motion, or after complaint, after investigation and public hearing, at which the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, to suspend or revoke any license issued by it for any violation by the licensee or by any of the agents, servants or employees of such licensees of the provisions of this Chapter, or of any of the rules or regulations adopted by the state licensing authority or the statutes of the State of Colorado. Procedures for suspension or revocation shall be as provided by state law and/or resolution of the Authority. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.150 - Fines in lieu of suspension. 
    A licensee subject to suspension may request a fine in lieu of suspension. The standards for payment of a fine in lieu of suspension shall be as provided for in Section 44-3-601(3)(b), C.R.S., and shall apply to any licensee who violates or whose employees violate any terms of this Code, Title 44, Articles 3, 4 and 5, C.R.S., or the rules and regulations related thereto. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  7, 2019; Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.160 - Buildings to meet code standards. 
    No license shall be issued, renewed or transferred unless the building in which the business or licensed activity is carried on meets all of the requirements of the zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, mechanical, housing and dangerous building codes and, if applicable, the Weld County Health Department rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.170 - Continuation of existing licenses. 
    Any license issued by the licensing authority of the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of such license under the former law; provided, however, that any suspension, revocation, renewal, or transfer of any such license shall be governed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.180 - Special events permit. 
A.  Required. It is unlawful for an organization to sell, by the drink only, fermented malt beverages or malt, spirituous or vinous liquors at a special event, unless such organization has acquired a special events permit in accordance with Article 5, Title 44, C.R.S. 
B.  Application form handling fee. 
1.  The applicant shall fully complete an application for special events permit as required by the state licensing authority. No application for a special events permit shall be submitted to the City until the application has been completed in all respects. 
2.  There shall accompany each application for a special events permit a handling fee to defray actual and necessary expenses and the cost of processing the application, together with such other fees as are required by the state licensing authority. 
C.  Documents to accompany application. Every application for a special events permit shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Appropriate fee; 
2.  A diagram of the area to be licensed; 
3.  Copy of lease, deed or written permission from the owner of the property giving consent for use of the property during all times of the special event; 
4.  Certificate of good corporate standing issued by the Secretary of State within the last two years; or 
5.  If not incorporated, a nonprofit charter; or 
6.  If a political candidate, copies of reports and statements that were filed with the Secretary of State; and 
7.  Such other information or evidence as may, from time to time, be required by the Licensing Authority for the purpose of insuring that the special event will be lawfully conducted and that the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community will not be adversely affected by reason of the nature of the special event or its location within the community. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  8, 2019; Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.190 - Optional premises license. 
A.  The following standards for the issuance of optional premises license or for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license are adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 44-3-310, C.R.S. 
B.  These standards adopted herein shall be considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the issuance of licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code for optional premises licenses or for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant licenses. These two types of licenses for optional premises will collectively be referred to as "optional premises" in these standards unless otherwise provided. 
C.  Eligible facilities. An optional premises may only be approved when that premises is located on or adjacent to an outdoor sports and recreational facility. The types of outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be considered for an outdoor premises license shall not be limited.; however, the Authority may consider the type of particular outdoor sports or recreational facility in relationship to the number of optional premises requested for the facility. 
D.  There are not restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be eligible for the approval of an optional premises license; however, the Authority may consider the size of the particular outdoor sports or recreational facility in relationship to the number of optional premises requested for the facility. 
E.  Number of optional premises. There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one licensee may have on this outdoor sports or recreational facility; however, any applicant requesting approval of more than one (1) optional premises shall demonstrate the need for each optional premises in relationship to the outdoor sports or recreational facility and its guests. 
F.  Submittal requirements. When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises, an applicant shall also submit the following information: 
1.  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises requested; 
2.  A legal description of the approximate areas within which the optional premises shall be located; 
3.  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use; 
4.  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional premises for the future use on the optional premises; 
5.  Advance notification. Pursuant to Section 44-3-310(4), C.R.S., no alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided written notice to the state and local licensing authorities forty-eight (48) hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional premises. Such notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. In this regard, there is no limitation on the number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice; however, no notice may specify any date of use which is more than one hundred eighty days (180) from the notice date. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  9, 2019; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
Article III - General Provisions - Unlawful Acts 

5.08.200 - Disorderly conduct to be reported by licensee. 
A.  Each licensee shall conduct his or her establishment in a decent, orderly and respective manner, and shall not permit within or upon the licensed premises the loitering of habitual drunkards or intoxicated persons, lewd or indecent displays, profanity, rowdiness, undue noise or other disturbance or activity offensive to the senses of the average citizen or to the residents of the neighborhood in which the establishment is located. 
B.  It is unlawful for any licensee, permit holder or his or her employee to fail to report immediately to the Police Department all violations of city, state or federal laws which constitute felonies and misdemeanors, such as disorderly conduct or other offenses involving breach of the peace, such as assault and harassment. 
(Ord. 264-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.205 - Teen night/fight night. 
A.  No business establishment holding a license of any classification pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code, Section 44-4-101 et seq., C.R.S., Section 44-3-101 et seq., C.R.S., or the Colorado Liquor Code, shall promote, hold, conduct or allow in its premises to be promoted, held or conducted, any "teen night" or similar event, in which under-age persons are specially solicited, attracted and/or invited by the licensee or anyone recruited by the licensee on the licensee's behalf to the licensed premises during business hours after 8:00 p.m. of any day during which the establishment is open for business, and during which time adult patrons are present primarily for the purpose of consuming alcohol beverages, except that this Section shall not apply to licensed premises in which multiple facilities are located and at such times as two (2) or more unrelated and otherwise lawful activities or events are taking place simultaneously. 
B.  No business establishment holding a license of any classification pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code, Section 44-4-101 et seq., C.R.S., Section 44-3-101 et seq., C.R.S., or the Colorado Liquor Code, shall promote, hold, conduct or allow in its premises to be promoted, held or conducted any "fight night" or similar event, in which persons are engaged, encouraged and or compensated for fighting in a manner creating a public display and intended or purported to serve as entertainment. 
C.  This Section is not intended to prohibit or limit teenage activities which as otherwise provided and allowed by applicable law may be advertised and/or held in or upon any such licensed establishment which ceases all alcohol sales for the time of each activity, making alcohol unavailable for sale or provision on the premises during that time. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  10, 2019; Ord. 1110-98) 
5.08.210 - Lighting in licensed premises. 
    All licensees shall be required to maintain a level of light within the licensed premises which would permit the checking of identification materials without resorting to other lighting. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.220 - Licensed premises to be open for inspection. 
    All premises licensed under this Chapter shall be open to inspection by the Police Department, the health department of the County, the state licensing authority and any other federal, state, county or city agency which is permitted or required by law to inspect licensed premises. It is unlawful for the licensee, his or her employees or agents, or for any other person to refuse to permit any such inspection. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.230 - Unlawful acts - open container, service or consumption in certain public areas. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to serve, consume or have any open container of liquor or fermented malt beverage when on, in or using, by conveyance or otherwise, any public street, parking lot, alley, park, public place, avenue or sidewalk within the City, with the exception that alcoholic beverages with six percent (6%) or less alcohol content may be consumed in the parks of the City outside of the Riverside Park Ball Fields and adjacent parking area and with the exception that alcoholic beverages may be consumed (upon issuance of a special permit - refer to Section 16.40.090 of this Code) within the confines of the Evans Community Complex with a City issued permit approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation and with the permit holders' signed agreement to adhere to certain regulations and policies as set forth by the City. 
B.  This Section shall not apply to the purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages from a group or organization holding a special event permit, which event is occurring on or near a designated public street, avenue, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, park or public place within the City for which a special event permit has been obtained pursuant to Section 5.08.180 of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  11, 2019; Ord. 292-04; Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 1044-97; Ord. 767-90; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.235 - Unlawful acts - serving alcoholic beverages to minors or persons visibly intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful to: 
A.  Sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any alcohol beverage to a visibly intoxicated person or to a known habitual drunkard; 
B.  Sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving, or procuring of any alcohol beverage to or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
C.  Obtain or attempt to obtain any alcohol beverage by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where alcohol beverages are sold when such person is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
D.  With knowledge, to permit or fail to prevent the use of identification, including a driver's license, by a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age, for the unlawful purchase of any alcohol beverage. 
(Ord. 455-08) 
Article IV - Manager Registration 

5.08.240 - Manager required, when - registration required - one license per manager. 
    Each hotel & restaurant licensee and tavern licensee shall himself or herself manage or have a separate and distinct manager, and shall register the manager of each liquor-licensed premises with the State and the City. No person shall be registered manager for more than one (1) hotel and restaurant license or for more than one (1) tavern-licensed location. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.250 - Manager ceasing function - notice to City and State - new manager designation. 
    When a person ceases to be a registered manager of a hotel and restaurant licensee and tavern licensee, for whatever reason, the hotel and restaurant licensee or tavern licensee shall notify the City Clerk within five (5) days and shall designate a new registered manager within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.260 - Character, record and reputation requirements of manager. 
    Access of authorities to criminal history. Either the State or the City may refuse to accept any person as a registered manager unless the person is satisfactory to the respective licensing authorities as to character, record and reputation. In determining a registered manager's character, record and reputation, the state and local licensing authorities may have access to criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. (Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.270 - Fee to licensee for character, record and reputation establishment. 
    The hotel and restaurant licensee and tavern licensee shall pay a registration fee to the State and City to defray the expense incurred in investigating the character, record and reputation of each registered manager. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
Article V - Occupational License Tax 

5.08.280 - Liquor and fermented malt beverages licenses - separate occupation finding. 
    The City Council finds, determines and declares that considering the nature of the business of selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors and fermented malt beverages, and the relation of such business to the municipal welfare as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required of the City and a proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City, and all other matters properly to be considered in relation thereto, that the classification of such business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminating and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  12, 2019; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 692-19 ,  12, adopted March 19, 2019, changed the title of  5.08.280 from "Liquor and fermented beverages licenses - separate occupation finding" to read as herein set out. 
5.08.290 - Liquor and fermented malt beverages licenses - tax levied and assessed. 
    There is levied and assessed for each year an annual occupational license tax upon the business of selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors and fermented malt beverages. Such tax is established by City Council by resolution. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  13, 2019; Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 692-19 ,  13, adopted March 19, 2019, changed the title of  5.08.290 from "Liquor and fermented beverages licenses - tax levied and assessed" to read as herein set out. 
5.08.300 - Occupational licenses - term - issuance conditions. 
    Such occupational license tax shall be due and payable to the City Clerk on January 1st of each year and shall be delinquent on February 15th of the same year. In the case of licenses issued in the year 1970, the occupational license tax shall be prorated as provided in Section 5.08.310 below and shall be due on the date the licenses are issued, and delinquent forty five (45) days thereafter. Upon receipt of the tax, the City Clerk shall execute and deliver to the licensee the date of payment, the annual period for which the license is paid and the place at which the licensee conducts business. All persons licensed hereunder shall at all times post such receipt in a conspicuous place in the place of business stated in the license. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.310 - Occupational licenses - prorated conditions. 
    Whenever any licensee begins business with a new license subsequent to January 1st in any year, the occupational license tax required herein shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the remaining portion of the year; but no refund shall be made to any person who discontinued business under a license before the expiration of the period covered by the tax. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.320 - Delinquency - not grounds for suspension or revocation - excluded from licensing consideration. 
    No delinquency in payment of the occupational license taxes provided for in this Article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license granted hereunder, and in acting as a licensing authority, the City Council shall exclude from consideration any delinquency in payment of such taxes. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 687 87) 
5.08.330 - Delinquency - unlawful - recovery right of City. 
    It is unlawful to operate any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor establishment or fermented malt beverage establishment within the City without paying the applicable tax imposed by this Article and any person doing so shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. Each day that the delinquency continues shall constitute a separate violation; in addition, the City shall have the right to recover all sums due under this Article by judgment and execution thereon in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1067-97, 1997; Ord. 687 87, 1987) 
Article VI - Temporary Permits 

5.08.340 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant means the proposed transferee of any license for the sale of fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages and, once issued, the holder of a temporary permit under this Article. 
    Department of Revenue means the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado. 
    Temporary permit means a permit which authorizes the applicant to continue to sell fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages as permitted under the permanent license for a licensed premises during the period in which an applicant to transfer the ownership of such license to the applicant is pending. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.350 - Requirements for issuance of temporary permit. 
    A temporary permit shall not be issued unless or until the City Clerk determines that the following conditions have been satisfied: 
A.  The premises have been previously licensed by the State and the City, and such license was valid at the time the application for transfer of ownership was filed with the City Clerk. 
B.  The applicant has filed with the City Clerk a properly completed application for the transfer of the license. 
C.  A preliminary background review has been conducted by the Police Department and a written report of findings has been provided to the City Clerk which shall be filed with the application for transfer. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.360 - Time for filing of application for temporary permit. 
    An application for a temporary permit shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the filing of the application for transfer of ownership with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1067-97, 1997; Ord. 847-92, 1992) 
5.08.370 - Temporary permit fee. 
    Each application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. Such fee shall be refunded if the temporary permit is not issued, but once the temporary permit is issued, such fee shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.380 - Application for temporary permit. 
    An application for the issuance of a temporary permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk for such purpose. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.390 - Issuance of temporary permit by City Clerk. 
    The City Clerk may issue a temporary permit to the applicant if he or she determines that all of the conditions of this Article have been satisfied. Such permit shall be issued within five (5) working days after the City Clerk's receipt of the application for issuance of a temporary permit. 
(Ord. 295-04; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.400 - Duration of temporary permit. 
    A temporary permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be valid only until such time as the application to transfer ownership is granted or denied, or for one hundred twenty (120) days, whichever occurs first; except that if the application to transfer the license has not been granted or denied within the one hundred twenty (120) day period and the applicant demonstrates good cause, the City Council may, in its discretion, extend the validity of said permit for an additional period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.410 - Other transfers for which a temporary permit is available. 
    A temporary permit may also be issued by the City Clerk, subject to the requirements of this Article, in the event of a transfer of possession of a licensed premises by operation of law; or the filing of a petition in bankruptcy pursuant to federal bankruptcy law; by the appointment of a receiver; by a foreclosure action by a secured party or by a court order dispossessing the prior licensee of all rights of possession pursuant to Article 40, Title 13, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
5.08.420 - Cancellation, revocation or summary suspension of temporary permit. 
    A temporary permit may be canceled, revoked or summarily suspended by the City Council if it determines that there is probable cause to believe that the transferee has violated any provision of the Colorado Beer Code (Article 3 of Title 44, C.R.S.) or the Colorado Liquor Code (Article 4 of Title 44, C.R.S.), whichever statutes govern the license of the licensed premises, or any rule or regulation promulgated by the Department of Revenue thereto or any City ordinance governing the operation of the licensed premises, or if the applicant has failed to truthfully disclose those matters required pursuant to the application forms required by the Department of Revenue or the City. 
( Ord. No. 692-19 ,  14, 2019; Ord. 1067-97; Ord. 847-92) 
CHAPTER 5.10 - Adult Businesses 

5.10.010 - Short title. 
    This Chapter shall be known as the "Evans Adult Business Ordinance." 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.030 - Definitions. 
    The following, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore is a commercial establishment which: 
1.  Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its in-stock-trade or interior floor space to; 
2.  Receives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from; or 
3.  Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of: 
a.  the sale, rental or viewing (for any form of consideration) of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult business shall include, but not be limited to, adult motion picture theaters, nude entertainment, adult book stores, and other similar type businesses. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Nude entertainment shall include any type of entertainment where a person appears in a state of nudity. 
    Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities include any of the following: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
    State of nudity means when a person is unclothed or in such attire, costume, or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.040 - License required. 
    No adult business, service or entertainment establishment, as defined herein, shall be permitted within the City except as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or establish any adult business, service or entertainment establishment until an adult business license has been secured from the City Clerk's office. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.050 - Application for license. 
    Applicants for a license to operate an adult business, service or entertainment establishment shall submit a written application to the City Clerk on forms containing the following information: 
A.  The name and legal residence address for voting purposes, business and residence telephone numbers of the applicant. 
1.  If a partnership, the name and address of each partner; 
2.  If a corporation, association or other organization, the names and addresses of the president, vice president, secretary, managing officer, each director and each shareholder who owns more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock. 
B.  The trade name of the applicant. 
C.  Whether the applicant, any partners of a partnership or any officers, directors or any shareholders of a corporation holding more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock, or any of their spouses, have any financial interest in any other adult entertainment establishment. 
D.  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent (5%) of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding or of directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
E.  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation has ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony, involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
F.  Street addresses and legal description of the premises to be licensed. 
G.  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, a copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
H.  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name affidavit properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Colorado, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
I.  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony, or any crime not a felony, involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The City Clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this Subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
J.  Consent of access to business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
K.  Each application for an adult business, service or entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
2.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
3.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or 
4.  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative official. 
L.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to Subsection K above holds any other permits and/or licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, county, or state and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.060 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
A.  No license provided for by this Chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
1.  An applicant who has not paid all required fees; 
2.  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
3.  Any corporation, and whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent (5%) of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
4.  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent (5%) interest therein are not of good moral character; 
5.  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; or 
6.  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, State of Colorado or City of Evans. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.070 - Investigation and issuance of license. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall initiate a background investigation of the applicants and the information contained in the application. The City Clerk is authorized to investigate any fact that may be relevant or is believed to be relevant to determine the eligibility of the applicant for a license. The City Clerk is authorized to seek assistance of law enforcement agencies or such other assistance as the City Clerk believes necessary. 
B.  The City Clerk shall provide a notice of the results of the his or her investigation to the applicant. At any time, the City Clerk may supplement the investigation report with additional or newly found information. 
C.  The City Clerk shall either issue the license within forty-five (45) days of the date of receiving a complete application or schedule a hearing to commence within sixty (60) days of said date. Unless appealed to City Council, the decision of the licensing officer shall be binding on the applicant. 
D.  The City Clerk has the authority to refuse to issue any license as set forth herein for failure of the applicant to meet licensing requirements, subject to review by the City Council. 
E.  A copy of the decision of the City Clerk shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address shown on the application. 
F.  No license shall be issued by the City Clerk after approval of an application until the building in which the business is to be conducted is ready for occupancy with such furniture, fixtures and equipment in place necessary to comply with the provisions of this Chapter and only after inspection of the premises has been made by the City Clerk to determine that the applicant has complied with the drawing and plot plan and detailed sketch for the interior of the building submitted with the application. Reasonable conditions and development standards may be required by the City Clerk. 
G.  Upon request of an applicant within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the City Clerk's decision, or upon its own motion, the City Council may review the decision of the City Clerk or the City Council may, at its own discretion, take additional evidence as it believes necessary and issue such order and decision as to the Council appears proper. The City Council may attach reasonable conditions and development standards to any licensing decision. The decision of the City Council shall be considered the final decision of the City. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.080 - Term of license/renewal. 
A.  No license shall be issued until all fees have been received by the City. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid for only one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended as provided herein. 
B.  A licensee under this Chapter shall be required to renew his or her license from year to year as a matter of course. The licensee must present the license for the previous year or satisfactory evidence of its loss or destruction to the City Clerk and pay the appropriate license fee. Application for renewal shall provide the same information as was contained in the original application, except as waived by the City Clerk as being redundant. Should an application for renewal not be so made, the holder of the license shall have been deemed to waive renewal of the license. 
C.  All licenses not submitted for renewal at least forty five (45) days prior to the anniversary date of the license shall expire automatically on the anniversary date of issuance. The City Clerk may allow the delinquent licensee to renew after the said anniversary date for good and sufficient cause shown; however, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the license fee shall be imposed and collected prior to renewal of the license. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.090 - License fees. 
    As a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of a license under this Chapter, the licensee shall pay a license fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.100 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
A.  The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter if it determines upon notice and hearing sufficient evidence that: 
1.  The licensee, his or her agents, officers, servants, or employees, maintain or continue to maintain a nuisance on the licensed premises. 
2.  The licensed premises are unsanitary as certified by the Weld County Health Department. 
3.  The licensed premises are unsafe as certified by the City of Evans Fire Marshal. 
4.  Violation of the ordinances of the City, the laws of the State or the United States of America has occurred. 
5.  The licensee, his or her agents, officers, servants or employees, on the licensed premises or elsewhere, while in the scope of employment, violate any conditions or development standards. 
B.  Emergency Suspension. If the City Clerk has reason to believe that a violation of this Chapter has occurred in a deliberate or willful manner or that the public health, safety and welfare require immediate action on the part of the City Clerk, the City Clerk may summarily suspend the license of an adult business, service or entertainment establishment or an adult business, service or entertainment establishment employee, and said notice of suspension shall contain notice that the adult business, service or entertainment establishment or adult business, service or entertainment establishment employee may request a hearing to contest the suspension. Should the adult business, service or entertainment establishment or the adult business, service or entertainment establishment employee, within ten (10) days after service of the suspension notice, request a hearing on the suspension, the City Clerk shall set a hearing date before the City Council as soon as practicable. No suspension shall exceed thirty (30) days unless prior to expiration of the thirty (30) day suspension a revocation proceeding is commenced. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.110 - Transfer of license - change of name. 
A.  No license granted by this Chapter shall be transferred. 
1.  Transfer shall include any assignment of any interest in the license to any person not identified on the application for the license. 
2.  A transfer of license includes a transfer of more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation. 
B.  The licensee shall not conduct business under a name not submitted to the City Clerk prior to use. The licensee shall submit the legal authority to conduct business under an assumed name thirty (30) days prior to use. The City Clerk shall deny the use of the proposed name should the name be misleading, improper, or if the licensee has not shown proper legal authority to conduct business under such name or in violation of this Chapter or other law. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.120 - Miscellaneous regulations. 
A.  No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted to an adult business, service or entertainment establishment, nor shall any employee, agent, servant or independent contractor working on the premises during hours when adult entertainment is being presented be under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age. 
B.  Adult entertainment shall only be available at adult business, service or entertainment establishments between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday of each week. 
C.  An adult business, service or entertainment establishment shall be adequately buffered through the use of facade treatment, landscaping and fencing to minimize negative impacts on commercial uses, residential uses, public parks, churches or public or private schools certified or licensed by the State which are present in the vicinity. Buffering requirements shall be determined for the perimeter of the establishment on a case-by-case basis by reviewing the intensity of the establishment and comparing it to the type and location of surrounding land uses. For example, denser plantings and screening materials or more compatible facade treatment may be required between an adult business, service or entertainment establishment and a store or shop offering non-adult business goods and services at retail. 
1.  Issue at question. The basic issue for judging adequate buffering of adult businesses from other businesses in the vicinity shall be made without substantially interfering with the objectives of this Code, having due regard for the reasonable expectations of the applicant seeking the business license as well as those of other landowners in the neighborhood. 
a.  Process. Prior to action on a request for an adult business, service or entertainment establishment license, the City Council must have the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in regard to the adequate buffering of the adult businesses from other land uses which are present in the vicinity of the proposed use. 
D.  All outside lighting and signs shall be arranged, shielded and restricted so as to prevent negative impacts and any nuisance on adjacent streets, property commercial uses, residential uses, public parks, churches or public or private schools certified or licensed by the State in the area. 
E.  No adult business, service or entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any school certified or licensed by the State, church property, residentially zoned property, residential designated areas of PUD plats, public park, cemetery, existing adult business or youth facility, measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest property line of such school or church property to the property line of the adult business, service or entertainment establishment. 
F.  Display of license. All licensees licensed under this Chapter shall display their license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises in a clear, transparent cover or frame. The license shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. No person shall mutilate, cover, obstruct or remove a license so displayed. 
G.  Adult businesses may be licensed to operate in a B 1, Business; B-2, Shopping Center or M Manufacturing District. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.130 - Form of expression of opinion. 
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing or performance of any play, drama, ballet or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of a state of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
(Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
5.10.140 - Violation; penalty. 
    A person who violates the requirements of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 944-94, 1994) 
CHAPTER 5.12 - Temporary Vendors 

5.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Temporary vendors , as used in this Chapter, shall include any or all of the following: 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the City of not, who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders. This definition includes any person who, for himself or herself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or other place within the City for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking order for future delivery. 
    Transient merchant includes any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the City and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or other place within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction, provided that such definition does not include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing order for future delivery within the provisions of this Chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.040) 
5.12.020 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any temporary vendor to engage in any such business within the City without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.040) 
5.12.030 - Exemptions. 
    The terms of this Chapter do not include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to newsboys, nor the acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business, nor to persons acting in a political capacity, nor any persons conducting a bona fide auction pursuant to law, nor persons having a current business license in the City. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.040 - License application. 
    Applicants for a license under this Chapter shall file with the City Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall give the following information: 
A.  Name and physical description of applicant; 
B.  Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made; 
C.  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
D.  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship; 
E.  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and the location and proposed hours of operation. If the proposed location is on private property, the applicant must have obtained written consent of the property owner and evidence of such consent must be presented with the application; 
F.  The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed and the proposed method of delivery; 
G.  A recent photograph of the applicant which picture shall be approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguished manner; 
H.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
I.  The last cities or towns, not to exceed three (3), where applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application, and the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; 
J.  A complete set of fingerprints, which shall be taken by the Police Department. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.010) 
5.12.050 - Religious and charitable organization exemptions. 
A.  Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of such organization upon the streets, in offices or office buildings, by house to house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious, philanthropic or other similar non-profit purpose, shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 5.12.040 above; provided that the City Clerk may require to be filed sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall give the following information: 
1.  Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought; 
2.  Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization; 
3.  Period during which solicitation is to be carried on; and 
4.  Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof. 
B.  Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation is a charitable, philanthropic, religious organization or other similar non-profit organization, the City Clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such organization, association or corporation to solicit in the City. Such organization, association or corporation shall furnish all of its members, agents or representatives conducting solicitation, credentials in writing stating the name of the organization, name of agent and purpose of solicitation. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.060 - Bond. 
    Every applicant not a resident of the County, or who being such resident, represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside of the State, shall file with the City Clerk a surety bond running to the City in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable to and approved by the Council conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this Code and state statutes regulating peddlers, canvassers, solicitors, transient merchants, itinerant merchants or itinerant vendors, as the case may be, guaranteeing to any citizen of the City that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the licensee and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the City doing business with said solicitor, that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the solicitor. Action on such bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given, but the surety may, by paying, pursuant to order of the court, the fact amount of the bond to the clerk of the court in which suit is commenced, be relieved without costs of all further liability. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.070 - Exhibition of license. 
    Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the request of any citizen. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.030) 
5.12.080 - Application for license fee. 
A.  An application for a license under this Chapter shall be submitted to the City Clerk no less than one (1) working day prior to the first day of proposed operation. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
B.  Payment of such fee shall entitle the licensee upon approval of the license to a period of operation as specified on the license. 
C.  Licensee must remove all vehicles and structures from the premises at end of licensing period. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.050) 
5.12.090 - Finance requirements. 
A.  Upon approval of an application for a license but prior to the issuance of the license, the Finance Director will determine a sales and use tax deposit requirement up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The deposit requirement shall be in the form of certified funds made payable to the City. The deposit will be refunded at the end of the licensing period conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of the Code, including but not limited to any ordinances pertaining to the collection and remittance of retail sales and use taxes. 
B.  The deposit requirement shall not apply to applicants holding a current city sales tax license for business within the City limits. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.100 - Requirements for issuance. 
A.  Each license shall be valid for not more than one (1) location, a description of which shall appear on the face of the license. 
B.  In addition to the licensee's name, address and telephone number, the license shall contain the following: 
1.  The type of operation; 
2.  The period for which the license was issued; 
3.  The hours and days of operation; 
4.  The designated location; 
5.  A brief description of any vehicle, kiosk, table, chair, stand, box, container or other structure or display device to be utilized by the licensee; 
6.  Any special terms and conditions for issuance; 
7.  A statement that the license is personal and is not transferable in any manner; 
8.  A statement that the license is valid only when used at the location designated on the license; 
9.  A statement that a numbered receipt must be given with each sales transaction; 
10.  A statement that the license is subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990; prior code 5.08.020) 
5.12.110 - Restrictions and operations. 
A.  No license may use for the purpose of on-site storage, display or sale any vehicle, cart, kiosk, table, chair, stand, box container or other structure or display device not described on the fact of the license. 
B.  Except as otherwise specifically authorized by law, no vehicle, structure or device referred to in Subsection A above shall be located: 
1.  Within any portion of a street, alley, roadway or highway designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, except for the purpose of transporting the licensee's goods, wares or merchandise to, from or within the designated location; 
2.  Upon a public sidewalk within the extended boundaries of a crosswalk; 
3.  Within ten (10) feet of the extension of any building entrance, doorway or driveway; 
4.  In locations so as to impede or interfere with or visually obstruct the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
C.  All licensees who during the course of their licensed activities enter upon a public right-of-way or publicly owned property shall maintain liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the Finance Director according to the administrative regulation with proof of the same to be presented at the time of submission of the application. Any licensee who fails to provide proof of such insurance shall be prohibited from operating within or entering upon such property. 
1.  Liability insurance of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) must be maintained unless otherwise determined by the Finance Director. 
D.  The licensee shall pick up and dispose of any paper, cardboard, wood or plastic containers, wrappers or any litter which is deposited within twenty-five (25) feet of the point of any sale or transaction made by the licensee. The licensee shall provide and carry a suitable container for the placement of such litter by customers or other persons. 
E.  Each licensee shall maintain in safe condition any vehicle, structure or device as described in Subsection A of this Section, so as not to create an unreasonable risk or harm to the person or property of others. 
F.  The licensee shall not leave unattended any such vehicle, structure or device on a public right-of-way or at the designated location. 
G.  The licensee shall be responsible for a numbered receipt for each sales transaction. 
H.  The licensee shall comply with the provisions of all applicable ordinances of the City as well as the requirements of all state and federal laws. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.120 - Renewal. 
    Renewal of a license shall be treated as a new application under the provisions of this Chapter. Any violations by the licensee of the provisions of this Chapter shall be an additional factor to be considered in the renewal process. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.130 - Suspension. 
    If the operation of the licensee at any designated location becomes unsafe due to construction activity or other temporary condition, the license to operate at such location shall be temporarily suspended until such time, if at all, as the operation may be safely resumed. Any such suspension shall not extend the term of the license. 
(Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
5.12.140 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 753-90, 1990) 
CHAPTER 5.14 - Open Air Markets 

5.14.010 - Short title. 
    This Chapter shall be known and cited as "Open Air Markets." 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.020 - Definitions. 
    The following, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open air market shall mean a business operation or bazaar consisting of more than one (1) independent vendor who is allocated space and does business on the premises and is not in charge of the premises, and where goods and/or services are offered for sale or exchange at retail to the general public, either indoors or outside or both, including but not limited to antiques, curios, new and used merchandise, equipment, appliances and other goods and wares (excluding yard sales, auctions, pawn brokers and retail business establishments, and the like), where sales are made to the general public by the individual vendor who leases space where such sales are made. 
    Public hearing shall mean a hearing conducted by the City Council pursuant to this Chapter after due notice of such hearing is given by publication for at least one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by posting in a conspicuous location on the premises a notice of such hearing, and by giving such notice to the applicant for such license either personally or by mailing such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the post office address given in the application for the license, at least ten (10) days but not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of hearing. In computing the requisite number of days for notice, the date of posting, publication, mailing or personal delivery shall not be counted, but the immediately succeeding date shall be counted to and including the actual date of hearing. 
    Space shall mean an area designated by the licensee of the open air market where individual vendors lease such area for the purpose of selling to customers patronizing the open air market. Licensing of vendor space shall be based on the computation that a single space is not greater but may be less than three hundred and sixty (360) square feet in size. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.030 - Disturbance on premises. 
    Any person licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall immediately report to the Police Department of the City any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the premises licensed pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.040 - Unlawful transactions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to permit the conduct of business as a vendor by any of the following persons on the licensed premises: 
1.  Any person responsible for the allocated space who is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
2.  Any person known to the licensee to be a thief or dealer in stolen merchandise without first notifying a member of the Police Department. 
B.  Unless notification is given by the licensee to a member of the Police Department, it shall be unlawful for any licensee under this Chapter to knowingly sell or exchange, or permit the sale or exchange of any item or article with an altered serial or identifying number or with no such number if the item or article was originally manufactured with such a number. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.050 - License required. 
    No person shall operate an open air market as defined herein within the City without a license issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.060 - Application. 
    Every person required to be licensed by this Chapter for an open air market operation shall make application to the City Clerk in writing, who shall refer the application to the City Manager for review prior to submitting the application to the City Council. The application shall be submitted by the owner or lessee of the premises and not by each vendor who is doing business as part of the open air market operation. The application shall contain the following: 
A.  The full name, present address and telephone number of the applicant, and if a corporation, partnership or association, the names and residence addresses of all owners, officers, directors and operators of the open air market. 
B.  The address and legal description of the premises. 
C.  Evidence that all zoning requirements, conditions and development standards have been met as may be required by ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.070 - Bond. 
    Before any license required by this Chapter shall be issued to the applicant, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond in favor of the City in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed by the applicant as principal and at least one (1) surety upon whom service of process may be made in the State. The bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant fully complying with all provisions of the ordinances of the City and state statutes regulating and concerning the applicant's business and upon payment of all judgments and costs rendered against the applicant for any violation of the ordinances of the City or state statutes. The bond must be approved by the City Clerk as to form and as to the responsibility of the surety thereon prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.080 - License fee. 
    As a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of a license under this Chapter, the licensee shall pay a license fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98 1, 1998; Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.090 - Issuance of license. 
A.  After review by the City staff, the City Clerk shall place all applications for new licenses provided for in this Chapter before the City Council for public hearing. 
B.  Upon receipt of an application for renewal of any license issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City Manager for consideration. The City Manager shall obtain review of the application from the City staff and shall make inquiry as to whether the applicant for renewal of the license has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter or any laws of the City, State or Federal government and shall report thereon, in writing, to the City Council. The City Manager shall then place the application for renewal before the City Council for consideration at a duly convened council meeting. The City Council may renew the license with or without a public hearing and may deny or add conditions to the license after a public hearing. 
C.  Any license or renewal of license approved by the City Council may have reasonable conditions attached to the issuance of the license where such conditions are deemed necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. Any renewal of an existing license approved by the City Manager shall contain the conditions previously attached thereto by the City Council and any consideration must be referred to the City Council for consideration after public hearing. 
D.  Included as a condition in any license issued pursuant to this Chapter is the requirement that the licensee shall comply with all laws of the City, State and Federal governments in the conduct of the business licensed pursuant to this Chapter. 
E.  A temporary license may be issued on a previously licensed property for a maximum of sixty (60) days to and until a hearing may be held to approve a permanent license, so long as the previously issued license has not been revoked or suspended, or has expired for a period of more than one (1) year. Each application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee and shall be required upon the issuance of a temporary permit. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 926-94, 1994; Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.100 - Conditions for license approval. 
    The City Council shall consider the following conditions before approving an open air license: 
A.  Zoning requirements, conditions and development standards as they apply to the open air market. 
B.  All other City ordinances as they may relate to traffic, public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Times of operation. The City Council shall approve the times of operation based upon the nature of the open air market operation and its effect on the public health, safety and welfare. The open air market operator shall list the dates of operation (including holidays) and times of operation during the term of the license. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.110 - Term of license. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be for a period of one (1) calendar year, commencing on the date of City Council approval of either a new license or a renewal, unless suspended or revoked by the City Council as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 926-94, 1994; Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.120 - Suspension, revocation or refusal to renew. 
    Before suspending, revoking or refusing to renew any license issued pursuant to this Chapter, the licensee shall be notified in writing and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard regarding any grounds for suspending, revoking or refusing to renew such license. The written notice of such hearing shall be served no less than five (5) days prior to the date of hearing, either personally or by mailing the same by certified mail, return receipt requested, first class mail postage prepaid, to the post office address given in the application for the license. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.130 - Open air market daily or annual vendors' license required. 
A.  Each person, entity or organization who rents or otherwise occupies an individual space from an open air market licensee for the purpose of offering goods for sale or exchange at retail to the general public from said rented space within any licensed open air market shall obtain an open air market daily vendors' license or open air market annual vendors' license at the time of the rental of space from the licensee. The fee for vendor licenses is established by City Council by resolution. No other City business license shall be used for selling purposes within an open air market. 
B.  The open air market daily vendors' license required shall entitle the holder of said daily vendors' license to offer goods or services for sale within the licensed open air market in the City and only upon the day of issuance of said daily vendors' license. The open air market annual vendors' license which may be purchased in lieu of the daily vendors' licenses shall entitle the holder of said annual vendors' license to offer goods or services for sale within the licensed open air market in the City and only on days approved during the calendar year for which said annual vendors' license is issued. Any person, entity or organization who offers for sale, or sells to, any other person any goods or services without first having obtained an open air market daily vendors' license or open air market annual vendors' license is in violation of this Chapter. 
C.  The purpose of the open air market daily vendors' license or open air market annual vendors' license is for the privilege of doing business within the City and to raise revenues thereby in order to offset the costs of protecting the public health, safety and welfare from the impacts thereon created by the presence of each individual open air market daily or annual vendors licensee's customers and business within the City. 
(Ord. 808-91, 1991; Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.140 - Issuance of license. 
A.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the open air market licensee is hereby designated as the agent of the City for the sole and limited purpose of: 
1.  Distributing each open air market daily or annual vendors' license required hereby to each person, entity or organization paying therefore, prior to or at the time of, renting space to said person, entity or organization within the licensed open air market; 
2.  Collecting the open air market daily vendors' license fee and the open air market annual vendors' license fee from the individual vendor; 
3.  Holding in trust and remitting all fees so collected to the City on a weekly basis, as agreed upon by prior stipulation with the Finance Director; 
4.  Providing accurate daily records of the total number of open air market daily or annual vendors' licenses issued, and the name and address of each person, entity or organization to whom said license is issued, and delivering said reports to the City Clerk at the time of remittance of the collected fees; 
5.  An open air market annual vendors' license may be issued in lieu of said daily vendors' license to those vendors who retain spaces for a more permanent time than daily. 
B.  The City Clerk shall cause to be prepared and delivered to the open air market licensee an adequate supply of open air market daily or annual vendors' licenses to allow said licensee to comply with the requirements of this Section. 
C.  Tax exempt or non-profit entities which have been issued a daily vendors' license may petition the City Council for a refund of the fee paid to acquire said license. All other open air market vendors' licenses shall be considered non-refundable. 
D.  It shall be a violation of this Code: 
1.  For any person to duplicate any daily or annual vendors' license form without the prior written authorization of the City Clerk; 
2.  To transfer any daily or annual vendors' license, once purchased as authorized in this Section, to another person, with or without the transfer of consideration of any sort; 
3.  For any person to fail to collect, and to thereafter remit to the City, the fees required to be collected and remitted hereunder. (Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.150 - Collection of sales taxes. 
A.  Every person, entity or organization issued an open air market daily or annual vendors' license shall be obligated to collect state and local taxes on every sale made by the person, entity or organization. Sales taxes shall be collected at the time of the taxable transaction and shall be remitted as provided in Chapter 3.04 of this Code. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person, entity or organization to fail to charge, collect or remit state and local sales taxes as specified herein. 
(Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
5.14.160 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 802-91, 1991) 
CHAPTER 5.16 - Garage Sales 

5.16.010 - Garage sale defined. 
    A garage sale, as regulated by this Chapter, means a sale of tangible personal property had in a district of the City so zoned as not to permit a regular established business engaged in the sale of merchandise, to which sale the public is invited by an advertisement or otherwise, and shall include, but not be limited to, lawn sales, attic sales, basement sales, or similar sales. 
(Ord. 311-75) 
5.16.020 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 452-08. 
5.16.030 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 452-08. 
5.16.040 - Restrictions - time and number of sales. 
    No person, firm, organization or corporation shall hold a garage sale for a longer period than two (2) days, nor shall the same person or organization hold more than two (2) such sales within a period of one (1) year, nor shall more than two (2) sales be held at the same place within a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. 452-08; Ord. 311-75) 
5.16.050 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 452-08. 
5.16.060 - Signs advertising sales. 
    Signs advertising garage sales shall not be placed on the streets of the City, on the property of persons other than the one holding such sales without express permission, nor at a distance of more than three hundred (300) feet from the location of the sale. 
(Ord. 311-75) 
5.16.070 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 311-75) 
CHAPTER 5.20 - Pawnbrokers 

5.20.010 - Pawnbroker defined. 
A.  For the purposes of this Chapter, pawnbroker means any corporation, company or person who: 
1.  Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, other than chooses in action, securities or evidence of indebtedness; or 
2.  Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price. 
B.  No corporation or company shall be deemed a "pawnbroker" which is licensed as a national or state bank, or which is licensed under any other national or state law regulating businesses engaged primarily in lending money. 
(Ord. 307, 1975) 
5.20.020 - License - required. 
    It is unlawful for any corporation, company or person to establish or conduct the business of pawnbroker within the City unless such corporation, company or person shall have first procured a license for such business and shall have executed a bond in the amount and form provided by Section 5.20.040 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 307, 1975) 
5.20.030 - License - issuance conditions - fee. 
    The City Council may grant licenses, to be issued over the signature of the Mayor, to such persons as shall produce satisfactory evidence of good character and ability to carry on the business of pawnbroker. The license shall specify the place, street and number where the business is to be carried on. No license issued to a pawnbroker shall be transferable. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 307, 1975) 
5.20.040 - License - bond requirements. 
    No license shall be issued until and unless the applicant has executed a written bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a corporate surety, or two (2) or more individual sureties approved by the Finance Director. The bond shall run to the people of the City and shall be conditioned for due observance by the licensee of the requirements and provisions of this Chapter and of all applicable laws, and for the safekeeping and return of all articles held by the licensee in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 307, 1975) 
5.20.050 - Property sale restrictions - notice to Chief of Police required - hold orders. 
    No property shall be sold by a pawnbroker except in accordance with all provisions of applicable state law and only after there has been delivered to the Chief of Police, at least ten (10) days prior to any sale, a written notice specifying the date, hour and place when and where the sale is to be conducted and a description of the goods or articles to be sold. If necessary to permit the Police Department to continue a pending investigation regarding criminal activity involving or thought to involve the property to be sold, the Chief of Police may order the postponement of the sale for up to sixty (60) days. In that case, the Chief of Police shall issue a hold order, which shall be delivered to the pawnbroker. 
(Ord. 307, 1975) 
5.20.060 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 307, 1975) 
CHAPTER 5.30 - Emergency Telephone Service 

5.30.010 - Emergency telephone charges. 
    There is imposed, pursuant to Section 29-11-101 et seq., C.R.S., upon all telephone exchange access facilities within the City, an emergency telephone charge in an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the tariff rates as approved by the Public Utilities Commission or fifty cents ($.50), whichever is less. Upon recommendation of the Weld Emergency Telephone Service Authority, the City Council may, by resolution, raise or lower the emergency telephone charge, but in no event shall such charge exceed the amount of two percent (2%) of the tariff as approved by the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 691 87, 1987) 
5.30.020 - Collection of charges. 
    Telephone service suppliers providing telephone service in the City are authorized to collect the emergency telephone charge imposed by this Chapter in accordance with Section 29-11-101 et seq., C.R.S., and to provide those funds to the Weld Emergency Telephone Service Authority as provided in the intergovernmental agreement that establishes such authority. 
(Ord. 691 81, 1987) 
CHAPTER 5.32 - Private Security Services 

5.32.010 - Private security services defined. 
A.  Private security services means a person, firm or corporation, including its employees and agents, engaged in the business of providing protection to any person, firm or corporation, and/or their property, and preserving the peace and conduct of any business in the City. 
B.  This definition includes, by way of example only, persons who are employed to provide internal security for their employer's business; armed private security personnel; guard and patrol services and personnel for hire; investigative services and personnel for hire; alarm services and personnel for hire; and armored car and armored courier services and personnel for hire. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.020 - License and permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or employee or agent of such person, firm or corporation, to engage in the business of a private security service or to represent himself or herself to any person or the public as a private security service without having first procured a license or permit therefor, as provided in this Chapter, from the City Clerk, except that no person who is a peace officer having a valid certification shall be required to obtain a license or permit pursuant to this Chapter to engage in off-duty employment as a private security service within the jurisdiction of the governmental entity employing him or her as a peace officer. 
B.  The Chief of Police may, upon written application, grant an exception to the license or permit requirement of individuals if, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, the exception is reasonable. No exemption granted by the Chief of Police shall be for more than thirty (30) calendar days. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any private security service to employ any agent or employee unless the person to be employed has obtained a license or permit as hereinafter provided, or the Chief of Police has granted an exception to the license/permit requirement. This requirement is not intended to include employees whose job responsibilities are exclusively administrative and not functional; this includes, by way of example only, but is not limited to, secretarial positions. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept employment as a private security service employee or agent operating within the City without obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided for or having been granted an exception by the Chief of Police. This requirement is not intended to include employees whose job responsibilities are exclusively administrative and not functional; this includes, by way of example only, but is not limited to, secretarial positions. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.030 - License and permit - application contents. 
    Applicants for licenses or permits as private security service, or as an employee or agent of a private security service, shall file an application with the City Clerk on a form to be provided for that purpose which shall contain the following: 
A.  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted or services to be offered and the area expected to be covered in the conduct of business; 
B.  A statement as to the number of persons to be employed as agents or employees; 
C.  A statement as to the number and type of vehicles to be used in the conduct of the business, and a description thereof; 
D.  A description of any other equipment to be used in conducting the business; 
E.  A statement of the applicant's intention relative to carrying a firearm; 
F.  If the applicant is to be employed by any other firm, corporation or person, it shall be stated who the employer is, the nature of services to be rendered to the employer and any other pertinent facts required by the City Clerk; 
G.  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation, the nature of the offense, penalty or punishment imposed, and the date and place where such offense occurred; 
H.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever had a civil judgment or criminal conviction of fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against him or her and if so, the details thereon; 
I.  A certificate showing satisfactory completion of an approved and generally accepted private security training course consisting of at least twenty-four (24) hours of classroom instruction or an acceptable equivalent amount of training as determined by the Chief of Police. An acceptable course of instruction will include and address, as a minimum, legal powers and authority of private security services, Colorado Revised Statutes (Criminal Code), limitations on the use of force in general and the limitation on the use of deadly force specifically. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.040 - License and permit - issuance - annual renewal. 
    The City Clerk shall issue licenses or permits to applicants who are eligible to be licensed under the terms and provisions of this Chapter. Such licenses or permits shall be renewed annually. Licensees and permit holders desiring the renewal of their license or permit must apply for renewal within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the expiration date of the license/permit. As a part of the license/permit renewal process, the licensee or permit holder must demonstrate documentation of the receipt of no less than twenty-four (24) hours of additional in-service training during the previous year. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.050 - License and permit fee. 
A.  There is assessed an annual fee for the following: 
1.  For persons, firms and corporations engaged in the business of private security services; 
2.  For agents and employees of such persons, firms and corporations; 
3.  For individuals hired for the purpose of preserving the peace and conduct of a business by other than private security services businesses. 
Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.060 - License and permit - conditions barring issuance. 
    No license or permit shall be issued to the following persons: 
A.  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
B.  Any person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor or violation of municipal ordinance pertaining to moral turpitude or breach of the peace in the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
C.  Any person against whom civil judgment or criminal conviction for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within five (5) years immediately preceding the application; 
D.  Any person who has a record of illegal drug use or a record of violent acts against person or property; 
E.  Any person whose physical or mental condition is such as not to warrant confidence that the service to be rendered will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of any person; 
F.  Any person who fails to comply with all license/permit requirements. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.070 - License and permit - suspension and revocation. 
A.  The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license or permit granted under this Chapter for violation of any federal or state statute, city ordinance or any of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any act committed by the license/permit holder which is detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the public. It shall be considered a violation of a federal or state statute or city ordinance if criminal charges are filed in any court; if the licensee or permit holder is acquitted of the charges, he or she shall be reinstated as a license/permit holder under this chapter upon application to the City Clerk. 
B.  No further application of any person whose license or permit has been revoked shall be accepted by the City Clerk until at least one (1) year has elapsed since the last previous revocation. 
C.  In the event that the license or permit expires while under suspension, no renewal license or permit shall be issued until the end of the suspension. 
D.  Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Clerk in the denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit as provided in this Chapter may appeal to the City Manager. 
E.  Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager, within fourteen (14) calendar days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The City Manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.080 - Rules and regulations - authority of Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police may issue and promulgate, from time to time, rules and regulations to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City in relation to the private security service. Such rules may pertain, by way of example, to the duties of licensees or permit holders, manner of conduct and reports to be furnished to the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.090 - Inspection by police. 
    A licensee or permit holder shall be subject to inspection as to his or her activities and duties by the Chief of Police or any police officer of the City. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.100 - Identification card - issuance - contents. 
    In addition to the license or permit, the City Clerk shall issue to each license/permit holder an identification card which shall include the following: 
A.  Name, address, physical description and picture of the license/permit holder; 
B.  The name of employer if the permit holder is an employee of agent; 
C.  Signature of the license/permit holder and that of the City Clerk; 
D.  A statement as to whether or not license/permit holder is authorized to carry firearms; 
E.  The expiration date of the license or permit and such other information as the City Clerk may deem advisable. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.110 - Uniforms, badges and insignia. 
    The Chief of Police shall approve all uniforms, badges and insignia used by all private security services, agents or employees, and such uniforms, badges and insignia shall not be similar or a colorable imitation to any uniforms, badges or insignia used by the City police or other local law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.120 - Vehicles - color - lights or sirens - insignia. 
    If any vehicles are used by the private security service, agents or employees with the City, they shall be of a color approved by the Chief of Police and shall be distinguishable from all vehicles used by the Police Department of the City or other local law enforcement agencies. In addition, the vehicles shall not be equipped with any lights or sirens in violation of the traffic code of the City or the State, nor shall any insignias be painted on the sides thereof which are similar to or which could be confused with those painted on the sides of the vehicles of the Police Department of the City or other local law enforcement agencies. Whenever a new vehicle is acquired by the licensee or permit holder for use in the conduct of his or her business, the type and description shall be immediately reported to the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.130 - Words that may be confused with City police - use prohibited. 
    The words "police" or "officer" or any other words that may be confused to indicate any connection with the Police Department of the City shall not be used by any private security service, agent or employee. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.140 - Firearms - specific grant of authority and training required. 
    Licensee or permit holder shall be authorized to carry firearms only when specifically authorized by the Chief of Police. Prior to authorization, the license/permit holder must present a certificate of satisfactory completion of an approved and generally accepted firearms training course; such training course shall consist of a minimum of sixteen (16) hours of instruction and qualification with the firearm to be carried. To renew a license or permit with authorization to carry a firearm, the licensee or permit holder must present a certificate of satisfactory completion of an approved firearms refresher course that consists of a minimum of four (4) hours of instruction and qualifications with the firearm to be carried. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.150 - Firearms - authority to carry limited to while on duty or en route. 
    The authority to carry firearms will be extended only while the licensee or permit holder is performing the required duties of his or her employment and while en route to and from his or her place of business. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.160 - Discharge or other cessation of work - notice to City. 
    Whenever a private security service, agent or employee is discharged for any reason or ceases to be employed as a private security service, immediate notification shall be given to both the Chief of Police and the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.170 - Discharge or other cessation of work - surrender of identification card - reissue upon re-employment. 
    When any private security service, agent or employee ceases to be employed by a private security service, he or she shall forthwith surrender his or her identification card to the City Clerk. In the event the person surrendering an identification card is re-employed or conducts a business as a private security service for the remainder of the year, the identification card may be reissued to him or her without charge. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.180 - Changes of abode or business address - notice. 
    Any licensee or permit holder changing place of business or abode shall immediately notify the City Clerk of such fact, together with the address of the new place of business or abode; provided, however, that in the event the licensee or permit holder changes his or her place of abode, this is not a transfer of a license or permit and does not require the payment of additional fees. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.190 - Unlawful acts - arrest. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee or permit holder to arrest any person except when that person commits a criminal offense in the presence of the license/permit holder and the arrest conforms to a citizen's arrest in accordance with the laws of the State. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.200 - Unlawful acts - failure to turn over arrested person to police. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee or permit holder to fail to turn over any such person arrested immediately to the Police Department of the City. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.210 - Unlawful acts - firearms. 
    It is unlawful: 
A.  For any licensee or permit holder to carry a firearm without having successfully completed the prescribed training, or without designation on his or her license or permit while in the performance of duties as a private security service, agent or employee. 
B.  For any licensee or permit holder to fire or draw firearms in the performance of his or her duties, except when necessary to protect himself or herself from serious bodily injury or death or to prevent the commission of a felony involving serious bodily injury or death. 
C.  For any licensee or permit holder who fires a firearm within the City to fail to promptly report such incident to the Police Department. 
D.  For any licensee or permit holder to carry a firearm concealed on or about his or her person while performing duties under the authority of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.220 - Unlawful acts - police investigations. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to engage in or interfere with any investigation of the jurisdiction of the Police Department of the City. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.230 - Unlawful acts - reporting violations. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to fail to report immediately to the Police Department all violations of city, state or federal ordinances and laws which constitute felonies or breach of the peace coming to his or her attention. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.240 - Unlawful acts - uniforms, badges and insignia. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to wear a uniform, badge or insignia other than that authorized by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.250 - Unlawful acts - misrepresentation as police officer. 
    It is unlawful for a licensee or permit holder to represent himself or herself to be an officer of the Police Department or any other law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.260 - Unlawful acts - conduct generally. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to fail to conduct himself or herself in a lawful and orderly manner at all times. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.270 - Unlawful acts - identification card. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to fail to immediately produce the private security permits upon request by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
5.32.280 - Violation - penalty. 
    A person who violates the requirements of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 858-92, 1992) 
CHAPTER 5.34 - Towing Services 

5.34.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish rules and regulations, pursuant to the Towing Carrier Rules of the State, for the towing and storage of motor vehicles from the City's public roadways by operators engaged in the business of towing and storing motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.020 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to those businesses that engage in towing and storage of motor vehicles within the City. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases below shall have the following meanings: 
    Abandoned/inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, as defined by Sections 42-4-1802(1) and 42-4-2102(1), C.R.S., and as the terms abandoned vehicle and inoperable vehicle are defined in Section 8.24.020 of this Code. 
    Accident vehicle means a motor vehicle that has been involved in an accident. 
    Disabled vehicle means any motor vehicle that is unable to operate under its own power. 
    Heavy-duty recovery means the recovery of any motor vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight which requires the vehicle to be uprighted or recovered from either on or off the traveled portion of a public roadway. 
    Heavy-duty towing means the towing of any motor vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    Impounded vehicle means a vehicle which, at the direction of the Police Department, is taken into police custody because the operator of the vehicle was engaged in a violation of the law, including but not limited to the operator being arrested on a DUI charge, the operator having been arrested for driving without registration or insurance, the operator having been arrested for stealing the motor vehicle or the vehicle having been involved in a serious accident. 
    Light-duty towing means the towing of any motor vehicle up to and including ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    Motor vehicle means all vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including trailers and recreational campers, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and motorized bicycles. 
    Storage rates means fees charged for the storage of motor vehicles. 
    Towing list means a rotating list of all towing services registered with the City kept by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
    Towing rates means fees charged by a towing service for removal and transportation of a motor vehicle. 
    Towing service means a licensed and insured business engaged in the towing and storing of motor vehicles that has been approved for the towing list. 
    Towing vehicle means a motor vehicle employed by a towing service for the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing motor vehicles from public roadways. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.040 - Towing service registration. 
A.  No towing service shall be placed upon the towing list for the towing or storing of motor vehicles within the City unless the towing service shall first register and, upon notification of placement, retain a valid business license and sales tax license with the City. In order to facilitate expeditious response once a towing service is requested, to be placed on the towing list for light-duty towing, a towing service must be located within five (5) miles of the Evans Community Complex, 1100 37th Street, Evans, Colorado, or within the City. Registration applications shall be made available by the Police Department. A towing service that has met all the specifications and requirements of this Chapter and has registered with the Police Department shall be placed on the towing list by the Chief of Police; however, the maximum number of towing services on the City towing list shall be three (3) such services. Services shall be placed on the towing list on a first-come first-served basis. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner. Each towing service must submit its schedule of basic towing and storage rates with its registration application. The rates and fees for towing and storage of motor vehicles shall not exceed the rates set by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission. 
B.  A nonregistered tow service will not be permitted to tow a vehicle from a scene or incident which is under Police Department control and/or investigation except by owner's request or where a tow service was unable to provide required service. 
C.  The towing service owner or its authorized representative shall sign the registration application form indicating that the full requirements of the Towing Carrier Rules (TCR) of the Rules Regulating Transportation by Motor Vehicle have been met and rules set forth in this Chapter have been met by the towing service applicant. 
D.  If any information provided by a towing service in its registration application changes, the towing service is responsible for notifying the Police Department of the change in the registration information within thirty (30) days of such change. Failure to comply with this provision will be deemed a violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.050 - Insurance, City sales tax license and business license and operating permit. 
A.  No towing service shall operate within the City unless it carries liability insurance in the following amounts: 
1.  Garage liability/comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit covering bodily injury and property damage liability, including but not limited to personal injury, products' liability, independent contractor and completed operation coverage; 
2.  Garage keeper's legal liability insurance policy in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000); 
3.  For heavy-duty towing and heavy-duty recovery vehicles, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit with endorsement MSC-90; 
4.  Automobile liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit covering bodily injury and property damage liability, including but not limited to owned, non-owned and hired vehicles; 
5.  Worker's compensation insurance as required by law, including but not limited to statutory Colorado worker's compensation benefits and employer's liability coverage; 
6.  All policies shall provide an endorsement for collision coverage for motor vehicles and cargo towed by towing service vehicles. 
B.  No towing service shall operate within the City unless it has a valid sales tax license from the City. 
C.  No towing service shall operate within the City unless it has a valid business license from the City. 
D.  Towing service must receive an operating permit from the Public Utilities Commission and provide a copy to the Police Department. Towing services are also subject to the rules and regulations as promulgated by the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.060 - Rates, fees and collection of fees. 
A.  The fees and rates for the towing and storage of motor vehicles shall be established by the Public Utilities Commission (PUC), which rates shall be based on the usual, customary and reasonable rates of operators towing and storing motor vehicles. All rates shall be posted in a conspicuous location as to be visible to customers within every towing service office. The fees and rates established by the PUC, and any subsequent revisions thereto, shall be retained by the City Clerk and shall be made available to the public during normal business hours of the City. 
B.  The City assesses an administrative fee on each tow service provider registered with the City. The tow fees are in addition to any services provided by the tow company. 
C.  All towing service companies shall be responsible for collection of all fees and rates for services rendered. In addition, prior to releasing a vehicle towed at the direction of the Police Department, all registered towing services shall collect the City administrative towing fee of twenty-six dollars ($26.00) from every vehicle owner. Monies collected for the City administrative towing fee will be sent on a monthly basis by check made payable to the "City of Evans." Failure to comply with this Section will result in immediate suspension of services. The City administrative towing fee offsets the costs associated with tow service registration, inspections, data management and certified mail correspondence. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.070 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  All towing services placed on the towing list shall be available to respond to a call in accordance with the towing rotation schedule of on-call status established by the Chief of Police. 
B.  All towing services shall respond to a call in any part of the City within thirty (30) minutes. If a towing service does not respond within thirty (30) minutes of a call, the towing service next on the towing list shall be called and entitled to provide services as needed, and the first towing service shall lose any claim to compensation. Repeated failures to respond to calls in a timely manner by a towing service will result in removal of the towing service from the City's towing list. 
C.  All drivers and operators of towing vehicles shall be properly licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the State and are subject to driver's license checks by the Police Department at the time of registration and at least on an annual basis thereafter. All towing vehicles shall be properly registered and inspected in accordance with any applicable laws. Lack of reputability of the driver or owner will be cause for denial or removal from the towing list, including but not limited to: 
1.  Conviction of any felony when the person's civil rights have not been restored. 
2.  Conviction of any felony or first-degree misdemeanor directly related to the business of operating a towing service or tow truck, regardless of whether civil rights have been restored. For the purpose of this policy, any offense involving perjury or false statement shall be considered to be directly related to the business of operating a towing service. 
3.  Responding to a call while under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance or chemical substance to the extent that his or her normal faculties are impaired. 
4.  Conviction of the offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or any controlled or chemical substance to the extent that normal faculties are impaired or driving with an unlawful blood alcohol level, or of any criminal traffic offense. 
D.  All vehicles must be towed in a safe manner. 
E.  All towing services shall be capable of providing reasonable roadside services to disabled vehicles, such as, but not limited to, jump-starting, changing of flat tires and providing fuel. Such services will only be performed if they can be done safely, as determined by the police officer on the scene. All towing services shall charge only reasonable rates for such roadside services. Charging of excessive fees for roadside services shall be grounds for the removal of a towing service from the towing list. 
F.  All towing services shall make available a copy of their basic rates and provide a business card to all owners and operators of motor vehicles that will be towed. 
G.  All towing services shall keep accurate records of all motor vehicles towed and stored at the direction of the Police Department. A copy of all such records shall be provided to the Police Department monthly by fax, email or mail. During the first week of every month, all registered towing services will send a report containing all the previous month's towed vehicles report at the direction of the Police Department. 
H.  Towing services shall not remove any motor vehicle which has been abandoned or involved in an accident in any public roadway without first notifying the Police Department. 
I.  The towing service shall notify the Police Department of all vehicles found by the towing service to have been abandoned and not claimed after being stored. The Police Department shall, upon notification, expeditiously process the vehicles in accordance with the Colorado Motor Vehicle Code concerning abandoned and unclaimed motor vehicles. 
J.  The City Council authorizes the Police Department to promulgate and revise administrative rules regarding the operation of towing services as necessary. Notice of said amendments will be made to all registered tow service owners and shall become effective immediately upon receipt of said notifications. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.080 - Towing list and towing list rotation. 
A.  A towing list will be kept with the Chief of Police. The towing list shall include all towing services that have registered with the City and will be forwarded to the Weld County Communications Center for rotation purposes. A towing service shall be placed on the bottom of the towing list upon registration. The towing list shall be a rotating list as provided in Subsections B, C, D and E below. 
B.  When the need arises, the Police Department will call the towing service on the top of the list, which is on-call on the towing rotation schedule. The towing service called, if it performs any of the services covered by this Chapter, shall be placed at the bottom of the towing list after providing such service and not called again until all other on-call towing services on the towing list have been called. 
C.  If a towing service is unavailable to perform required services when called by the Police Department, for whatever reason, said towing service shall be charged with a call and placed at the bottom of the towing list, and the next available on-call towing service shall be called. The towing service that responds in its place shall remain at the top of the list. 
D.  If a towing service, after being dispatched, is recalled and does not perform any duties or services covered by this Chapter, the towing service shall remain on the top of the towing list. However, if a towing service arrives at the scene of an incident in which its services are required and cannot perform said services, it shall be placed at the bottom of the towing list, and the next on-call towing service on the list shall be called. 
E.  When a towing service is not available to respond due to equipment and/or mechanical failure, the Weld County Communication dispatcher will be notified of the condition by the towing service owner and/or operator, and will be removed from the available list until notified by the owner and/or operator that he or she is again ready for immediate service. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.090 - Storage facilities. 
A.  All storage facilities operated or used by towing services shall meet all local zoning and code requirements and must be located within five (5) miles of the Evans Community Complex, 1100 37th Street, Evans, Colorado, or within the City. 
B.  All towing services shall have indoor storage facilities at their disposal for motor vehicles that have been involved in criminal activity and impounded by the Police Department. 
C.  All storage facilities shall have a business office open to the public between normal business hours at least five (5) days a week, excluding holidays. 
D.  All outside storage facilities shall be secured and fully enclosed by a sturdy fence having a minimum height of six (6) feet, with a lockable gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to dawn. Towing services with additional security recorded monitoring devices (CCTV) will be preferred during the selection process over towing services without recorded monitoring devices. 
E.  All towing services shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and safe storage of all motor vehicles towed pursuant to this Chapter and shall be liable for any damage incurred by such motor vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage facilities, excepting only damage caused by law enforcement officers during a motor vehicle stop or investigation. 
F.  If the Police Department places a hold on a towed vehicle, such hold shall last a maximum of ten (10) days, during which time no storage fees will accrue. At the end of the tenth business day, the hold will expire unless other arrangements have been made and storage fees will begin to be assessed to the vehicle owner. All vehicles towed at the direction of the Police Department where the vehicle, not the contents, is considered as evidence will have a police hold and shall be stored without accruing storage fees. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.100 - Towing vehicle and equipment specifications. 
A.  All towing services engaged in light-duty towing shall have at least one (1) rollback truck and one (1) wrecker, with necessary brooms and equipment to do the complete removal. Each truck must have a manufacturer's capacity of at least (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and a manufacturer's boom capacity of four (4) tons. Proof of capacity must be supplied to the Police Department at the time of registration. 
B.  All towing services engaged in heavy-duty towing shall have one (1) heavy-duty wrecker with a manufacturer's capacity of not less than twenty-seven thousand (27,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and a boom capacity of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds independently or twenty-four (24) tons jointly; air brakes so constructed as to lock rear wheels; and heavy-duty underreach. 
C.  All towing services engaged in heavy-duty recovery shall have two (2) heavy-duty wreckers with manufacturer's capacity of not less than twenty-seven thousand (27,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and boom capacity of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds independently or twenty-four (24) tons jointly; two (2) power winches with pulling capacity of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds each; at least two hundred (200) feet of cable at least nine-sixteenths ( 9 / 16 ) of an inch diameter on each drum; double boom to permit splitting, or single boom hydraulically elevated and extendable with a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree swivel on the end of the boom; air brakes so constructed as to lock rear wheels; heavy-duty underreach; and two (2) snatch blocks with a twenty-five-thousand-pound rating and two (2) scotch blocks. 
D.  All towing vehicles must have radio equipment with a twenty-four-hour dispatch service or a cellular telephone for the purpose of maintaining communications with the Weld County Communications Center. 
E.  All towing vehicles must be equipped per TCR specifications and the following: at least one (1) five-pound ABC-type fire extinguisher, safety chains, substances for application to small liquid spills and stiff push brooms to clean up debris at the scene. 
F.  Proof of towing vehicle and equipment specifications shall be provided to the Police Department with the registration application. 
G.  All towing vehicles are to conform with all applicable state and federal laws and shall be subject to inspection by City officials during normal business hours at the time of registration and on an annual basis thereafter. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.110 - Rights of owners/operators of motor vehicles required to be towed. 
A.  If a motor vehicle operator or owner wishes to have his vehicle towed by a particular towing service, his or her request shall be honored, provided that the police officer in charge at the scene has not already dispatched a towing service or the police officer has determined that the motor vehicle in question will not be removed in an expeditious or safe manner and will jeopardize the public safety, in which case the motor vehicle operator or owner shall be required to utilize a dispatched towing service. 
B.  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle required to be towed or stored shall have the right to remove all personal items and effects from the motor vehicle unless the Police Department has placed a police hold on any such vehicle or items. 
C.  A towing service shall provide a detailed and itemized bill for all services rendered. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
5.34.120 - Complaints, violations and hearings. 
A.  All violations of this Chapter and all complaints by the public or Police Department against any towing service shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police. 
B.  The Chief of Police, in his or her discretion, shall determine if any complaint or violation against a towing service is of such a serious nature as to warrant a hearing and possible disciplinary measures. If the Chief of Police decides that a hearing is required, it shall, upon proper notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing in which all parties may present evidence. If after a hearing the Chief of Police finds that a towing service has violated any provision of this Chapter, he or she may, depending on the seriousness of the offense: 
1.  Suspend the violating towing service from the towing list for not more than one (1) month for a first offense; not more than three (3) months for a second offense; and not more than six (6) months for a third offense. 
2.  Permanently remove the violating party from the towing list for having three (3) offenses within an eighteen-month period. 
(Ord. 585-13 1) 
TITLE 6 - Animals 
CHAPTER 6.04 - Animal Control 

6.04.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following words have the following meanings: 
    Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except human primate. 
    Animal shelter or impoundment facility means a facility in which to impound animals held by the City, or a humane society, pursuant to agreement or contract, acting for the City. 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner. 
    City means the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    Code enforcement officer means a peace officer so designated by law, the ordinances of the City, or by written order of the chief of police, to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
    Control is defined in Section 6.04.020 below. 
    Exotic animal means nonhuman primate, skunk, fox, raccoon, wild/exotic cat and similar animals. 
    Farm animal means horse, mule, ass, sheep, goat (excluding pygmy goat), llama, swine (excluding pot belly pig), cow, or other cloven hoofed animals commonly known as livestock. 
    Fowl animal means chicken, turkey, goose, duck, guinea, household bird, pigeon and similar animals provided they are for the enjoyment of the occupants of the lot and are not kept primarily for the purpose of sale or commercial endeavor. Commercial activities must comply with all other ordinances and zoning regulations. 
    Household means a dwelling unit and surrounding property customarily used by a single family for living purposes. 
    Kennel operation means any activity which includes boarding, breeding, or care and treatment of animals for compensation or profit. Kennel operations must comply with all other ordinances and zoning regulations. 
    Leash or lead means a thong, cord, rope, chain or similar device which holds an animal in restraint, and which is not more than ten (10) feet long. 
    Litter means offspring of one (1) of the adult animals being harbored which is commonly considered to be too young to wean. 
    Livestock means any bovine animal, horse, mule, ass, sheep or goat (excluding pygmy goat). 
    Neighborhood means the area within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundaries of the premises where the animal is kept. 
    Open area means space on a lot or parcel of ground which is used exclusively for the containment of animals and which is not covered with any structures, paving, buildings or similar appurtenances, i.e., corrals. 
    Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning any animal or animals, or having the same in his or its care, custody or control, or who causes, encourages or suffers the same to remain upon their premises for a period of three (3) consecutive days or more. 
    Pet animals means domestic dog, domestic cat, rabbit, guinea pig, hamster, mouse, snake, iguana, turtle, pot belly pig, pygmy goat, ferret and similar animal provided they are for the enjoyment of the occupants of the lot and are not kept primarily for the purpose of sale or commercial endeavor. 
    Pet shop means the premises of any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise that buys or sells animals on a regular basis. 
    Premises means real property owned, rented, leased, used, kept or occupied by a person or persons, a partnership, a corporation or governmental unit, howsoever described. 
    Public nuisance means any animal that: 
1.  Menaces or attacks persons or vehicles; 
2.  Menaces or attacks other animals; 
3.  Goes upon school premises without the permission of the person in charge thereof; 
4.  Is at large; 
5.  Damages private or public property; 
6.  Barks, howls, yelps, bawls, or makes other loud, persistent noise in a manner which, under non-mitigating circumstances, could be considered by reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities as excessive or continuous; 
7.  Being a female in heat, because of the nature of its confinement, or lack of the same, has attracted other animals and caused them to congregate or remain on or about any premises; 
8.  Is in a public lake; 
9.  Any other act or condition in this chapter designated as a public nuisance. 
    Rabies vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Raptor means any migratory bird that is a member of falconiformes or strigiformes and, specifically, but not by way of limitation, means falcons, hawks, owls and eagles. 
    Trap means any device used to contain or capture an animal. 
1.  Humane trap means any trap which does not cause injury to the animal trapped. 
2.  Inhumane trap means any trap which causes injury to the animal trapped. 
    Veterinary hospital means any premises upon which a licensed veterinarian performs surgery, makes diagnoses, and treats diseases or the injuries to animals. 
    Vicious animal means: 
1.  Any animal that constitutes a threat to the well being or safety of human beings or other animals. Without limitation, an animal may be deemed to constitute a threat if such animal, without provocation, attacks or bites a human being or domestic animal; or 
2.  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
3.  Any animal which because of its size, physical nature, or vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by Section 6.04.180(F)-(I); or 
4.  Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting, or any animal trained for fighting. 
    Wild animal means any monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, poisonous snake or reptile, jaguar, cheetah, mountain lion, wildcat, panther, margay, or any other species of cats other than ordinarily domesticated house cats, any bear, any nonpoisonous snake longer than six (6) feet, any crocodile or alligator longer than one (1) foot, any badger, prairie dog, beaver, muskrat or bat, or any wolf, coyote, fox or other species of canine other than ordinarily domesticated dogs. 
(Ord. 589-14, 2014; Ord. 456-08; Ord. 1104-98; Ord. 1083-97; Ord. 957-95; Ord. 816-91; Ord. 703-88; Ord. 652-86; Ord. 549-82; prior code  7.04.010) 
6.04.020 - Control required - running at large prohibited when. 
A.  All animals, except domestic cats, shall be kept under control. No owner shall permit such animals to run at large within the City. If any animal is found at any place within the City other than upon the premises of its owner is presumed to have violated this Section. 
B.  Dogs. A dog shall be considered running at large when it is neither on the premises of the owner nor on a leash ten (10) feet or less in length, attached to the dog and held by or tied to a person. 
C.  Livestock. No horses, asses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine or goats shall be herded or picketed upon any street, alley, ditch-bank or public ground in the City. 
D.  Exclusions. This Section shall not apply to seeing-eye dogs accompanied by their masters, nor dogs participating in dog shows, dog exhibits, or dog-training activities to the extent that such shows, exhibits and activities are conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. 479-09; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.030) 
6.04.025 - Domestic cats. 
A.  It is unlawful to shoot at, wound, kill, capture, ensnare, trap, transport, net, poison or in any other manner kill, injure or molest any domestic cat. 
B.  Domestic cats that have bitten a person or are sick or injured may be captured using a cage or humane live trap for quarantine and/or veterinary care. 
C.  The provisions of Section 6.04.025 shall be applicable only to domestic cats, and shall not prohibit feral cats from being captured, ensnared, trapped, or netted by duly authorized animal control officers of the City of Evans or of Weld County or their duly authorized designee for the purposes of feral cat population control. As used in this subsection C., the term "feral cat" is defined as a cat that (i) is non-socialized and has no owner, (ii) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and which is not socialized, or (iii) is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized. 
( Ord. 662-17,  1 , 2017; Ord. 479-09) 
6.04.030 - Dog and cat licenses - required. 
    The owner, keeper, harborer or any other person who has assumed the responsibility for any dog or cat within the City shall secure a license for such dog or cat from the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.035 - Licensing requirements and standards for possession of raptors. 
A.  Persons who possess and maintain falconry licenses, as required by state and federal agencies may keep birds of prey on their premises; provided that such birds of prey are maintained according to state and federal laws and regulations. 
B.  No person may keep, maintain, harbor or possess in or at any one (1) household, a combined total of more than three (3) raptors. 
C.  Raptors shall be permitted provided they are for the enjoyment of the occupants of the lot and are not kept primarily for the purpose of sale or commercial endeavor. 
D.  Nothing in this Section will be interpreted to waive any requirements or City ordinances related to building codes and zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 1104-98) 
6.04.040 - License - exemptions. 
    No license shall be required for any dog or cat under the age of six (6) months. No license shall be required for any dog or cat held for sale by any kennel or pet shop authorized to carry on business in the City. No license shall be required for seeing eye dogs. No license shall be required for dogs or cats brought into the City for less than a thirty-day period and if licensed by another municipality. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.050 - Where to file - contents. 
    An applicant for a dog or cat license shall apply to the City Clerk's office. Such application shall be upon forms provided by the City and shall contain at least the following information: 
A.  Name, address and a telephone number of the owner; 
B.  The call-name, breed, color and sex of the animal; 
C.  Proof of current rabies vaccination; 
D.  Documentation of animal neutering, if applicable. 
(Ord. 345-05; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.060 - Issuance of tag - term. 
A.  Upon acceptance of the completed license application, documentation of current rabies vaccination and animal neutering, if applicable, and payment of the license fee, the City Clerk Department shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and expiration date. Such tag shall be issued as follows: 
1.  One-year licenses shall be valid for the twelve (12) months following the date of issuance. 
2.  Two-year licenses shall be valid for twenty-four (24) months following the date of issuance. 
3.  Three-year licenses shall be valid for thirty-six (36) months following the date of issuance. 
B.  Such license shall be issued concurrent with the issuance of the certificate of rabies vaccination with the following exceptions: 
1.  If the rabies vaccination is to expire in less than one (1) year, a license may not be issued until the animal is re-vaccinated; or 
2.  If the rabies vaccination is to expire in less than two (2) years, then a one-year license may be issued; or 
3.  If the rabies vaccination is to expire in less than three (3) years, then a one- or two-year license may be issued. 
Licenses issued for dogs and cats shall be valid for a maximum of three (3) years. Dogs and cats brought into the City shall be licensed no later than thirty (30) days from the date they are brought into the City. 
C.  In order to entitle any applicant to a license under the provisions of this Chapter, such applicant shall produce and display to the City Clerk Department proof of current rabies vaccination. This certificate must be issued by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine certifying that the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies and when such vaccination will expire. 
(Ord. 345-05; Ord. 747-89; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.070 - License - fee. 
    The City requires all dogs and cats over the age of six (6) months to be licensed. Each applicant for a license shall be required to pay the appropriate license fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 747-89; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.080 - Record of tags issued. 
    The City Clerk's office shall maintain a record of all tags issued according to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 345-05; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.060) 
6.04.090 - Tag requirements. 
A.  Each dog or cat so licensed shall be provided by its owner, keeper or harborer with a collar or harness of suitable material, to which such license tag shall be securely fastened, and its owner shall keep such collar or harness with such tag fastened thereto on such dog or cat. 
B.  It is unlawful for any owner, keeper, harborer or any other person who has assumed the responsibility for a dog or cat to permit such dog to wear any license tag other than the one issued by the City for the dog or cat. 
(Ord. 345-05; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.100 - License - duplicate tags - ownership changes. 
A.  In the event a tag issued pursuant to this chapter is lost or destroyed, a new tag may be obtained from the City clerk upon payment of the appropriate fee. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. 
B.  In the event the ownership of a licensed dog or cat is changed, the new owner must license such dog or cat within thirty (30) days of purchase and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 345-05; Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 747-89; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.020) 
6.04.110 - Rabies control. 
    The owner of every dog or cat over the age of six (6) months shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies, and such owner shall obtain from a licensed veterinarian a rabies vaccination certificate and tag. The tag shall be required to be attached to the collar or harness, as required in Subsection 6.04.090.A above. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.060) 
6.04.120 - Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat. 
    The code enforcement officer may order any unspayed female dog or cat that is in a stage of estrous (heat) and is not properly confined, or is creating a public nuisance, to be removed to a boarding facility or a veterinary hospital until the period of estrous is finished. All expenses incurred as a result of such order shall be paid by the animal's owner. Failure to comply with such an order is a violation of this Section, and the animal may be impounded at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.050) 
6.04.130 - Animal defecation - owner responsibility. 
A.  Any owner, taking the animal upon any public way or other public property in the City, shall immediately remove or cause to be removed, and lawfully dispose of all fecal matter left on such property by the animal. 
B.  Any owner, taking any animal upon any private property other than his or her own, shall immediately remove or cause to be removed, and lawfully dispose of all fecal matter left on such property by the animal. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.160) 
6.04.140 - Nuisance animals designated. 
A.  Public nuisances, as defined in Section 6.04.010(U), are prohibited. The owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of any animal that causes a public nuisance shall be in violation of this Section and shall be deemed responsible for the actions of the animal. 
B.  Areas in which animals are kept shall be maintained in a manner which does not create odors, dust, noise or drainage offensive to the senses of smell, hearing, or sight, thereby constituting a hazard or nuisance to the use or enjoyment of adjoining properties. 
(Ord. 589-14, 2014; Ord. 456-08; Ord. 1083-97; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 652 86; Ord. 549-82; prior code 7.04.080) 
6.04.150 - Noisy animals. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner, keeper, harborer, or any other person who has assumed the responsibility for an animal, to permit such animal kept in any yard, house or other place to bark, howl, yelp, bawl or make other loud and persistent noise, in a manner which, under nonmitigating circumstances, could be considered by reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities as excessive or continuous. 
B.  The code enforcement officer, police officer, or other designated officer of the City shall have authority, without liability, to use all reasonable means to abate such nuisance, including the authority to impound such animal, upon receipt of a complaint, where the owner is absent from the premises; provided, however, that this authority does not extend to entering the owner's dwelling or other building upon the owner's premises. 
C.  Upon impoundment of an animal for violation of this Section, such officer shall attempt to notify the absent owner by reasonable means as soon as possible and such animal may not be destroyed until the owner is notified and has had the opportunity to reclaim the animal from impoundment. 
(Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.110) 
6.04.160 - Animal bites - report and animal quarantine requirements. 
A.  The owner of any animal that bites a human being shall report the occurrence to the code enforcement officer when known to him or her or reported to him or her, and shall deliver the animal to the code enforcement officer, and shall provide such further information requested by the code enforcement officer. 
B.  Any animal that bites a human being shall be quarantined pursuant to one (1) of the following procedures for a period of not less than ten (10) days: 
1.  The code enforcement officer in his discretion may allow the animal to be quarantined on the owner's premises. Otherwise, the animal shall be quarantined in the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital at the expense of the owner. 
2.  Every person having knowledge thereof shall report to the code enforcement officer any suspected or positively diagnosed occurrence of rabies, and any biting by any suspected or confirmed rabid animal. 
3.  No person shall kill any suspected or confirmed rabid animal except in defense of a human being or other animal, or to prevent the escape of such suspected or confirmed rabid animal. 
4.  No person shall remove the dead body of any suspected or confirmed rabid animal from where the animal was killed or found. 
5.  If rabies has been diagnosed by a veterinarian or medical doctor in any animal, such animal shall be summarily destroyed, and its brain sent immediately to the State Health Department in Denver for positive verification at the owner's expense; or the animal or its body may be disposed of according to law, regulation or order of the Department of Public Health and Environment. 
6.  If a standard rabies incubation period has not been established for a particular species of animal, any animal of that species has been diagnosed as rabid, or is reasonably suspected of being rabid, it shall be summarily destroyed, and if involved with another animal or human, a necropsy shall be performed to determine if the other animal is contaminated by rabies. 
7.  When there has been a positive diagnosis of rabies within the City, the Chief of Police may declare a City wide quarantine for a reasonable period of time. During the period of such quarantine, every owner of animals shall confine his or her animals within the premises of the owner, and shall not transport, take or remove his or her animal from the City without the prior written consent of the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.060) 
6.04.170 - Certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, care for or possess the following animals within the City. 
A.  Any animal having poisonous bites. 
B.  Any farm animal, as defined in this Chapter, on properties with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of open area designed to be used and used by the animals. Furthermore, an additional two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of open area is required for each animal in excess of three (3). This open area must be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residence, business or other building intended for human habitation. 
C.  Any wild or exotic animal, as defined in this Section. 
D.  Authorized licensed kennel operations as defined in this Chapter are exempt from the prohibitions described within this Section. 
(Ord. 816-91; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.170) 
6.04.180 - Vicious animals. 
A.  No person shall own, keep, harbor or possess any vicious animal in the city except as provided in (F) through (I) of this Section. 
B.  An animal shall not be deemed to be a vicious animal because it has attacked or bitten any of the following persons: 
1.  Any person engaged in the unlawful entry into or upon the animal owner's property where such animal is kept; or 
2.  Any person engaged in the unlawful entry into the animal owner's automobile or other vehicle wherein such animal is confined; or 
3.  Any person engaged in attempting to stop a fight between such animal and another animal; or 
4.  Any person engaged in attempting to aid such animal when it is injured. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, a person is lawfully upon the private property of such owner when he is on the property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state or city, or the law or postal regulations of the United States, or when he is on such property at the invitation, expressed or implied, of the owner thereof. 
D.  It is the duty of the code enforcement officer, police officer, or other designated officer of the city, to investigate all complaints concerning vicious or dangerous animals. 
E.  If the code enforcement officer, or any such police officer of the city, deems an animal to be vicious, he may issue a written warning to the owner of such animal, stating his determination that such animal is vicious, and shall request the owner to comply with requirements (F) through (I) of this Section for vicious animals; and he may cause charges to be filed in municipal court against the owner, alleging the vicious propensities of such animal. 
F.  Confinement. Except as provided in (G) of this Section, the owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal shall not permit the animal to go unconfined. A vicious animal is "unconfined" if the animal is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the animal. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
G.  Leash and Muzzle. The owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal shall not permit the animal to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the animal is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or other animal. 
H.  Signs. The owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious animal on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. 
I.  Insurance. Owners of a vicious animal must provide proof to the city clerk of public liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted or that may be inflicted by his or her vicious animal. 
(Ord. 589-14, 2014; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.070) 
6.04.190 - Disposal of animals by court order - conditions. 
    If a complaint has been filed in the Municipal Court against the owner, keeper, harborer or any other person who has assumed responsibility for any animal within the City for violation of this Chapter, the Municipal Judge shall have the authority, upon making the finding that such animal constitutes a nuisance or that such animal is a vicious animal, and further, that such animal, as a result, constitutes a real and present danger to the citizens of the City, to order that the animal be destroyed in a humane fashion. 
(Ord. 703 88; 549 82; prior code 7.04.090) 
6.04.200 - Accidents injuring animals - report required. 
    Any person who, while driving a motor vehicle, strikes or injures any domestic animal shall: 
A.  Stop immediately and report the incident to the owner of the animal; 
B.  If, after reasonable searching, the driver cannot locate the owner, immediately report the incident to the code enforcement officer or the police. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.140) 
6.04.210 - Dead or injured animals. 
    Animals killed or injured on or along public streets are considered to have been running at large, and the code enforcement officer, police officer, or other designated officer of the City may remove such animals therefrom and, in his or her discretion, may take those animals needing medical attention to the animal shelter or a veterinarian. The owner of any animal receiving such medical attention shall be responsible for any cost incurred. The City is not and will not be liable for the costs of treatment of such animals. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.040) 
6.04.220 - Impoundment authorized when - prosecution for violations. 
A.  It shall be lawful for the code enforcement officer, police officer or other designated officer of the City to impound dogs which have been found running at large, or to return the dog to the owner, keeper, harborer or any other person who has assumed the responsibility of the dog, and issue to such person a penalty assessment citation or summons and complaint citation for the violation of this Chapter. 
B.  It shall be no defense to a prosecution under Subsection 6.04.020.A of this Chapter that the dog alleged to have run at large was impounded in connection to the incident, nor shall the payment of a redemption fee protect the owner, keeper, harborer or other person who has assumed responsibility for the dog from prosecution for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 479-09; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.230 - Redemption of impounded animals - conditions. 
A.  The owner or other person having a legal right to the possession of any animal which has been impounded pursuant to this chapter, unless there are pending charges of animal care under Section 6.04.300 of this Chapter, shall have the right to redeem the animal from the shelter facility during the time that the animal is kept there, and until the animal is disposed of pursuant to this Chapter. The person seeking to redeem the animal shall satisfy the code enforcement officer or other person lawfully in charge of the redemption that such person is in fact the owner of the animal, or is the person having the lawful right to the possession of the animal. 
B.  As an additional condition to the right to redeem, the owner, keeper, harborer or other person who has assumed the responsibility for a dog or cat not licensed must, within seven (7) days of the date of redemption, provide proof of a vaccination certificate for the dog or cat and an animal license. Noncompliance may subject such person to receive another summons or penalty assessment for violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 273-04; Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 816-91; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.240 - Livestock - impoundment conditions. 
    Any livestock found running at large in the City shall be impounded by the code enforcement officer, police officer or other designated officer of the City. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.250 - Livestock - holding following impoundment. 
A.  All livestock so impounded by the officer under Section 6.04.240 above shall be kept and controlled by the officer until the owner, or such other person who shall be legally entitled to possession of such livestock, shall call for the same and take control thereof. 
B.  In the event no authorized person takes possession of the impounded livestock within twenty-four (24) hours after the same shall have been impounded by such officer, then the State Board of Stock Inspection Commissioners, or an authorized brand inspector representing said board having authority to move such livestock to a safe and practical place within the immediate vicinity, to be held during a legal advertising period, will be notified, and the livestock will be released to such authority. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.260 - (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1126-98). 
6.04.270 - Impoundment - disposition of unredeemed animals. 
    Any animal which has been impounded at the shelter facility and not redeemed may be adopted out or disposed of in a humane manner by the Northern Colorado Animal League no less than seventy-two (72) hours after 12:00 a.m. of the day the animal was impounded in accordance with the shelter's policy. 
(Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.280 - Impoundment - records required. 
    The code enforcement officer or other person lawfully in charge of the impounding, shall make or cause to be made a written record of all circumstances pertaining to the impounding of animals. Such records shall be in sufficient detail so that the provisions of this Chapter for multiple violations can be enforced. 
(Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.100) 
6.04.290 - Fees - amendment authorized when. 
    Whenever this Chapter imposes or requires that a fee be paid, as distinguished from any penalty that may be imposed pursuant to Section 6.04.340 of this Chapter, the City Council may amend the amount of such fees from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.190) 
6.04.300 - Animal care - unlawful activities designated. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, keeper, harborer or any other person to: 
A.  Fail to provide adequate food and water, proper shelter, veterinary services, and with humane care or treatment necessary to maintain the good health of the animal and to prevent suffering by the animal, while such animal is in his or her custody for more than twelve (12) consecutive hours; 
B.  Commit or cause to be committed any act of cruelty, harassment or torture to any animal, or to cause such animal to be wounded, mutilated, strangled or killed, unless such act is necessary to defend a person or other animal from immediate attack or as otherwise authorized by law or ordinance. Nothing in Subsection B above will be interpreted to prohibit the act of humane euthanasia at the direction of a licensed Doctor of Veterinary Medicine; 
C.  Abandon an animal; in this context, abandon means to leave the animal unattended for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours; 
D.  Confine any animal within a parked, closed vehicle, without allowing cross ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering heat exhaustion, heat stroke or death. Any code enforcement officer, police officer, or other designated officer for the City, observing any animal suffering from violation of this Subsection, may enter the vehicle, leaving written notice in the vehicle, and shall impound such animal to protect its own well-being. Any such officer making an entry into any vehicle for the purpose of this Subsection is immune from suit or liability, criminal or civil, for, caused by or arising out of such entry; 
E.  Take and deliver to the animal shelter or elsewhere an animal, not his or her own, from any enclosed lot, premises or other building, not his or her own, unless he or she shall have first received permission from the owner of such animal, as well as otherwise authorized by this Chapter; 
F.  Without the consent of the owner, release any dog from restraint, except when necessary to preserve the life of such animal; provided, however, when an animal has been released under such necessity, the person making such release shall immediately inform the code enforcement officer that he has done so or, in the alternative, shall immediately return the animal to the custody of its owner; 
G.  Tie or otherwise physically fasten any animal to any object on a public way, or so near to a public way that the animal may go upon the same, and to leave the animal and depart the immediate vicinity thereof; 
H.  Tie or otherwise physically fasten any animal in such a manner as to create an immediate physical danger to the well-being of the animal; 
I.  Expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that a reasonable person would know or should know that such substance would probably cause animals to be attracted thereto, eat thereof, and be poisoned thereby; provided, however, this Subsection does not make unlawful the poisoning of rats or mice with commercial rat poison mixed with vegetable substances; 
J.  Set any type of steel jaw trap, or any other inhumane trap which, by its nature, may kill or maim any animal, including a human; provided, however, this Subsection does not prohibit the use of common rat and mouse traps; 
K.  Keep, maintain, harbor or possess in any one household, a combined total of more than four (4) pet or fowl animals within the City. A litter of the pet animals or fowl animals lawfully harbored may be kept until such time that a natural weaning period, as determined by the City, has expired. A household located on one (1) acre or more of land may have a total of twelve (12) fowl animals, provided an open area of at least one hundred (100) square feet per animal is provided and such open area is located at least fifty (50) feet from any residence, business or other building intended for human habitation. A request for a variance may be made to the regulations of this Subsection. Such request must be submitted on a petition form prescribed by the City and accompanied by the submittal fee established by City Council by resolution. The petition form shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a letter explaining why the variance should be granted. Additional supporting evidence, such as letters of support from surrounding property owners, photographs and maps, may be submitted and may be required by the City. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and make the final decision to grant the requested variance, grant a variance with a lesser number of animals than the request, or deny the variance. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the premises at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. At the public hearing, the City Council shall base its decision on the following criteria: 
1.  The variance is in harmony with the intent and purposes of this Chapter and with other relevant City ordinances; and 
2.  The variance will not result in damage to adjoining properties, nor an unreasonable amount of noise or smell, and will not otherwise be materially detrimental to the public welfare; and 
3.  The variance is appropriate, given the size, shape, topography and/or location of the property upon which the animals are to be kept. 
The City Council may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate for the protection of persons and property upon the granting of any such variance. The variance, if approved, shall be granted by resolution. In the event of violation of any of the conditions, safeguards or limitations imposed, or to the extent that such variance may constitute a nuisance, pursuant to notice and hearing, the City Council may revoke the variance granted. In the event that the homeowner has received more than two (2) convictions in Municipal Court under Chapter 6 of this Code, there shall be a presumption of a nuisance. 
L.  Cause, instigate, encourage or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals, or between animals and humans; 
M.  At any time within the corporate limits of this City, frighten, shoot at, wound, kill, capture, ensnare, trap, net, poison or in any other manner kill, injure or molest any wild birds, or injure the nest, eggs or young of such birds; provided, however, that this Section does not apply to English or European house sparrows or starlings; and provided further, the Chief of Police has authority to grant a permit for when, in his or her opinion, they have become a threat to the health and safety of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 372-06; Ord. 354-05; Ord. 256-04; Ord. 816-91; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.120) 
6.04.310 - Protective custody for animals receiving inhumane treatment. 
A.  Any animal found receiving inhumane treatment, as described in Section 6.04.300 below, may be removed and impounded at the expense of the owner by the code enforcement officer, a police officer or other designated officer of the City. 
B.  Any animal whose life reasonably appears to be endangered may be so removed and impounded, whether or not in the presence of its owner. 
C.  Impoundment under this Section shall not exceed twenty (20) days, unless there is a court order providing otherwise, after which such animal may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.04.270 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 273-04; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.130) 
6.04.320 - Enforcement - obstructing an officer prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly resist, oppose, obstruct or interfere with any officer from enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, or by threats or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer in the discharge of his or her official duty. 
(Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.150) 
6.04.330 - Damaging impoundment facility prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to break open, destroy or damage any door, gate, fence or enclosure used by the City as an animal shelter or impoundment facility, or to take or attempt to take therefrom any animal impounded therein without having approval from the shelter operator. 
(Ord. 1126-98; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.180) 
6.04.340 - Violation - penalty. 
A.  The violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute an offense against the City, and subject the offender to punishment as follows: 
Minimum Maximum First Offense $25.00 $2,650.00 Second Offense $50.00 $2,650.00 Third Offense $75.00 $2,650.00  
B.  The minimum fines set forth shall be mandatory and shall not be suspended for any reason. Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and is punishable accordingly. Any person charged with a fourth offense shall be required to appear in Municipal Court. For a conviction under Section 6.04.300 of this Chapter, the offender may be punished with a fine of up to two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) and imprisonment of up to one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 273-04; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 703 88; Ord. 549 82; prior code 7.04.200) 
CHAPTER 6.05 - Prairie Dogs 

6.05.010 - Prairie dogs; nuisance defined. 
(a)  As used in this Chapter, the term prairie dog shall mean any of the social, burrowing, North American rodents comprising the genus cynomys of the squirrel family (sciuridae), characterized by a stout body with brown fur, short legs, short tail and barking cries. 
(b)  Prairie dogs are declared to be detrimental and injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and property, both public and private, of the City and they are determined and declared a public nuisance. 
(c)  Nothing contained in Subsection (b) above shall be construed or intended to include within the definition of a public nuisance any animal designated by a state or federal agency as an endangered animal under state or federal law. 
(d)  Nothing contained in Subsection (b) above shall be construed or intended to authorize the destruction or removal of an animal declared a public nuisance in violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation related to any threatened or endangered animal. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.020 - Control of infestation and encroachment; defined. 
(a)  No owner of any lots, blocks or parcels of land area or fraction thereof within the City, nor any tenant or agent in charge thereof, shall allow or permit said lots, blocks or parcels of land area or fraction thereof to become or remain infested with prairie dogs or prairie dog nests or burrows; provided, however, that where such nests or burrows are necessary for the maintenance of wildlife listed as threatened or endangered by state or federal law, rule or regulation, such nests or burrows may be maintained in accordance with such state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Section, infestation shall mean the presence of more than one (1) prairie dog burrow or nest per nine hundred (900) square feet of land surface area. 
(c)  For the purpose of this Section, encroachment shall mean the presence of one (1) or more prairie dog burrow or nest within twenty-five (25) feet of any curb or back of a sidewalk adjacent to a public street. 
(d)  The administrative authority shall have the right to inspect all property within the City on both public and private property to determine if an infestation or encroachment of prairie dogs exists. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.030 - Nuisance; abatement; notice. 
(a)  If an owner of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the City, or any tenant or agent in possession or in charge thereof, fails or refuses to remove or eliminate prairie dog infestations or encroachments of prairie dog nests or burrows as required in Section 6.05.020 above within thirty (30) days after being served notice to do so by an agent or employee of the City, the City may have the prairie dogs, nests or burrows removed and abated by an employee of the City or by a private firm or individual as provided in this Section and charge the cost thereof to such owner, tenant or agent, together with an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) plus twenty percent (20%) for inspection, administration and other costs. In the event that the Health Department or other public health official identifies the presence of a communicable disease, abatement shall occur within such shorter time as specified by the Health Department or official. 
(b)  Issuance of notice of violation. The administrative authority may inspect any lot, block or parcel of ground within the City upon receipt of a complaint, from referral by another City department or upon observation during the normal course of duties, concerning prairie dog infestation or encroachment. If, after inspection, the administrative authority determines that a violation exists, a notice of violation may be issued to the owner, tenant or agent of the lot, block or parcel, and the notice of violation may be issued without prior notice. The notice shall also specify that all procedures and acts undertaken to abate said nuisance shall conform to all municipal, state and federal law and regulations governing the taking, trapping, killing or disposal of wildlife and wildlife nests and burrows. 
(c)  In addition to charges for abatement, failure to comply with requirements of this Chapter also constitutes a Code infraction and is subject to the penalty provisions of Chapters 1.16 and 1.17 of this Code. 
(d)  If it is determined that employees of the City are not available to abate the nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Section, the City may solicit bids from properly licensed individuals or firms to undertake the necessary abatement, retaining the lowest qualified bidder to accomplish the abatement. 
(e)  In the event that a private person or firm accomplished the abatement as provided in this Section, the City shall provide a copy of the lowest bid with the notice for payment served on any owner, tenant or agent as provided in Section 6.05.040 below. 
(f)  In order to encourage the provision of services to protect the public health and safety and to allow the City to allocate its limited fiscal resources, nothing contained in this Section shall be intended or construed to impose any duty of care, liability or obligation on the City or any of its employees or agents where none otherwise existed. 
(g)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed or intended to authorize the destruction or removal of an animal declared a public nuisance in violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation related to any threatened or endangered animal. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.040 - Payment of abatement costs; notice. 
    In the event the City undertakes the abatement as provided in Section 6.05.030 above, a written notice for payment shall be provided to the owner, tenant or agent in charge of the lot, block or parcel upon which the nuisance was abated. This notice shall be sent by certified mail and contain the amount owed and a statement that it shall be paid to the City of Evans within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the same by the City of Evans. A copy of the lowest bid as provided in Section 6.05.030(d) above shall be attached. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.050 - Failure to pay assessment. 
    Failure to pay an assessment as provided for in Section 6.05.040 above within thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against the lot, block or parcel of land upon which abatement occurred and shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessment, and the same may be certified at any time after such failure to so pay by the City of Evans to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent (10%) penalty to defray the cost of collection as provided by the laws of the State. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.060 - Nuisance abatement to conform to law. 
    Any person, firm business or contractor undertaking to remove, eliminate or abate any nuisance as provided under Sections 6.05.020 through 6.05.040 above shall comply with all municipal, state and federal regulations and laws governing the taking, trapping, killing and disposal of wildlife and wildlife nests or dens. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
6.05.070 - Sanctions. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or performs any unlawful act defined by this Chapter, any person who fails to perform any action required by this Chapter or any person who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order given pursuant to this Chapter commits a Code infraction and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.17 and sanctions set forth in Chapter 1.16 and 1.17 of this Code. 
6.05.080 - Enforcement. 
    The employees of the City shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the City for inspection and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
( Ord. 670-17 ,  1, 2017) 
TITLE 7 - Civil Emergencies 
CHAPTER 7.04 - Disaster Emergency Management Ordinance 

7.04.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "disaster emergency management ordinance" of the city. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or the manager's designee. 
    Coordinator means the person appointed by the city manager to head the office of emergency management. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury and loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, nuclear incident, epidemic, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, aircraft crash, riot, chemical or oil spill or other contamination of air or water requiring immediate action to avert danger or damage or any other declared disaster that requires the aid and assistance of outside, local, state or federal agencies. 
    Disaster emergency services means services designed to carry out the basic essential government functions of maintaining public peace, health and safety during a disaster. 
    Disaster forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of the city departments, boards and commissions and in addition it includes mutual aid agencies, state and federal agencies, public entities, private enterprises, volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by anyone or requested by the city. 
    Disaster volunteer means any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the director of the office of disaster emergency services assigned and authorized to participate in disaster emergency operations of the city without remuneration. 
    Emergency means a threat to the health, safety or welfare of an area of the city or a group of citizens, but not of such magnitude and severity as to constitute a disaster, and includes but is not limited to fire, flood, water and power shortages, explosions, contaminations and civil disturbances involving three (3) or more persons acting together accompanied by violence or threat of imminent force. 
    Regulations means proclamations, rules, standard operating procedures and other disaster and emergency procedures deemed essential to disaster planning and coordination of disaster emergency services. 
    Volunteer means anyone contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the disaster emergency services of the city without remuneration. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.030 - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any person performing services during the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.031 - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of the city council to ensure that the basic government functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety are provided and to effectively deal with any disaster that may occur within the city by ensuring the readiness and the complete and efficient utilization of all available resources. 
B.  It is the intent of this chapter to establish an office of emergency management which will be the coordinating agency for all disaster planning and will be the instrument through which the city manager may exercise his or her authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him or her by the city Charter and local ordinances. 
C.  This chapter shall not relieve any city department of its official responsibilities or authority given to it in the city Charter or by ordinance, nor shall it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency for relief in disaster emergency. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.032 - Organization. 
A.  City manager. The city manager is authorized and directed to establish an office of emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the services and resources of existing departments within the city. The city manager shall be the coordinator of the office of emergency management and shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operations. 
B.  Appointment of coordinator. The city manager shall appoint a coordinator of the office of emergency management who shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the city manager and who may be otherwise employed by the city. Upon appointment, the coordinator shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager and shall be charged with the duties, responsibilities and authority contained in this chapter. Subject to the approval of the city manager, the coordinator may appoint such deputies and other administrative assistants as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the office. 
C.  Cooperation. The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards and commissions shall participate in disaster planning activities. Responsibilities assigned to a city department shall be similar to the normal duties of the department. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.033 - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The city manager is responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the disaster activities in the city and shall ensure that the Coordinator of the office of emergency management performs the following duties: 
1.  Develops a comprehensive disaster plan delineating measures to be implemented by the city to prevent a disaster or to be used by the city during a disaster or to direct relief and recovery efforts after a disaster has occurred; 
2.  Coordinates municipal functions, including but not limited to firefighting, police, medical, health, rescue, engineering, warning, communications, radiological monitoring services, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare, temporary shelter, emergency transportation, debris removal, temporary restoration of public utility services and any other functions related to public protection, together with all activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and delivery of disaster services; 
3.  Coordinates the activities of city departments with private and other public agencies cooperating in the disaster emergency program; 
4.  Sponsors and carries out instructions and training of municipal and private support groups in order to secure a unified, balanced and coordinated program; 
5.  Negotiates on behalf of the city with other municipalities and governmental entities to work out mutual aid agreements for reciprocal assistance in disaster situations; 
6.  Negotiates on behalf of the city with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for the disaster operations and designates suitable buildings as public shelters; 
7.  Develops a shelter plan and appoints and trains shelter managers; 
8.  Identifies, registers, appoints, trains and supervises volunteers who may be called upon from time to time to assist and supplement city departments; 
9.  Conducts exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the disaster plan; 
10.  Submits to the city council an annual report which shall include a summary of the past year's activities; 
11.  Ensures that current copies of the disaster plan are routinely provided to affected city employees and officials; and 
12.  Assumes such authority and conducts such activity as the city manager may direct to promote and execute the disaster plan. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.034 - Disaster plan. 
A.  Adoption. A comprehensive disaster plan shall be adopted and maintained by ordinance of the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager. When approved it shall be the duty of all city departments to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and shall have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined in this chapter, has been declared. 
B.  Positions. The city manager shall prescribe in the disaster plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his or her own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the director a current list of three (3) persons as successors to his or her position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
C.  Responsibilities of department heads. Each department head assigned responsibility in the disaster plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned city employees and volunteers. Each department head shall formulate the operational plan for his or her service which, when approved by the city council, shall be an annex to and part of the disaster plan. 
D.  Amendments. Amendments to the disaster plan may be submitted to the director. If approved, the coordinator will submit the amendments to the city council with recommendations for their approval. 
E.  Services for persons outside of government. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the coordinator is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be enrolled as volunteers in cooperation with heads of the city departments affected. 
F.  Authority of city manager. Some of the duties described in this section will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by the director, but the responsibility and authority stems from and remains with the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.035 - Disaster powers and authority. 
[A.  Reserved.] 
B.  Powers of city manager. The city manager shall have the power to verbally declare that a state of disaster exists, when in his or her opinion a disaster has occurred or the threat of a disaster is imminent. The declaration of a state of disaster shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring it to the attention of the general public. 
C.  Duration of state of disaster. The state of disaster shall continue until the city manager finds that the threat of danger has passed or the disaster has been dealt with to the extent that disaster conditions no longer exist and terminates the state of disaster. No state of disaster may continue for longer than seven (7) days unless renewed by the consent of the majority of the city council. The city council may terminate by motion a state of disaster at any time, whereupon the city manager must issue a proclamation ending the state of disaster. 
D.  Proclamation of state of disaster. The proclamation of disaster shall be prepared in written form and shall describe the nature of the disaster, the area threatened, the conditions which have brought it about and the conditions that would make possible the termination of the state of disaster. The written proclamation of disaster shall be signed by the city manager as soon as reasonably possible in light of the circumstances created by the disaster. Such proclamation shall be disseminated to the public by proper publication. The issuance of a proclamation declaring a state of disaster shall automatically empower the city manager to exercise any and all of the disaster powers contained in this chapter and shall activate all relevant portions of the disaster emergency plan. The city council may convene to perform its legislative powers as the situation demands and shall receive reports relative to disaster operations. Nothing in this chapter shall abridge or curtail the powers of the city council. 
E.  Promulgation of regulations. During any period when a disaster proclamation is in effect, the city manager may promulgate such regulations as he or she deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of disaster forces or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city; 
2.  Regulating the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster; 
3.  Declaring a public curfew; 
4.  Temporarily seizing any nonresident building for the purpose of providing temporary shelter for displaced disaster victims; Closing or regulating the business hours of any commercial establishment in the city when such closing or regulation is in the public interest; 
5.  Prohibiting the sale and distribution of any product, item or materials when such prohibition is in the public interest; 
6.  Seizing any food, clothing, water or medical supplies necessary to sustain displaced disaster victims; and 
7.  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
    Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority in this subsection will be given widespread circulation by disseminating the regulations to newspaper, radio and television media. Violation of these regulations will be subject to the penalties provided for in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.36 - Declaration of emergency. 
A.  An emergency may be declared by the city manager in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.  The city manager shall have the power to verbally declare that a state of emergency exists, when in his or her opinion an emergency has occurred or the threat of an emergency is imminent. The declaration of a state of emergency shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring it to the attention of the general public. The written proclamation of emergency shall be signed by the city manager as soon as reasonably possible in light of the circumstances created by the emergency. The city manager shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of putting the emergency measures into effect. 
2.  The emergency and proclamation shall remain in effect only so long as, in the opinion of the city manager, emergency powers are necessary to be invoked for the health, safety or welfare of the residents of or property in the city. 
3.  The emergency shall be terminated by the city manager by a written proclamation stating that the emergency situation theretofore found to exist is no longer a condition that threatens the health, safety or welfare of residents of or property in the city. 
4.  The emergency proclamation may activate in writing any relevant provisions of the disaster emergency plan, except that the disaster emergency powers shall not be invoked for an emergency. 
5.  In addition to any other extraordinary powers the city manager may have to deal with the emergency, the city manager may exercise the following powers by the emergency proclamation: 
a.  Order the closing of all retail malt, vinous and spirituous liquor outlets and all fermented malt beverage outlets and order the closing of all private clubs wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted. 
b.  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of any gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
c.  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments whose principal business activity is the sale or distribution and dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible materials. 
d.  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever and order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof which engage in the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms and ammunition. 
e.  Designate certain areas of the city as being restricted against entry therein by any unauthorized persons, except bona fide residents living or working within the restricted area. 
f.  Declare a public curfew during such hours as set forth in the proclamation prohibiting all persons, except those expressly authorized, from being upon the public streets or in any public or private place in the city. 
g.  Establish a communications headquarters for the dissemination of all public information, which shall be the official headquarters for any public report relating to the emergency. 
h.  Such other orders which in the sole discretion of the city manager are necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
B.  The powers enumerated in subsection A. of this section shall be in addition to any other power or authority existing by virtue of the Charter or ordinances of the city. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.37 - Conflicting legislation. 
    At all times when the order, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
7.04.38 - Applicability of state law. 
    The Colorado Disaster Emergency Act of 1992 (C.R.S.  24-32-2101 et seq.), as amended, shall govern the implementation of the duties, powers, immunities and other provisions set forth in this chapter to the extent applicable. 
( Ord. No. 635-15, 2015 ) 
TITLE 8 - Health & Safety 
CHAPTER 8.04 - Refuse Collection 

8.04.010 - Title for citation. 
    This Chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Refuse Collection Code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this Chapter as "this Code." 
(Ord. 1146-99, 1999; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Administrative authority means and is construed to be the City Manager or his or her designated representative. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    City-licensed hauler means any person, firm or corporation licensed by the City to operate a business of collection, transporting or removing refuse, garbage or ashes within the City, in accordance with this Code. 
    Community facilities means and consists of churches, schools, or other noncommercial facilities, as defined by the City's zoning ordinance. 
    Garbage means all rejected or waste foods, fruit, kitchen or table refuse, swill, offal and any refuse, and decaying animal or vegetable matter not unfit for feed for swine. 
    Multifamily residence means a building occupied by two (2) or more families living independent of each other in separate units, but not including hotels or motels. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.030 - Applicability of provisions. 
    The provisions of this Code shall apply to all areas, territory, property, vacant lots and buildings within the City. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.040 - Enforcement - administrative authority powers and duties. 
A.  The administrative authority is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code. The administrative authority shall maintain public office hours necessary to effectively administer the provisions of this Code and amendments thereto, and shall examine, observe, inspect and check all property in the City for violations of this Code. 
B.  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the administrative authority may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed by this Code, excluding living quarters. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.050 - License and bond - required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to collect, transport or remove refuse, garbage or ashes within the City without first obtaining a license. 
A.  Applications for a license to operate a business of collecting, transporting or removing refuse, garbage or ashes shall be filed with the City Clerk and issued by the City Clerk upon approval. 
B.  There is assessed an annual license fee for each person, firm or corporation maintaining or operating a business of collecting, transporting or removing refuse, garbage or ashes within the City. Such fee is established by City Council by resolution. There shall be no pro rata of the license fee when issued for part of the year; each such license shall expire on December 31st of each year. 
C.  The licensee shall execute and deposit with the City clerk a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000), such bond to be conditioned that all work performed by the licensee, or under his or her supervision, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and laws and ordinances of the City, and that he or she will pay all fines and penalties properly imposed upon him or her for violation of the provisions of this Chapter and laws and ordinances of the City, and to save the City harmless from damages arising from the workmanship or negligence of the licensee. All bonds required under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire on the 31st day of December next succeeding. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 307 3, 1975) 
8.04.060 - Collection by unauthorized haulers prohibited. 
A.  The City, by and through its duly authorized agents, employees, contractors or City-licensed haulers, shall be the sole agency for the collection and disposal of refuse, and no person except such duly authorized agents, employees, contractors or City-licensed haulers shall collect or dispose of any refuse, whether his or her own or another's, within the City. Nothing in this Code shall relieve any contractor or hauler of the obligation of cleaning up premises after completion of his or her contract. 
B.  Nothing in this Code shall prevent an individual from hauling his or her own waste material, provided that it is properly disposed of in conformity with this Code. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533-81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.070 - Vehicles - type and equipment. 
A.  Every truck or vehicle used by a licensed hauler or individual for the collection, removal or transportation of refuse, garbage or ashes along the streets and alleys of the City shall be of the packer type variety, and shall be equipped with a tight metal lining and side frames, and with a flameproof tarpaulin or other cover so attached to such vehicle so as to prevent the loss of any of the contents therefrom. 
B.  Every vehicle used by a City-licensed hauler for the collection, removal or transportation of refuse, garbage or ashes within the City shall have affixed thereto or located within the vehicle a copy of the City license. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.080 - Collection service - provided by City. 
    The City or its agents, contractors or City-licensed haulers shall furnish refuse collection service as provided in this Code. The City Council may enter into a nonexclusive contract or agreement with any contractors or City-licensed haulers for the collection and disposal of refuse within the City, and issued by the City Clerk upon approval. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.090 - Use of system required - exceptions. 
A.  A refuse collection system shall be provided by the City or its contractor to all residences, community facilities and industrial and commercial establishments who use and provide thirty-gallon containers and require only weekly collection, except those who qualify and obtain an exemption from City services as provided in this Code. All others shall be served by the City-licensed collectors except those persons obtaining a permit as provided in this Code. 
B.  The City shall not compel industrial or commercial establishments, community facilities or multifamily residences of four (4) or more units to use or pay user fees for refuse collection services provided by the City or its contractor in preference to those services provided by a private person or hauler. 
C.  Any owner or operator of an industrial or commercial establishment, community facility or multifamily residence of four (4) or more units may exempt such establishment from City refuse collection services and service fees; however, such exemption shall not affect the obligation of the owner or operator to remove refuse from such establishment, facility or residence in accordance with this Code. 
D.  Any owner or tenant of a single family or multifamily residence of three (3) or less units may use another City-licensed hauler in lieu of refuse collection services provided by the City; however, such exemption shall not affect the obligation of the owner or tenant to pay the City refuse collection charges as provided for in Section 8.04.100 below, or to remove refuse from such residence in accordance with this Code. 
E.  Each trailer or mobile home unit located within a mobile home park shall be classified as an individual single-family unit, and therefore shall be serviced by the City collection system. In the alternative, the owner or operator of a mobile home park operation may elect to classify the entire park operation as a commercial establishment and thereby qualify for exemption from City collection services and service fees. Such exemption, however, shall not affect the obligation of the owner or operator to remove refuse from such mobile home park in accordance with this Code. 
F.  Applications for exemption to refuse collection service provided by the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.100 - Charges - establishment and enforcement. 
A.  The City Council shall, by resolution, establish charges for collection service provided by the City or its contractors under this Code, and prescribe the time and manner of payment of such charges, and adopt measures designed to enforce the payment thereof such as, in their discretion, are necessary or desirable. Such charges and procedures, when adopted, shall be of the same force and effect as if incorporated in this Section. 
B.  The charge for City collection of refuse will be made at the same time as the charge for the water utility service offered and furnished by the City, and such refuse charge shall be due and payable at the same time and place as the charge for the water utility service is due and payable. 
C.  The charge for City refuse collection and the charge for water utility service are hereby declared to be parts of one (1) debt to the City insofar as the same affect any one (1) customer or consumer, and the refusal or failure to pay any part of such debt for any monthly period of service, in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the City Council, shall be sufficient cause for discontinuing water utility service and/or refuse collection. 
D.  The amount of charges for refuse collection service provided by the City shall be a lien upon the property served until the same is paid. In case of failure to pay the established charges for collection service by the owner or person having the occupancy, control or management of any premises, within thirty (30) days after the time prescribed for payment of such charges by the City Council, the City Clerk may certify such charges as assessed to the County Treasurer, to be placed on such tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by the laws of the State. 
(Ord. 1146-99, 1999; Ord. 533 81, 1981; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.110 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  The City Council shall promulgate rules and regulations relating to the manner of preparing and accumulating refuse and waste material for collection; the type and kind of containers to be used for such accumulation; the manner of, use of and care for such containers; the location of pickup points, procedures, schedules and such other rules and regulations as, in their discretion, are necessary or desirable in the interest of maintaining efficiency and sanitary conditions in the refuse collection system and service within the City; and such rules and regulations, when promulgated, shall be of the same force and effect as if incorporated in this Section. 
B.  Every occupant of any house, hotel, restaurant, store building, flat, apartment or tenement in the City where persons reside, board, lodge or stay, or where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or served, shall provide and at all times maintain therefor in good condition one (1) or more sufficient, suitable container or receptacles for garbage. Hotels, restaurants and public places shall have sufficient receptacles to supply their needs adequately. Such garbage receptacles shall be watertight, made of substantial metal or plastic material, with an easy, close-fitting cover, and have a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons. All persons keeping or using garbage cans shall keep the same in sound condition and clean, and shall wash the same as necessary, so as to ensure they will not attract flies or be filthy or ill-smelling. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.120 - Refuse accumulations and sanitary facilities - property owner or lessee responsibility. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person, whether owner, lessee or renter of any vacant lot, building or premises, including any place of business, hotel, restaurant, dwelling house, apartment, tenement, mobile home or any other establishment, at all times, to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of refuse other than ordinarily attendant upon the use for which such premises are legally intended. Any such accumulation shall constitute a nuisance and a violation of this Code. 
B.  Every owner remains liable for violations of responsibilities imposed upon him or her by this Code, even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his or her building or premises, and even though the owner has an agreement imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this Code. 
C.  Every owner shall, where required by this Code, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, or the pollution of air or water. 
D.  Every occupant shall be responsible for keeping his or her dwelling, structures or premises which he or she occupies and controls in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, and shall dispose of all his or her rubbish, refuse, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by this Code. No person shall in any manner throw, place, scatter, deposit or bury any refuse in or upon any public street, alley or other public place, or upon his or her own premises or the premises of another. 
E.  No person shall burn combustible rubbish or garbage in any ash pit or can so as to produce odor or smoke therefrom. 
F.  No person shall molest, remove, handle or otherwise disturb any refuse containers, bags or baskets or contents, for servicing by the collector; provided that this Section shall not apply to the owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of the residence or dwelling so placing the containers and contents. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.130 - Refuse from business establishments. 
A.  Discarded automobile parts, refuse of all kinds, wool, hides, junkyard refuse, and packing house or slaughterhouse refuse shall be removed periodically from such respective establishments by the proprietor so that the premises are clean and orderly at all times. 
B.  Silt and similar deposits from automobile washracks shall be removed to an approved disposal site by the establishment creating such deposits. 
C.  Any accumulation of refuse that is highly explosive or inflammable, which might endanger life or property, shall be removed to such place as required by state law, such removal to be handled by the establishments therefor. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
8.04.140 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1146-99; Ord. 533 81; prior code 6.12) 
CHAPTER 8.12 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 466-09 
CHAPTER 8.14 - Regulation of Trees and Vegetation 

8.14.010 - Parkway defined. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, parkway means that portion of a public street or highway right-of-way not paved or otherwise set apart for roadway or sidewalk use. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 738-89) 
8.14.020 - Permit required. 
    No person shall plant trees or woody plants on the public parkway without a tree planting permit. Such permit may be obtained from the Department of Parks and Recreation. All landscaping and planting upon public rights-of-way must be approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 738-89) 
8.14.030 - Trees at intersections. 
    Planting of trees and woody plants at intersections shall be located so as to comply with Chapter 15.58 of this Code concerning site distances. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 738-89) 
8.14.040 - Spacing of trees. 
A.  Trees shall be spaced at least thirty (30) feet apart within the public right-of-way. No trees shall be planted closer than five (5) feet from a driveway or alley or be planted in such a way so as to interfere with or obstruct any improvements such as traffic and street signs and signals, fire hydrants, overhead utility wires, street lights, utility poles and the like. 
B.  When a space of less than five (5) feet in width exists between the curb and the abutting property line, no trees or woody plants shall be planted on the public area involved. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 738-89) 
8.14.050 - Species of trees. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant any tree within a parkway of a species not listed on the Approved Landscape Planting List of the City of Evans Parks and Recreation Department. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to remove any such tree from the parkway adjacent to his or her property upon notification from the City. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 738-89) 
8.14.060 - Violations. 
    Violations of this Chapter shall be punishable as described in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 738 89) 
CHAPTER 8.16 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 466-09 
CHAPTER 8.18 - Control of Smoking[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 622-15, adopted June 15, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 8.18,  8.18.010-8.18.060, and enacted a new Ch. 8.18 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 427-08; Ord. 374-06; Ord. 1075-97. 

8.18.10 - Legislative declaration. 
    The City of Evans hereby finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the people of this City to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and electronic smoking devices in most indoor areas open to the public, public meetings, food service establishments, places of employment, and certain outdoor recreation areas. The City further finds and determines that a balance should be struck between the health concerns of nonconsumers of tobacco and nicotine products and the need to minimize unwarranted governmental intrusion into, and regulation of, private spheres of conduct and choice with respect to the use or nonuse of tobacco and nicotine products in certain designated public areas and in private places. Therefore, the City hereby declares that the purpose of this Chapter is to preserve and improve the health, comfort, and environment of the people of this City by limiting exposure to tobacco smoke and vapor created from the use of electronic smoking devices. 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
8.18.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Auditorium means the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto. 
    Bar means any indoor area that is operated and licensed under Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S., primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Cigar-tobacco bar means a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31, 2005, generated at least five (5) percent or more of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines. In any calendar year after December 31, 2005, a bar that fails to generate at least five (5) percent of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the one-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors shall not be defined as a "cigar-tobacco bar" and shall not thereafter be included in the definition regardless of sales figures. 
    Electronic smoking device means any electronically actuated device which in operation causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or other substance resulting in chemically altered human exhalation. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, a vaporizer, a vape pen, or under any similar product name or descriptor. The term "electronic smoking device" does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that has been specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
    Employee means any person who: 
(1)  Performs any type of work for benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit; or 
(2)  Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity. 
"Employee" includes every person described in this definition, regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit entity that employs one or more persons. "Employer" includes, without limitation, the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Entryway means the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted from this Section 8.18.040. "Entryway" also includes the area of public or private property within a specified radius outside of the doorway. The specified radius shall be fifteen feet. 
    Environmental tobacco smoke, ETS, or secondhand smoke means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke or a burning tobacco product, also known as "sidestream smoke," and smoke exhaled by the smoker. 
    Food service establishment means any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption. The terms includes, without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, and short-order cafes. 
    Indoor area means any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area. 
    Place of employment means any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer. 
    Public building means any building owned or operated by: 
(1)  The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; 
(2)  Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, a special district, an authority, a commission, or an agency; or 
(3)  Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of states or local government. 
    Public meeting means any meeting open to the public pursuant to Part 4 of Article 6 of Title 24, C.R.S., or any other law. 
    Smoke-free working area means an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited under this Chapter. 
    Smoking means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco. 
    Tobacco means cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, and periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe, or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. "Tobacco" also includes cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged for smoking. 
    Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
    Work area means an area in a place of employment where one (1) or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
8.18.030 - General smoking restrictions. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 8.18.040, and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in any indoor area or specified outdoor recreation areas, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Public meeting places; 
(b)  Elevators; 
(c)  Government-owned and or operated means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans, and trains; 
(d)  Taxicabs and limousines; 
(e)  Grocery stores; 
(f)  Gymnasiums; 
(g)  Jury waiting and deliberation rooms; 
(h)  Courtrooms; 
(i)  Child day care facilities; 
(j)  Health care facilities including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor's offices, and other health care related facilities; 
(k)  (I)  Any place of employment that is not exempted. 
(II)  In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted from this Chapter, such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental tobacco smoke. Every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental tobacco smoke. 
(l)  Food service establishments; 
(m)  Bars; 
(n)  Limited gaming facilities and any other facilities in which any gaming or gambling activity is conducted; 
(o)  Indoor sports arenas; 
(p)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(q)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and in at least seventy-five percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests; 
(r)  Bowling alleys; 
(s)  Billiard or pool halls; 
(t)  Facilities in which games of chance are conducted; 
(u)  The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and nursing homes, not including any resident's private residential quarters; 
(v)  Public buildings; 
(w)  Auditoria; 
(x)  Theaters; 
(y)  Museums; 
(z)  Libraries; 
(aa)  To the extend not otherwise provided in Section 25-14-103.5, C.R.S., public and non-public schools; 
(bb)  Other educational and vocational institutions; 
(cc)  The entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in paragraphs (a) to (bb) of this subsection; and 
(dd)  Within the entire fenced area of the Riverside Park Ball Fields. 
B.  A cigar-tobacco bar shall not expand its size or change its location from the size and location in which it existed as of December 31, 2005. A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one (1) conspicuous place and at least four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size stating: "Smoking allowed. Children under eighteen years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian." 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
8.18.040 - Exceptions to smoking restrictions. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except that this Chapter shall apply if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if any private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation; 
(2)  Limousines under private hire; 
(3)  A hotel or motel room rented to one (1) or more guests if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent; 
(4)  Any retail tobacco business; 
(5)  A cigar-tobacco bar; 
(6)  An airport smoking concession; 
(7)  The outdoor area of any business; 
(8)  A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is under the control of an employer that employs three or fewer employees; 
(9)  A private, non-residential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in Section 39-1-102, C.R.S., that has annual gross income of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
8.18.045 - Restrictions on use of electronic smoking devices. 
    The use of an electronic smoking device shall not be permitted and no person shall use an electronic smoking device at any location where smoking is prohibited in Section 8.18.030, subject to the exempted locations provided at Section 8.18.040. 
( Ord. No. 622-15, 2015 ) 
8.18.050 - Optional prohibitions. 
A.  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 8.18.030, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 8.18.040, may post signs prohibiting smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices. Such owner or manager may post signs providing smoking and non-smoking areas as well as areas where use of electronic smoking devices are permitted and areas where the use of electronic smoking devices are not permitted. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place, or the designated non-smoking portion thereof, in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in Section 8.18.030, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 8.18.040, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by Section 8.18.030(1)(k)(I), the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
8.18.060 - Unlawful acts-Penalty-Disposition of fines and surcharges. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of a premises subject to this Chapter to violate any provision of this Chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this Chapter. 
C.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 622-15,  1, 2015 ) 
CHAPTER 8.20 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 517-11 
CHAPTER 8.24 - Nuisances 

8.24.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this Chapter shall be to preserve and enhance property values within the City by requiring certain minimum standards of maintenance of property. This Chapter is not intended to replace or supplant any other requirements of this Code, as amended. Where conflicting provisions of the Code are found to exist, the more restrictive provision or the provision with the higher standard, shall govern. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to preclude legal action regarding nuisances under state or common law. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases below shall have the following meanings: 
    Brush shall mean a growth of bushes, shrubs or trees such as are growing without care, and shall include all cuttings from trees, shrubs and bushes, and high and rank shrubbery growth which may conceal forms of refuse. 
    Dirt pile earthen or other material or debris that is piled or stocked over thirty-six (36) inches in height as measured from the surrounding grade. 
    Hazardous trees shall include, but shall not be limited to, dead, dying, diseased or weakened trees and shrubs; dead, dying or weakened branches in otherwise healthy trees; shrubs and trees such as are growing wild and without care and maintenance; and trees and shrubs that obstruct the public right-of-way or official traffic control devices. 
    Inoperable vehicle shall mean a vehicle or trailer in a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, missing parts or equipment necessary to operate the vehicle or trailer safely and legally on a public right-of-way, including but not limited to any flat tires or any part of said vehicle being supported by jacks, blocks or other supports, or any vehicle or trailer lacking properly displayed current license plates. 
    Junk shall mean items that are outdoors and that are broken, discarded or not reasonably useable, including but not limited to boxes, crates, salvage materials, discarded fence posts, tires, motor vehicle bodies or parts, scrap metal, bedsprings, discarded furniture and all other household goods or appliances, used lumber and other similar objects. 
    Nuisance shall mean any thing, condition, or conduct that endangers or may endanger health and safety or environment, or that is unreasonably offensive or obnoxious, or that is detrimental to property or property value. Nuisance shall not include land uses lawfully conducted in accordance with the City's zoning designation for a property. Nuisance shall include immediate hazards, which may be abated without prior notice by the City. 
    Property shall mean any real estate, such as, but not limited to, lots and parcels. 
    Sidewalk shall mean areas within the public right-of-way improved with concrete or other such material as well as areas within a public right-of-way used as pedestrian walkways or capable of being so used, whether or not improved. 
    Trailer shall mean an object with wheels but without an engine and designed to be towed by a vehicle, including but not limited to travel trailers, trailer homes, boat trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers and trailers for hauling snowmobiles, motorcycles, etc. 
    Trash shall mean any material rejected or discarded, including but not limited to garbage, food waste, animal feces, paper, cans, bottles, glass, containers, rags, cloth or other materials common to household use or objects which may become a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes or vermin, or which give off unpleasant odors. 
    Vehicle shall mean any automobile, truck, tractor or motorcycle that originally contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time. 
    Weed shall mean any plant that meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  A plant of a species that is listed as a weed by the Colorado Department of Agricultural (any list, as amended); 
b.  A plant that aggressively invades or is detrimental to economic crops or native plant community; 
c.  A plant that is poisonous to livestock; 
d.  A plant that is a carrier of detrimental insects, diseases or parasites; 
e.  A plant that is detrimental, whether directly or indirectly, to the environmentally sound management of natural or agricultural ecosystems; 
f.  Useless, troublesome, or injurious plants, including all vegetation in excess of twelve (12) inches in height, but excluding flower garden plants, shrubbery and trees, vegetable garden plants, plots of grain plants, plants in pastures used for feed, fodder or forage, provided they are adequately weeded and maintained. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.030 - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its residents. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.040 - Violations and enforcement. 
    Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared public nuisances and shall be punishable as described in Chapters 1.16 and/or 1.17 of this Code. Compliance with this Code shall be enforced in accordance with said Chapters. Lack of or delay in enforcement of any provision of this Code shall not constitute a waiver of such provision. The City assumes no liability for any such violation. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.050 - Weeds and brush. 
    No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit weeds or brush to grow or remain on such property, or on that adjacent area between the property and adjacent sidewalks, streets or alleys. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.060 - Trash, junk and outside storage. 
A.  No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit the accumulation of trash or junk on such property, or on that adjacent area between the property and adjacent sidewalks, streets or alleys. All trash shall be contained in approved receptacles customarily used for such purpose. 
B.  No owner of any residential property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall permit the outdoor storage on such property of materials not customarily stored outdoors in residential neighborhoods, such as, but not limited to, construction materials, tires and household appliances, pickup campers, truck bed covers, upholstered furniture that is designed, manufactured and intended primarily for indoor use, if such materials, whether or not sheltered or covered or within a carport or other partially enclosed structure, are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley or from the ground level of abutting properties. The storage of materials within a garage or other fully enclosed structure shall not be considered outdoor storage for the purposes of this provision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, construction materials may be stored outdoors on residential property for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, if such materials are being used in the construction of a structure for which a building permit has been issued by the City, or for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, if such materials are being used for construction that does not require a building permit. 
C.  Trash or junk stored in/on a trailer or in a truck bed shall be fully covered and secured. No such trailer or truck with trash or junk shall be parked on the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.070 - Dirt piles and debris. 
A.  No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit dirt piles or debris to exist on such property, or on that adjacent area between the property and adjacent sidewalks, streets or alleys, except that dirt piles on private property resulting from the construction of a building shall be allowed until the building receives a certificate of occupancy, but in no case shall a dirt pile be allowed to remain in place for more than sixty (60) days. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit obstructions such as landscaping materials within public right-of-way or to allow obstructions to remain on any public right-of-way abutting or adjoining the property controlled, owned or occupied by such person. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.080 - Hazardous trees. 
A.  No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit tree branches or other growth to obstruct sidewalks below a height of eight (8) feet, or streets below a height of fifteen (15) feet. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, including that adjacent area between the property and adjacent sidewalks, streets or alleys, to remove immediately from said property any hazardous tree, including dead or diseased tree or tree branch, any tree or tree branch infested with insects that pose a hazard to other trees, or any obviously weakened tree or tree branch. Stumps of trees of species that commonly carry disease, stumps of diseased trees and stumps infested with insects that pose a hazard to other trees may be required to be removed as well. Failure to perform such removal is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.090 - For sale vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any owner of property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to allow or permit more than two (2) vehicles offered for sale or barter to remain on such property unless such property consists of a retail business enterprise in compliance with existing City zoning and business license regulations. 
8.24.100 - Inoperable vehicles. 
    No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit inoperable vehicles to exist on such property, except within an enclosed garage or other building and except as provided in this Section. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or their agent, conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing City zoning and business license regulations. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a parcel of property with one (1) inoperable vehicle that is being renovated or stored for the purpose of being renovated; provided, however, that such vehicle shall be screened with a fence of a minimum of six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be constructed of standard privacy fencing material that obscures the view of any inoperable vehicle or parts from adjacent right-of-way or property. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.110 - Snow on sidewalks. 
A.  No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit snow or ice to remain on sidewalks adjacent to such property. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to remove snow and ice from sidewalks adjacent such property within twenty-four (24) hours after the termination of the most recent snowfall. 
B.  It is unlawful to drag, shovel, deposit or otherwise move snow from private property onto public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.120 - Maintenance of fences. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to maintain any fencing or wall on such property in good structural condition and in good repair at all times, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the replacement of any broken or missing portions of such fences and paint or wood stain. Failure to perform such maintenance is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.130 - Property maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to maintain the exterior finish of all structures on such property in good structural condition and in good repair at all times, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, paint, siding, windows and roofing. Failure to perform such maintenance is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.24.140 - Other nuisances. 
    No owner of any property within the City, nor tenants or agents in charge thereof, shall allow or permit to exist on such property any nuisance, as defined herein. Failure to remove or cease operation of the cause of such nuisance is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
CHAPTER 8.26 - Removal of Graffiti Required 

8.26.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this Chapter shall be to preserve and enhance property values within the City by requiring prompt removal of graffiti from private property. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.26.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases below shall have the following meanings: 
    Graffiti shall mean any defacement of private property with any inscription, word, figure, sign, symbol, marking or design, by means of painting, marking, drawing, writing, etching or carving, by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife or any similar method, and which is visible from the public right-of-way or an adjacent property. Graffiti shall not include authorized signage or speech. 
    Property shall mean any real property, such as, but not limited to, lots and parcels, and structures on real property. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.26.030 - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.26.040 - Violations. 
    Violations of this Chapter shall be punishable as described in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
8.26.050 - Removal of graffiti required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property within the City, or tenants or agents in charge thereof, to remove any graffiti within forty-eight (48) hours of such defacement from such property. Failure to perform such removal is a violation of this Code and shall be punished and/or abated in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 466-09) 
TITLE 9 - Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
CHAPTER 9.04 - General Provisions 

9.04.010 - Applicability of provisions - terms referring to prohibited conduct. 
A.  Any person who does an act prohibited by the provisions of this Title, or who fails to do an act required to be done by the provisions of this Title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment within the limits prescribed by Section 9.36.010 of this Title. 
B.  The terms offense , violation , unlawful and misdemeanor , as used in this Title, are synonymous, and all refer to conduct prohibited or the failure to do acts required by this Title. 
C.  The provisions of this Title shall apply to any such prohibited or required conduct occurring, or required to occur, within the territorial limits of the City and upon real property owned by or under the exclusive control of the City. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.04.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are applicable to the determination of culpability requirements for offenses defined in this title. 
    Act means a bodily movement, and includes words and possession of property. 
    Child means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    City means the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    Conduct means an act or omission and its accompanying state of mind or, where relevant, a series of acts or omissions. 
    Criminal negligence . A person acts with criminal negligence when, through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, he or she fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Culpable mental state means intentionally or knowingly , or recklessly or with criminal negligence , as these terms are defined in this Chapter. 
    Intentionally. A person acts intentionally , with respect to a result or to conduct described by an ordinance defining an offense, when his or her conscious objective is to cause such result or to engage in such conduct. 
    Knowingly . A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by an ordinance defining an offense when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is of such nature, or that such circumstance exists. 
    Minor. See Child . 
    Omission means a failure to perform an act as to which a duty of performance is imposed by law. 
    Recklessly . A person acts recklessly when he or she consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Underage person mean any person under the age of twenty one years. 
    Voluntary act means an act performed consciously as a result of effort or determination, and includes the possession of property if the actor was aware of his or her physical possession or control thereof for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate it. 
(Ord. 519-11: 347 77) 
9.04.030 - Responsibility for offenses - defense conditions. 
A.  Impaired mental condition. Evidence of an impaired mental condition, though not legal insanity, may be offered in a proper case as bearing upon the capacity of the accused to form the specific intent, if such an intent is an element of the offense charged. 
B.  Intoxication. 
1.  Intoxication of the accused is not a defense to a criminal charge, except as provided in Subsection C below, but in any prosecution for an offense, evidence of intoxication of the defendant may be offered by the defendant when it is relevant to negative the existence of a specific intent, if such intent is an element of the crime charged. 
2.  Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute mental disease or defect, within the meaning of impaired mental condition in Subsection A above. 
3.  A person is not criminally responsible for his or her conduct if, by reason of intoxication that is not self-induced at the time he or she acts, he or she lacks capacity to conform his or her conduct to the requirements of the law. 
4.  Intoxication , as used in this Section, means a disturbance of mental or physical capacities resulting from the introduction of any substance into the body. 
5.  Self-induced intoxication means intoxication caused by substances which the defendant knows or ought to know have the tendency or cause intoxication, and which he or she knowingly introduced or allowed to be introduced into his or her body or under circumstances that would afford a defense to a charge or crime. 
C.  Responsibility - affirmative defense. The issue of responsibility under this Section is an affirmative defense. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.04.040 - Arrest by peace officer authorized when. 
    A peace officer may arrest a person when: 
A.  He or she has a warrant commanding that such person be arrested; or 
B.  Any crime has been or is being committed by such person in his or her presence; or 
C.  He or she has probable cause to believe that the offense was committed and has probable cause to believe that the offense was committed by the person to be arrested. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.04.050 - Enforcement - rules of procedure. 
    All proceedings pertaining to the enforcement of the sanctions of this title and of other ordinances and codes of the City shall be carried out in accordance with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
CHAPTER 9.08 - Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government 

9.08.010 - Resisting arrest. 
A.  A person commits the violation of resisting arrest if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor, or another, by: 
1.  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or 
2.  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing bodily injury to the peace officer or another. 
B.  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful if he or she was acting under color of his or her official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest he or she was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the rights of self-defense. A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him or her. 
C.  The term peace officer , as used in this Section and elsewhere in this Chapter, means a police officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself by exhibiting his or her credentials as such peace officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.020 - Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter. 
A.  A person commits the violation of obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle, or in any manner, he or she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer acting under color of his or her official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter acting under color of his or her official authority. 
1.  To assure that animals used in law enforcement activities are protected from harm, a person commits obstructing a peace officer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or an obstacle, he or she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders any such animal. 
B.  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer was acting in an illegal manner if he or she was acting under color of his or her official authority, as defined in Subsection 9.08.010.B above. 
C.  This Section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 779-90, 1990; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.030 - Imitating uniform of a police officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit, imitate or cause to be counterfeited, imitated or colorably imitated, the uniform, apparel or insignia of office used by the Police Department. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.040 - False alarms and false reports. 
    A person commits false reporting to authorities if: 
A.  He or she knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
B.  He or she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern, when he or she knows that it did not occur; and 
C.  He or she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities, pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information, or knows that the information is false; or 
D.  He or she knowingly provides false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. Identifying information means a person's name, address, birth date, social security number or driver's license or Colorado identification number. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.050 - Refusing to aid a police officer. 
    A person, eighteen (18) years of age or older, commits the violation of refusing to aid a peace officer when, upon command by a person known to him to be a peace officer, he or she unreasonably refuses or fails to aid such peace officer in effecting or securing an arrest, or preventing the commission by another of any offense. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.060 - Impersonating a peace officer. 
    A person who falsely pretends to be a peace officer and performs an act in that pretended capacity commits the violation of impersonating a peace officer. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.070 - Escaping from lawful custody. 
    A person commits the violation of escape if he or she escapes or attempts to escape from custody or confinement while under a sentence for a violation of any ordinance or code of the City, or while held for or charged with a violation of any such ordinance or code. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.080 - Aiding or assisting escapes. 
A.  Any person who aids, abets or assists another person to escape or attempt to escape from custody or confinement commits the violation of aiding escape. 
B.  Escape is deemed to be a continuing activity commencing with the conception of the design to escape, and continuing until the escapee is returned to custody or the attempt to escape is thwarted or abandoned. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.08.090 - Failure to obey a lawful order. 
A.  A person commits the offense of failure to obey a lawful order if he or she knowingly disobeys the lawful or reasonable order of any peace officer or fireman given incident to the discharge of the official duties of such peace officer or fireman when such peace officer or fireman is acting under the color of his or her official authority. 
B.  It is no defense to prosecution under this Section that the peace officer or fireman was acting in an illegal manner if he or she was acting under the color of his or her official authority as defined in this Section. 
C.  As used in this Section, a peace officer or fireman acts under color to official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make and does make a judgment in good faith, based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that the order should be made by him or her. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999) 
CHAPTER 9.12 - Assaults and Fighting 

9.12.010 - Assaults. 
    A person commits the crime of assault if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person; or, with criminal negligence, he or she causes bodily injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.12.020 - Menacing. 
    A person commits the crime of menacing if, by any threat or physical action, he or she knowingly places or attempts to place another person in fear of imminent serious bodily injury. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.12.030 - Criminal intimidation. 
    A person commits the violation of criminal intimidation if, without legal authority, he or she threatens to confine, restrain, or to cause bodily harm to the threatened person or another, or to damage the property or reputation of the threatened person or another, with intent thereby to induce the threatened person or another, with intent thereby to induce the threatened person or another, against his or her will, to do an act or refrain from doing a lawful act. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.12.040 - Reckless endangerment. 
    A person commits the violation of reckless endangerment if he or she recklessly engages in conduct which creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury to another person. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.12.050 - Fighting by agreement. 
    If two (2) or more persons shall fight by agreement in a public place, and not with a deadly weapon, except in a sporting event authorized by law, the persons so fighting commit fighting by agreement. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
CHAPTER 9.16 - Offenses Against the Person and Public Order 

9.16.010 - Loitering - activities prohibited - affirmative defense. 
A.  The word loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about or to remain, abide or tarry in a public place. 
B.  A person commits a class 1 petty offense if he or she or she, with intent to interfere with or disrupt a school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, loiters in or about a school building or grounds or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his or her representative or by a peace officer. 
C.  In addition to the other provisions of this Subsection, a person who is a sex offender required to register as provided by Section 16-22-103, C.R.S., commits a violation of this Section if he or she loiters at or within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any city recognized school, park, playground, recreational center, swimming pool or splash park without having any legitimate reason for being there. 
D.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he or she was exercising his or her rights of lawful assembly as a part of peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(Ord. 469-09; Ord. 1148-99; Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.020 - Loitering - soliciting for purchase of drinks. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to frequent or loiter in any tavern, cabaret or nightclub with the purpose of soliciting persons to purchase drinks. 
B.  It is unlawful for the proprietor or operator of any such establishment to allow the presence in such establishment of any persons who violate the provisions of Subsection A above. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.030 - Disorderly conduct. 
A.  A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
1.  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
2.  Makes unreasonably noise in a public place or near a private residence that he or she has no right to occupy; 
3.  Fights with another in a public place, except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; 
4.  Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place, except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or 
5.  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
B.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Paragraph A.1 above that the actor had significant provocation for his or her abusive or threatening conduct. 
(Ord. 1148-99; Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.035 - Sound-reproduction devices or machines. 
    Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television set, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, in such a manner as to be plainly audible at fifty (50) feet from such device when operated within a vehicle, is unlawful. 
(Ord. 1118-98) 
9.16.040 - Harassment - stalking. 
A.  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
1.  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person, or subjects him or her to physical contact; 
2.  Directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
3.  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
4.  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, written, computer, computer network, or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone, written, computer, computer network, or computer system that is obscene; 
5.  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensures, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
6.  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges, or makes communications in offensively course language to, another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or 
7.  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or private property. 
B.  A person commits stalking if directly or indirectly through another person such person knowingly: 
1.  Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly follows approaches, contacts or places under surveillance that person, a member of that person's immediate family or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship. 
2.  Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly makes any form of communication with that person, member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship, regardless of whether or not a conversation ensues. 
3.  Repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, places under surveillance or makes any form of communication with another person, a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship, in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to suffer serious emotional distress and does cause that person, a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship to suffer serious emotional distress. For purposes of this Subparagraph, a victim need not show that he or she received professional treatment or counseling to show that he or she suffered serious emotional distress. 
For the purposes of this Subsection, credible threat means a threat or physical action that would cause a reasonable person to be in fear for the person's life or safety, or the safety of his or her immediate family, and repeatedly means on more than one (1) occasion. Immediate family includes the person's spouse and the person's parent, grandparent, sibling or child. In connection with means acts occurring either before, during or after the credible threat. 
(Ord. 285-04; Ord. 1148-99; Ord. 906-94; Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.045 - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
A.  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises or in or upon any vehicle owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control or operation. 
B.  For purposes of this Section, unreasonable noise shall mean any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment. Members of the Police Department, upon receiving a complaint and then investigating such complaint, are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable, which determination may be based upon, but not need be limited to, a consideration of the following factors: 
1.  The time of day; 
2.  The size of any gathering of persons creating or contributing to the noise; 
3.  The presence or absence of noise amplification equipment; and 
4.  Any other factors tending to show the magnitude and/or disruptive effect of the noise. 
C.  In any prosecution charging a violation of this Section, proof that the owner or tenant of the premises upon which the unreasonable noise occurred was present at the time of the violation shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person was in control of the premises and knowingly permitted the violation to occur. 
(Ord. 497-10) 
9.16.050 - Disrupting a lawful assembly. 
    A person commits the violation of disrupting lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he or she significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.055 - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter: 
    Aggressive panhandling shall mean: 
a.  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
b.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
c.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
d.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited, or persisting in closely following or approaching the person being solicited, with the intent of asking that person for money or other things of value, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or anything of value to the solicitor; 
e.  Using profane or abusive language which is likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction from the person being solicited; 
f.  Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line for tickets, for entry to a building or for another purpose; or 
g.  Approaching or following a person for solicitation as part of a group of two (2) or more persons, in a manner and with conduct, words or gestures intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or damage to or loss of property or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value. 
    Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account record, which is able to carry out transactions, including but not limited to account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments. 
    Automated teller machine facility shall mean the area comprised of one (1) or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
    Financial institution shall mean any bank, industrial bank, credit union or savings and loan as defined in Title 11, C.R.S. 
    Public place shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park or playground. 
    Soliciting or panhandling, for purposes of this Section, are interchangeable and mean any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this Chapter. Panhandling does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one (1) is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling in any public place. 
(2)  No person shall panhandle on private or residential property after having been asked to leave or refrain from panhandling by the owner or other person lawfully in possession or control of such property. 
(3)  No person shall panhandle within twenty (20) feet of public toilets. 
(4)  No person shall panhandle within twenty (20) feet of any automated teller machine; provided, however, that, when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(5)  No person shall panhandle in any public transportation vehicle, within twenty (20) feet of any bus stop or in any public parking lot or structure. 
(6)  No person shall panhandle within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to a building. 
(7)  No person shall panhandle within twenty (20) feet of any pay telephone; provided that, when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility. 
(8)  No person shall solicit or panhandle after dark, which shall mean one-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. 
(9)  No person shall solicit or panhandle within twenty (20) feet of any licensed liquor establishment. Licensed liquor establishment means any business that has a license to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors under Title 12, C.R.S., or Chapter 5.08 of this Code. 
(c)  A violation of this Section is a misdemeanor infraction and shall be punishable under Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 628-15, 2015 ) 
9.16.056 - Solicitation and panhandling in public rights-of-way. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit employment, business, contributions or sales of any kind, or collect monies for the same, from the occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any street, road or highway when such solicitation or collection: 
1.  Causes the person performing the activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street or highway; 
2.  Involves the person performing the activity to be located upon any median area that separates traffic lanes for vehicular travel in opposite directions; 
3.  Causes the traffic on the traveled portion of a street or highway to be delayed or impeded; or 
4.  Involves the person performing the activity to be located such that vehicles cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or contributions of any kind from the occupant of any vehicle on any highway included in the interstate system, including any entrance to or exit from such highway. 
C.  For the purposes of this Section, the traveled portion of a street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular traffic; or the entire width of every way declared to be a public street or highway by any law of this State. 
D.  A violation of this Section is a misdemeanor infraction and shall be punishable under Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 627-15, 2015 ) 
9.16.060 - Obstructing highways or other public ways. 
    A person commits a violation of this Section if, without legal privilege, he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
A.  Obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, building entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his or her acts alone or from his or her acts and the acts of others; or 
B.  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move, is sued by a persons he or she knows to be a peace officer, a fireman or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway, or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot or other hazard. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.070 - Inciting riot. 
A.  A person commits the violation of inciting riot if he or she: 
1.  Incites or urges a group of five (5) or more persons to engage in a current or impending riot; or 
2.  Gives commands, instructions or signals to a group of five (5) or more persons in furtherance of a riot. 
B.  The term riot , as used in this Section, shall mean the same as is used in Subsection 9.16.080.B below. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.080 - Engaging in a riot. 
A.  A person commits a violation of this Section if he or she engages in a riot. 
B.  For purposes of this Section, the term riot means a public disturbance involving an assemblage of five (5) or more persons which, by tumultuous and violent conduct, creates grave danger of damage of injury to property or person, or substantially obstructs the performance of any governmental function. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.090 - Disobeying public safety officers during riot conditions. 
    A person commits a violation of this Section if, during a riot or when one is impending, he or she intentionally disobeys a reasonably public safety order to move, disperse, or refrain from specified activities in the immediate vicinity of the riot. A public safety order is an order designed to prevent or control disorder or promote the safety of persons or property, issued by an authorized member of the police, fire, military or other forces concerned with the riot. No such order shall apply to a news reporter or other person observing or recording the events on behalf of the public press or other news media, unless he or she is physically obstructing efforts by such forces to cope with the riot or impending riot. In applicability of the order is an affirmative defense. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.16.095 - Urinating in public. 
    Any person who urinates on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or on private property within the public view commits a violation of this Section. 
(Ord. 551-13 1) 
CHAPTER 9.20 - Offenses Against Public Decency 

9.20.010 - Indecent exposure. 
    A person commits the crime of indecent exposure if he or she intentionally exposes his or her genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is for the purpose of personal sexual arousal or gratification. 
(Ord. 551-13 2; Ord. 347 77) 
9.20.020 - Public indecency. 
    Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by another person or persons commits public indecency: 
A.  An act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
B.  An act of deviate sexual intercourse; 
C.  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; or 
D.  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person. 
(Ord. 1148-99: 347 77) 
9.20.030 - Prostitution. 
    Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual intercourse, or any act of deviate sexual intercourse, with any person not his or her spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value, commits prostitution. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.20.040 - Soliciting for prostitution. 
    A person commits soliciting for prostitution if he or she: 
A.  Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; 
B.  Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or 
C.  Directs another to a place, knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.20.050 - Patronizing a prostitute. 
    Any person who performs any of the following with a person not his or her spouse commits patronizing a prostitute: 
A.  Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or of deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute; or 
B.  Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.20.060 - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
    Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which offers seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution and who performs any one (1) or more of the following commits keeping a place of prostitution if he or she: 
A.  Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or 
B.  Permits the continued use of such place for the purpose of prostitution after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he or she should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
CHAPTER 9.24 - Offenses Against Property 

9.24.010 - Theft - value less than two thousand dollars. 
    A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, or knowing such thing of value to have been stolen, and the value of the thing involved is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and the person: 
A.  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
B.  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
C.  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
D.  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
( Ord. 677-18 ,  1, 2018; Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 841-92, 1992; Ord. 678 87, 1987; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 677-18 ,  1, adopted April 3, 2018, changed the title of  9.24.010 from "Theft - value less than five hundred dollars" to read as herein set out. 
9.24.020 - Obtaining control over any stolen items - conviction authorized when. 
    Every person who obtains control over any stolen thing of value, knowing the thing of value to have been stolen by another, may be tried, convicted and punished, whether or not the principal is charged, tried or convicted. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.030 - Concealment of unpurchased goods. 
    If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment be on his or her own person or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of such store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.040 - Criminal mischief - damages to property less than one thousand dollars. 
    Any person who intentionally damages the real or personal property of one (1) or more other persons, where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), commits the crime of criminal mischief. 
( Ord. 677-18 ,  2, 2018; Ord. 841-92; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 677-18 ,  2, adopted April 3, 2018, changed the title of  9.24.040 from "Criminal mischief - damages to property less than four hundred dollars" to read as herein set out. 
9.24.050 - Criminal trespass. 
    A person commits the crime of second degree criminal trespass if he or she unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises of another which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders, or which are fenced; of if such person knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the common areas of hotel, motel or condominium or apartment building. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.060 - Criminal use of stink bombs and other noxious substances. 
A.  Any person who deposits on the land or in the building or vehicles of another, without his or her consent, any stink bomb or device, irritant or offensive-smelling substance, with the intent to interfere with another's use or enjoyment of the land, building or vehicle commits the offense of criminal use of a noxious substance. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that a peace officer, in the performance of his or her duties, reasonably used a noxious substance. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.070 - Posting notices without consent. 
    Any person who places a posted notice or advertisement upon any public or private property without the consent of the owner of such property commits the violation of posting notice without consent. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.080 - Defacing property. 
A.  Any person who destroys, defaces, removes or damages any historical monument; or who causes, aids in or permits the defacing of public or private property without the consent of the owner by any method or defacement, including but not limited to painting, drawing or writing, by use of paint, spray paint or ink, or any other method of defacement commits the violation of defacing property. 
B.  Where such graffiti appears, the administrative authority shall transmit by certified mail and first-class mail, postage prepaid, or hand-deliver to the owner and occupant or other person in charge of the property on which such graffiti appeared or post in a conspicuous place on the premises, a notice advising such owner to remove such graffiti within ten (10) days of the date of such notice. 
C.  If such owner or occupant fails to remove such graffiti within the ten-day requirement, the administrative authority may direct such removal by an employee of the City or subcontract to have such work completed and charge the costs thereof to such owner of the property. 
D.  Upon completion of the removal of any graffiti, at the direction of the administrative authority, any costs incurred by the City shall be paid by the property owner within thirty (30) days after mailing of an invoice showing cost of graffiti removal, by the City Clerk to the owner of such property by certified mail, and first-class mail, postage prepaid. However, the property owner shall have the right to appeal the assessment of costs to him or her for removal of the graffiti by filing a written Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. The City Council shall then hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of filing the notice of appeal, and may waive the cost assessment based on circumstance of hardship. 
E.  If such owner, occupant or agent in charge fails to pay the cost assessment within thirty (30) days of mailing of the conclusion of the appeal process, the City may initiate civil proceedings to secure and collect a court judgment for the amount of the cost assessment. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 894-93, 1993; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.090 - Defacing posted notices. 
    Any person who intentionally mars, destroys or removes any posted notice authorized by law commits the violation of defacing posted notice. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.100 - Injuring ditches, gutters or culverts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to either willfully, maliciously, wantonly or negligently fill up, obstruct or otherwise damage any ditch or ditches, gutters or culverts lawfully constructed in the City. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.110 - Injuring or trespassing on gardens, crops or lawns. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon or to permit any animal or fowl owned by or controlled by him or her to trespass upon or injure any garden or field of growing crops. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or lead any horse or any other large animal upon or over any lawn or shrubs. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.120 - Throwing missiles - at or upon public or private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw any stone, snowball, or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building or upon or at any person in any public way or place. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.130 - Throwing missiles - at certain vehicles. 
    Any person who intentionally projects any missile at or against any vehicle or equipment designed for the transportation of persons or property commits a violation of this Section. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.140 - (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1148-99). 
9.24.150 - Littering. 
A.  Any person who deposits, throws or leaves any litter on any public or private property, or in any water, commits littering. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that: 
1.  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material, and the person is authorized by the property public authority to so use the property; 
2.  The litter is placed in a receptacle or contained installed on such property for that purpose; or 
3.  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or he or she has first obtained written consent of the owner of tenant in lawful possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of such owner or tenant. 
C.  1.  The term litter, as used in this Section, means all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description. 
2.  The phrase public or private property, as used in this Section, includes but is not limited to the right of way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, including frozen areas or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground or building, any refuge, conservation or recreation area, and any residential, farm or ranch properties or timberlands. 
D.  Littering is punishable by a fine between twenty dollars ($20.00) and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for first offense; between fifty dollars ($50.00) and two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) for a second offense and between one hundred dollars ($100.00) and two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) for a third or subsequent offense. 
E.  It is in the discretion of the court, upon the conviction of any person and the imposition of a fine under this Section, to suspend the fine upon the condition that the convicted person gather and remove from specified public property or specified private property, with prior permission of the owner or tenant in lawful possession thereof, any litter found thereon. 
F.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this Section, the operator of the motor vehicle is presumed to have caused or permitted the litter to be so thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped therefrom. 
G.  The affirmative defense set forth in Paragraph B.3 above shall not be deemed to authorize any conduct prohibited by other provisions of this Title, or by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 1148-99, 1999; Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.160 - Throwing sharp objects in public streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, cast or place any glass, tacks, sharp-edged stones, nails, bits of wire, sharp or pointed articles, or any other vehicles on the public streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the City. 
(Ord. 1148-99, 1999; prior code 10.12.020) 
9.24.170 - (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1148-99). 
9.24.180 - Abandoning iceboxes and other items with compartments. 
    Any person abandoning or discarding in any public place or private place accessible to children, any chest, closet, piece of furniture, refrigerator, icebox or motor vehicle, or other article having a compartment of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, and having a door or lid which, when closed, cannot be opened easily from the inside, or who, being the owner, lessee or manager of such place, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded article to remain in such condition, commits a violation of this Section. 
(Ord. 347 77, 1977) 
9.24.190 - Fourth degree arson. 
A.  A person who knowingly or recklessly starts or maintains a fire or causes an explosion, on his own property or that of another, and by doing so places another in danger of death or serious bodily injury or places any building or occupied structure of another in danger of damages commits fourth degree arson. 
B.  Fourth degree arson is a class 2 misdemeanor if only property is thus endangered and the value of the property is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
C.  Fourth degree arson is a class 3 misdemeanor if only property is thus endangered and the value of the property is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
D.  Fourth degree arson is a class 4 felony if a person is thus endangered and will be prosecuted pursuant to the State statute, and not as a municipal offense. 
(Ord. No. 656-16 , 2016) 
CHAPTER 9.25 - Limiting the Sale of Pseudoephedrine-Containing Products 

9.25.010 - Retail sale of methamphetamine precursor drugs - limitations. 
A.  Retail distributors selling products containing a methamphetamine precursor drug, defined here as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine or their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, must place such products in a secured area that is only accessible to the public with the assistance of the retailer or its employees, who shall be trained to prevent theft or diversion of these products. Such retailers must provide proof of such a training program to the City. 
1.  Methamphetamine precursor drug does not include a substance contained in any package or container that is labeled by the manufacturer as intended for pediatric use. 
B.  Retail distributors are prohibited from selling to a purchaser methamphetamine precursor drugs except in blister packs, with each blister to contain not more than two (2) dosage units, or when the use of blister packs is technically infeasible, sales in unit dose packets or pouches. 
C.  Retail distributors may not deliver in a single sale in or from a store more than three (3) packages of a methamphetamine precursor drug or a combination of two (2) or more methamphetamine precursor drugs. 
D.  Upon satisfactory application by a manufacturer, the City may exempt any product it determines to have been formulated to effectively prevent the conversion of any active ingredient in the product into methamphetamine or any other controlled substance. 
E.  No person in the course of selling, offering for sale, or otherwise distributing a PSE product shall provide locally displayed advertisement or representation in any manner that the product causes euphoria, ecstasy, a "buzz" or "high," or an altered mental state; heightens sexual performance; or, because it contains ephedrine alkaloids, increased muscle mass. 
(Ord. 355-05) 
CHAPTER 9.26 - Graffiti Materials, Sales and Possession 

9.26.010 - Possession of graffiti material by minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor, except a minor under the direct supervision of the minor's parent, legal guardian, teacher, or a law enforcement officer in the performance of duty, to purchase, procure or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure or possess, any prohibited graffiti material. 
(Ord. 113-01, 2001) 
9.26.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Broad-tipped marker pen means a felt-tip marker, or similar implement containing a fluid which is not water soluble with a tip that exceeds one-quarter (1/4) inch in width. 
    Paint pen means a tube, marker, or other pen-like instrument with a tip of one quarter (1/4) inch in diameter or less that contains paint or a similar fluid and an internal paint agitator. 
    Prohibited graffiti material means any can of spray paint, spray paint nozzle, broad tipped marker pen, paint pen, glass cutting tool, or glass etching tool or instrument. 
    Spray paint means any aerosol container that is made or adapted for the purpose of applying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    Spray paint nozzle means a nozzle designed to deliver a spray of paint of particular width or flow from a can of spray paint. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this Section that the minor possessing the material was: 
1.  Within their home or on property owned by the minor's parent or legal guardian; 
2.  At their place of employment; or 
3.  Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant or person having lawful control of such property, to possess such materials. 
(Ord. 113-01, 2001) 
9.26.030 - Sale and display of prohibited graffiti materials. 
A.  Sale. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent, legal guardian, school teacher or law enforcement officer in the performance of duty, to sell, exchange, give, deliver, loan or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, delivered, loaned or otherwise furnished any prohibited graffiti material to any minor unless the minor is accompanied by their parent or legal guardian. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection that the employer has adopted and enforces a written policy against selling prohibited graffiti materials to minors, has informed its employees of the applicable laws regarding sales or prohibited graffiti materials to minors, requires employees to verify the age identification documents and has established and imposes sanctions for noncompliance. 
B.  Signs required. It is unlawful for any person who sells or offers to sell any prohibited graffiti material to fail to display a warning sign. Such warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place in the building at all times and shall have a minimum height of fourteen (14) inches and a width of eleven (11) inches, with lettering of at least one-half (1/2) inch in height and shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE, 
TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS SPRAY PAINT, SPRAY PAINT NOZZLE, 
BROAD TIPPED MARKER PEN, PAINT PEN, GLASS CUTTING TOOL, 
OR GLASS ETCHING TOOL OR INSTRUMENT UNLESS ACCOMPANIED 
BY THEIR PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN AND, UPON CONVICTION, 
A FINE, NOT TO EXCEED $2,650 MAY BE IMPOSED. 
C.  Display and storage. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business where prohibited graffiti materials are sold or who sells or offers for sale any prohibited graffiti material to store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, prohibited graffiti material in an area that is accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of business pending legal sale or other disposition. This Chapter shall not be construed to preclude or prohibit the storage or display of prohibited graffiti material in an area viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
D.  Contributing to unlawful possession. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of duty, to knowingly allow a minor to possess prohibited graffiti materials upon any public or private real property. It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this Subsection that the minor possessing the material was: 
1.  Within the minor's home or on property owned by the minor's parent or legal guardian; 
2.  At the minor's place of employment; or 
3.  Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant or person having lawful control of such property, to possess such materials. 
E.  Persons convicted of violating Subsection D above shall, in addition to any penalty imposed by the court, pay restitution for abatement or repair of any defacement or damage caused by the minor's use of prohibited graffiti material. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 113-01, 2001) 
9.26.040 - Performing services for minor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any minor any article or material which the minor himself is forbidden by law to purchase. It shall be unlawful for any minor to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for such minor any article or material which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(Ord. 113-01, 2001) 
CHAPTER 9.27 - Marijuana 

9.27.010 - Prohibiting operation of a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility and any retail marijuana store. 
    The operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores are hereby prohibited, and the operation of the same by any person shall be a violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 549-12 1) 
CHAPTER 9.28 - Offenses By or Against Minors 

9.28.010 - Curfew hours for minors - exceptions. 
    It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain upon any streets or alleys or other public places within the City, or to remain in any establishment open to the public generally within the City, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except: 
A.  When accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such minor; 
B.  For lawful employment; 
C.  When such minor is in the custody of and accompanied by a person who has reached his or her eighteenth birthday and who has in his or her possession the written consent of such parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such minor. 
(Ord. 519-11: 347 77) 
9.28.020 - Responsibility of parents and guardians. 
    It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of any minor falling under the terms of this Chapter to allow or permit such minor to violate any of the terms or provisions of Section 9.28.010 above. 
(Ord. 347 77) 
9.28.030 - Harboring of minors unlawful. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly harbor a runaway child. 
1.  A runaway child is an unemancipated person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age who is away from home without the consent of the custodial parents, legal guardian or other person having custody of such child. 
2.  Harbor means to provide shelter for, encourage, counsel or assist a runaway child in evading lawful custody. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to harbor an unemancipated child under eighteen (18) years of age when such person knows the child to be a parole violator or a fugitive from legal process. 
C.  The ordinance codified in this Section shall not apply to peace officers working in their official capacities or other persons working in their official capacities as employees or members of the staffs of agencies authorized by the state to harbor minors. 
(Ord. 679 87: 657 86) 
9.28.040 - Possession and consumption of alcohol by persons under age twenty-one. 
A.  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol (C2H3OH). 
    Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his or her person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate presence and control. 
B.  Any person under age twenty-one (21) years who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the City commits the crime of illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
1.  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this Section when the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(I)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
D.  During any trial for a violation of this Section, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whiskey gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," "liquor" or any other product generally recognized as being an alcoholic beverage shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
E.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to Article 46, 47, or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., except as provided in such articles. 
F.  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of this Section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the executive director of the Colorado Department of Health. 
G.  Official records of the Colorado Department of Health relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the state. Copies of such records, attested by the executive director of the Department of Health or his or her deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal of said department, which state that the executive director of the department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in the Municipal Court and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the Department described in this Subsection may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of their seal stamped upon the document. 
H.  In any proceeding in the Municipal Court concerning a charge under this Section, the Municipal Court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the Department of Public Health and Environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol. This Subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this Subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 874-93) 
CHAPTER 9.30 - Offenses Related to Marijuana 

9.30.010 - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Colorado Medical Marijuana Code means Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis , whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana includes marijuana products, as defined herein. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
    Medical marijuana card means a card properly and duly issued under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.020 - Possession of marijuana and marijuana accessories. 
A.  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall possess marijuana or marijuana accessories unless such person has been issued a medical marijuana card. If such person has been issued a medical marijuana card, such person shall not possess more than two (2) ounces of marijuana unless otherwise authorized to do so by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
B.  No person twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall possess more than one (1) ounce of marijuana unless such person has been issued a medical marijuana card. If such person has been issued a medical marijuana card, such person shall not possess more than two (2) ounces of marijuana unless otherwise authorized to do so by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.030 - Sale and transfer of marijuana and marijuana accessories. 
A.  No person shall sell, distribute, transfer, trade, exchange or give marijuana or marijuana accessories, with or without remuneration, to a person under the age of twenty-one (21). 
B.  No person shall sell, distribute, transfer, trade or exchange marijuana or marijuana accessories, with remuneration, to a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
C.  No person shall give more than one (1) ounce of marijuana to a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.040 - Public consumption or use of marijuana. 
A.  No person shall openly and publicly consume or use marijuana. 
B.  No person shall consume or use marijuana in a manner that endangers others. 
C.  No person shall consume or use marijuana in a location or facility owned or operated by the City, including but not limited to public parks, public buildings and public streets. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.050 - Prohibitions regarding minors on private property. 
    No person who is in possession and control of private property shall knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (210 to possess or consume marijuana on such private property, unless such minor person has been issued a medical marijuana card. For purposes of this Section, possession and control of private property shall mean, without limitation, the owner, tenant or designated custodian, such as a house-sitter or babysitter, of private property. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.060 - Personal cultivation of marijuana. 
A.  No person twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall possess more than six (6) marijuana plants, only three (3) or fewer of which are mature flowering plants. The marijuana produced by such plants, in excess of one (1) ounce, shall be maintained on the premises where grown and shall not be sold. 
B.  No person shall cultivate marijuana plants except in an enclosed and locked space and in compliance with all relevant provisions of this Code. 
C.  No person shall openly or publicly cultivate marijuana. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
9.30.070 - Violations. 
    A person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 580-13 1) 
CHAPTER 9.32 - Firearms and Weapons 

9.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Blackjack includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Deadly weapon means any of the following which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury: 
a.  A firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; 
b.  A knife; 
c.  A bludgeon; or 
d.  Any other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate. 
    Deface means to alter the appearance of something by removing, distorting, adding to or covering all or part of the thing. 
    Dwelling means a building which is used, intended to be used, or usually used by a person for habitation. 
    Firearm means any handgun, automatic, revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun or other instrument or device capable or intended to be capable of discharging bullets, cartridges or other explosive charges. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device, and includes projectiles designed for use in such a device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force, that when released is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds, but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife, the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in its handle. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.020 - Possessing an illegal weapon. 
A.  As used in this Section, the term illegal weapon means a blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife. 
B.  A person commits a violation of this Section if he or she possesses an illegal weapon. 
C.  It shall be an affirmative defense to the charge of possessing an illegal weapon that the person so accused was a peace officer or member of the armed forces of the United States or Colorado National Guard acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties, or that said person has a valid permit and license for possession of such weapon. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.030 - Possessing a defaced firearm. 
    A person commits a violation of this Section if he or she knowingly and unlawfully possesses a firearm, the manufacturer's serial number of which, or other distinguishing number or identification mark, has been removed, defaced, altered or destroyed except by normal wear and tear. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.040 - Defacing a firearm. 
    A person commits a violation of this Section if such person knowingly removes, defaces, covers, alters or destroys the manufacturer's serial number, or any other distinguishing number or identification mark of a firearm. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.050 - Carrying a concealed weapon. 
A.  A person commits a violation of this Section if he or she knowingly: 
1.  Carries a knife concealed on or about his or her person. 
2.  Carries a firearm concealed on or about his or her person. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was: 
1.  A person in his or her own dwelling, or place of business, or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying. 
2.  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of such person's or another's person or property, while traveling. 
3.  A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S., to carry the weapon by the Chief of Police or the Weld County Sheriff. 
4.  A peace officer, Level I or Level Ia, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(I) or (3)(1)(II), C.R.S. 
5.  A peace officer, Level II, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(III), C.R.S., while on duty. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.060 - Prohibited use of weapons. 
A.  A person commits a violation of this Section if: 
1.  He or she knowingly and unlawfully aims a firearm at another person. 
2.  Recklessly or with criminal negligence he or she discharges a firearm or shoots a bow and arrow. 
3.  He or she knowingly sets a loaded gun, trap, or device designated to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leaves it unattended by a competent person immediately present. 
4.  He or she has in his or her possession a firearm while he or she is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance, as defined in Section 12-22-303(7), C.R.S. Possession of a permit issued under Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S., is no defense to a violation of this Section. 
5.  He or she knowingly aims, swings, or throws a throwing star or nunchaku, as defined in this Paragraph, at another person, or he or she knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When transporting throwing stars or nunchaku for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, nonaccessible container. For purposes of this Paragraph, nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two (2) sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain, which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense, and throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is hand-held and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of self-defense. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.070 - Unlawfully carrying of deadly weapon on school, college or university grounds. 
A.  A person commits a violation of this Section if such person knowingly and unlawfully, and without legal authority, carries, brings or has in his or her possession a deadly weapon in or on the real estate and all improvements erected thereon of any public or private elementary or secondary school or any public or private college, university or seminary, except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class, for the purpose of carrying out the necessary duties and functions of an employee of an educational institution which require the use of a deadly weapon or for the purpose of participation in an authorized extracurricular activity or athletic team. 
B.  It shall not be an offense under this Section if: 
1.  The weapon is unloaded and remains inside a motor vehicle while upon the real estate of any public or private college, university or seminary; or 
2.  The person is in that person's own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under that person's control at the time of the act of carrying; or 
3.  The person is in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance and is carrying a weapon for lawful protection of that person's or another's person or property while traveling; or 
4.  The person, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S., to carry the weapon by the Chief of Police or the Weld County Sheriff; or 
5.  The person is a peace officer, Level I or Level Ia, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(I) or (3)(1)(II), C.R.S.; or 
6.  The person is a peace officer, Level II, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(III), C.R.S., while on duty; or 
7.  The person is a peace officer, Level IIIa, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(IV.5), C.R.S., while on duty and under supervision; or 
8.  The person has possession of the weapon for use in an educational program approved by a school which program includes, but shall not be limited to, any course designed for the repair or maintenance of weapons. 
(Ord. 896-93, 1993) 
9.32.080 - Discharging dangerous or deadly weapons prohibited - when. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to discharge within the city limits any weapon, or any air gun, gas-operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a "peashooter," "slingshot" or "beany," or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth above, or by any other name; provided, that nothing contained in this section and Section 9.32.090 below shall prevent the use of any such instruments in shooting galleries or for hunting as designated in Section 9.32.150 of this Chapter. 
B.  Exemptions: Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies; or any peace officers, as defined by state law, or members of the United States Armed Forces, Colorado National Guard or Reserve Officer Training Corps from having in their possession, displaying, concealing or discharging such weapons as are necessary in the authorized and proper performance of their official duties, or for training purposes. 
(Ord. 975-09; Ord. 138-02; Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.090 - Displaying certain weapons for sale prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, or any other individual, firm or corporation engaged in the wholesale or retail sale, rental or exchange of any of the weapons hereinafter named, to display or place on exhibition, in any show window, or other window facing upon any street of the City, any pistol, revolver or other firearm with a barrel less than twelve (12) inches in length. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.100 - Selling weapons to certain persons prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol or other firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, to a person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, or to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
B.  Further, such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the City to such person. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.110 - Concealing or displaying certain weapons prohibited - forfeiture. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to wear under his or her clothes, or concealed about his or her person, or to display in a threatening manner, any dangerous or deadly weapon, including, but not by way of limitation, any pistol, revolver, slingshot, cross-knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, or any bowie knife, dirk, dagger or any knife resembling a bowie knife, or other illegal or deadly weapon. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, display, use, possess or carry any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade or blades of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle, or other mechanical contrivance. Any such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of this Section and shall be subject to forfeiture to the City as provided in Sections 9.32.120 and 9.32.130 below. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.120 - Forfeiture of weapons required - when. 
A.  Every person convicted of any violation of Section 9.32.020 through Section 9.32.110 above shall forfeit to the City Police Department the weapon which is the subject of the offense, unless good cause is shown. Appeals of decision of the Chief of Police shall be made to the Municipal Judge within ten (10) days of forfeiture. 
B.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to forbid United States Marshals, sheriffs, constables, and their deputies, and any regular, special or ex officio police officer, or any other law enforcement officers, from the carrying or wearing while on duty of such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.130 - Disposition of forfeited weapons. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer, upon making any arrest and taking such a concealed, deadly or illegal weapon from the person of the offender, to deliver the same to the Police Department to be held until the final determination of the prosecution for such offense. Any weapons subject to seizure or forfeiture for which disposition is not provided by another ordinance, may be disposed of as follows, at the discretion of the Chief of Police unless otherwise ordered by the Municipal Judge: 
A.  By the Police Department if such weapon seized can be used by the Police Department. 
B.  Pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 2.40 of this Code. 
(Ord. 896-93; Ord. 347 77) 
9.32.140 - (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1148-99). 
9.32.150 - Revocable permits for hunting. 
A.  The City Clerk, or his or her designee, may grant a revocable permit to a landowner, containing such conditions as may be appropriate, to allow hunting on specific parcels or areas within parcels within the City. Such permit shall be granted for a time period to be determined by the City Clerk, but not to exceed one (1) year. Any such permit so granted shall be subject to all statutes and regulations of the State pertaining to the discharge of firearms, BB guns, pellet guns, bow and arrow, crossbows or other weapons. Any such permit so granted shall specifically designate what animals, fowl or wildlife may be hunted in such designated parcel or area and shall state that such animals, fowl or wildlife may only be hunted in conformance with state regulations governing hunting seasons. The hunting permit application shall be accompanied by a payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which is required for each new application and for each subsequent renewal application. The permit applicant is required to sign an agreement, to include the landowner's responsibility to provide a copy of the permit to all lessees and/or users of the property, and also acknowledge that the revocable permit can be revoked without cause at any time at City discretion. Any such permit so granted shall specifically designate the individual hunters who will use the property. Additionally, individual hunters must possess a valid permit from the Division of Wildlife, and each must apply individually with the City for inclusion on the list applicable to a specific parcel or area, and submit a twenty-five-dollar fee. Individual hunters must sign an agreement acknowledging his or her obligations and responsibilities. 
B.  Any violation of the foregoing provisions may be punishable by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and up to one (1) year in jail. 
C.  Administrative denial of a revocable permit may be appealed to the Community and Economic Development Manager. Within thirty (30) calendar days of an administrative denial of a revocable permit, the applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a written request for appeal. City staff will then schedule review of the appeal. 
(Ord. 475-09) 
CHAPTER 9.33 - Fireworks 

9.33.010 - Definitions. 
A.  The term fireworks includes an article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, without limitation, the following articles and devices commonly known and used as fireworks: blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, in which explosives are used; fire balloons (balloons of the type which have a burning material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath to propel them); firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, bottle rockets, Roman candles, Day-Glow bombs, torches or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. 
B.  The term fireworks does not include cylindrical and cone fountains, ground spinners, dipped sticks and sparklers, snakes and glow worms, trick noisemakers and trick or novelty items that smoke, pop and/or sparkle. Further, the term does not include highway flares, railway fuses or other emergency signal devices used during an emergency situation. 
( Ord. No. 620-15,  1, 2015 ) 
9.33.020 - Prohibited use. 
A.  No person, other than authorized personnel, shall possess, sell, use, ignite or discharge any fireworks in the City. 
B.  No person, other than authorized personnel, shall permit the possession, sale, use, ignition or discharge of any fireworks on such person's property. A person's property includes property that is owned or rented by such person. 
( Ord. No. 620-15,  1, 2015 ) 
9.33.030 - Evidence. 
A.  The Court shall not preclude evidence regarding violations of this Chapter based solely on the fact that the firework was destroyed by its use, ignition or discharge. 
B.  To the extent this Chapter conflicts with the provisions of the International Fire Code, contained in Chapter 15.48 of the Evans Municipal Code, this Chapter shall control. 
( Ord. No. 620-15,  1, 2015 ) 
9.33.040 - Violations. 
    A person who violates the provisions of this Chapter 9.33 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 620-15,  1, 2015 ) 
CHAPTER 9.36 - Penalty for Violations 

9.36.010 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Title is guilty of a violation of this Title and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this Code. 
(113-01: 842-92: 347 77) 
9.36.020 - Additional penalties for offenses involving public property. 
A.  In addition to any penalties provided in Section 9.36.010, anyone found guilty of theft under Section 9.24.010, criminal mischief under Section 9.24.040 or defacing property under Section 9.24.080, and the property involved in any such offense is public property of a city, school or other public entity, then in that event an additional fee of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be imposed on the defendant by the Municipal Court. Such fee shall be in addition to any restitution awarded by the Municipal Court. 
B.  All fees collected by the Municipal Court under Subsection A above shall be deposited in the general fund, but accounted for separately and shall only be used for the purpose of offering rewards to persons, other than law enforcement officers, who provide information which results in a conviction for any of the criminal offenses listed in Subsection A above against public property. Payment of any reward will be made in such a manner as to maintain the identity of any informant confidential. 
C.  The parent or parents of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years who is living with such parent or parents, and who commits a violation resulting in a penalty as described in Subsection A above, shall be responsible for ensuring that the fee described in such Subsection A is paid within the time for payment granted by the Municipal Court, not to exceed four (4) months. Failure of the parent or parents to ensure such payment shall be a separate violation of the ordinance and such parent or parents shall then be liable for a penalty in the amount of the fee not paid by the minor child. Failure of payment of the fee by the minor child shall be a presumption that the parent or parents did not ensure the payment by the child. The word parent shall include any person who has custody of a child or stands in the position of In Loco Parentis. 
D.  Upon the conviction of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, the Municipal Court shall set a restitution hearing not less than ten (10) days after such conviction, and shall give notice to the minor's parent, requiring such parent to appear at such hearing with the minor. At such hearing the Municipal Court may order restitution, may order the fee described in Subsection A and may enter judgment against the parent or parents for restitution. 
(Ord. 833-92) 
TITLE 10 - Vehicles and Traffic 
CHAPTER 10.04 - Model Traffic Code 

10.04.010 - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 and Part 4 of Article 15 of Title 30, and Section 43-2-135(1)(g) of the Colorado Revised Statutes; and Section 7.11 of the City of Evans Home Rule Charter, there is hereby adopted by reference the 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities , promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Ave., EP 700, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City. The purpose of this Chapter and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the nation. Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 524-11; 466-09; 224-03; 1080-97; 702 88; 515 81; prior code 10.04.010) 
10.04.020 - Deletions. 
    The 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to the City and are, therefore, expressly deleted: Section 511; Section 1210; Section 109.5; Section 109.6. 
(Ord. 524-11; 466-09; 224-03; 1080-97) 
10.04.030 - Additions or modifications. 
    The said adopted Code is subject to the following additions or modifications: 
A.  Section 109 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    " Section 109. Low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD, animals, skis, skates, and toy vehicles on highways. 
"(1)  A person riding a low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD upon a roadway where low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD travel is permitted shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties and penalties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as set forth in this Code except those provisions of this Code that, by their very nature, can have no application. 
"(2)  A person riding a low-power vehicle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
"(3)  No low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
"(4)  No person riding upon any low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
"(5)  A person operating a low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD upon a roadway shall ride as close to the side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
"(6)  Persons riding low-power electric vehicle or EPAMD upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast. 
"(6.5)  A person under the age of eighteen years may not operate or carry a passenger who is under eighteen years of age on a low-power electric vehicle unless the person and the passenger are wearing protective helmets in accordance with the provisions of Section 1502(4.5) of this Code. 
"(7)  Persons riding or leading animals on or along any highway shall ride or lead such animals on the left side of said highway, facing approaching traffic. This shall not apply to persons driving herds of animals along highways. 
"(8)  No person shall use the highways for traveling on skis, toboggans, coasting sleds, skates, or similar devices. It is unlawful for any person to use any roadway of this state as a sled or ski course for the purpose of coasting on sleds, skis, or similar devices. It is also unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a highway in a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This Subsection (8) does not apply to any public way which is set aside by proper authority as a play street and which is adequately roped off or otherwise marked for such purpose. 
"(9)  Every person riding or leading an animal or driving any animal-drawn conveyance upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Code, except those provisions of this Code which by their very nature can have no application. 
"(10)  Where suitable bike paths, horseback trails, or other trails have been established on the right-of-way or parallel to and within one-fourth mile of the right-of-way of heavily traveled streets and highways, the Department of Transportation may, subject to the provisions of Section 43-2-135, C.R.S., by resolution or order entered in its minutes, and local authorities may, where suitable bike paths, horseback trails, or other trails have been established on the right-of-way or parallel to it within four hundred fifty feet of the right-of-way of heavily traveled streets, by ordinance, determine and designate, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, those heavily traveled streets and highways upon which shall be prohibited any bicycle, electrical assisted bicycle, animal rider, animal-drawn conveyance, or other class or kind of non-motorized traffic that is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic, and, upon such a determination, the Department of Transportation or local authority shall erect appropriate official signs giving notice thereof; except that, with respect to controlled access highways, Section 1010(3) shall apply. When such official signs are erected, no person shall violate any of the instructions contained thereon. 
"(11)  The parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any provision of this Section. 
"(12)  (a) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) of this Subsection (12), any person who violates a provisions of this Section comments a Class B traffic infraction. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (6.5) of this Section commits a traffic offense." 
B.  A new Section 109.5 shall be added to read as follows: 
    " Section 109.5. Low-powered electric vehicles and EPAMDs. 
"(1)  Adoption. These regulations are enacted pursuant to the authority under Section 42-4-111, C.R.S., and the Home Rule Charter of the City of Evans. Only low-powered "electric" vehicles, excluding golf cars, shall be permitted on public streets in the City of Evans. 
"(2)  Definitions. As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
"(a)  'Electrical assisted bicycle' means a vehicle having two tandem wheels or two parallel wheels and one forward wheel, fully operable pedals, an electric motor not exceeding seven hundred and fifty watts of power, and a top motor-powered speed of twenty miles per hour. 
"(b)  'Electric personal assistive mobility device' or 'EPAMD' means a self-balancing, non-tandem two-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, that is powered solely by an electric propulsion system producing an average power output of no more than seven hundred fifty watts. 
"(c)  'Low-powered electric vehicles' means vehicles that meet the equipment standard set forth in this Section 109.5 (except EPAMDs), that have a wattage of not exceeding 4,476, and do not exceed the speed of twenty-five miles per hour. 
"(d)  'Neighborhood electric vehicles' means self-propelled vehicles that are designed for and which are generally and commonly used to transport persons and property that meets the equipment standard set forth herein. 
"(3)  License for drivers required. No person shall operate any neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD upon any roadway unless such person has been issued a currently valid driver's license or minor's driver's license. 
"(4)  Required equipment. 
"(a)  All neighborhood electric vehicles shall be equipped with: 
"(I)  A rear view mirror or mirrors; 
"(II)  A parking brake; 
"(III)  Two rear reflectors as either part of the tail lamps or separate equipment; 
"(IV)  Displays "slow moving vehicle" emblem. 
"(b)  The number of persons in neighborhood electric vehicles and EPAMDs may be one or more, but if more than one, the number of persons shall not exceed the number of seats in the vehicle. 
"(5)  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD on the roadway of any street within the City where: 
"(a)  The operator does not have in his possession a valid, current and unrevoked (and not suspended) driver's license; 
"(b)  The neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD is operated at night between sunset and sunrise; 
"(c)  The neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD is being operated during inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet; 
"(d)  The neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD is not equipped with the required equipment described under Section 109.5(4); 
"(e)  The operator fails to observe all traffic laws and regulations, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to a neighborhood electric vehicle or EPAMD; 
"(f)  All alcohol related violations will be prosecuted pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
"(6)  Roadway travel requirements. Any person operating a low-powered vehicle or EPAMD upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic shall ride in the right-hand lane, subject to the following conditions: 
"(a)  If the right-hand lane available for traffic is wide enough to be safely shared with overtaking vehicles, the operator of a low-powered vehicle or EPAMD shall ride far enough to the right as judged safe by the operator to facilitate the movement of such overtaking vehicles unless other conditions make it unsafe to do so. 
"(b)  The operator of a low-powered vehicle or EPAMD may use a lane other than the right-hand lane when: 
"(I)  Preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private roadway or driveway; 
"(II)  Overtaking a slower vehicle; or 
"(III)  Taking reasonably necessary precautions to avoid road hazards or road conditions. 
"(c)  Upon approaching an intersection where right turns are permitted and there is a dedicated right-turn lane, the operator of a low-powered vehicle or EPAMD may ride on the left-hand portion of the dedicated right-turn lane if the operator does not intend to turn right. 
"(7)  Roadway travel restrictions. Low-powered vehicles and EPAMDs shall not be permitted to travel on Highway 85 or Highway 34, nor shall they be permitted to travel on the arterial collector or local streets which have a posted speed limit above 35 miles per hour although such vehicles may simply cross those roadways. 
"(8)  Exceptions. Wheelchairs operated by a person with a physical disability shall be exempt from these regulations." 
C.  Section 113 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 113. Authority of officer at scene of accident. A police officer at the scene of a traffic accident may issue a written summons and complaint to any driver of a vehicle involved in the accident when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense under the provisions of this Code pursuant to state law in connection with the accident." 
D.  Section 115 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    " Section 115 . Office of the Director of Public Works. 
"(1)  The Director of Public Works or designee shall exercise the powers and duties of the City Traffic Engineer provided in this Code. 
"(2)  In the absence of the Director of Public Works or at such times as this person may be temporarily absent from the City or unable to perform his/her duties, the said duties shall be vested in the City Manager or other municipal official as determined and authorized by the City Manager. 
"(3)  The Director of Public Works or other official vested with responsibility for traffic control in the City shall cause the installation and maintenance of official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
"(4)  The Director of Public Works or other official vested with responsibility for traffic control in the City shall ascertain and determine the locations where official traffic control signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determination therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the most recent edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" as adopted by the State Department of Transportation of the State of Colorado and as adopted by the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as a standard for application on all classes of highways. 
"(5)  The Director of Public Works or official vested with responsibility for traffic control of the City may test traffic control devices under actual traffic conditions, and conduct research and tests on new traffic control devices not presently included in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." Such devices are not to remain in force beyond a period of one hundred twenty (120) days on an experimental basis, with the exception of devices being tested for durability. 
"(6)  The Director of Public Works of official vested with responsibility for traffic control of the City shall have the authority and duty to set standards used in the temporary barricading of construction sites and maintenance locations within the public rights-of-way and/or at locations which would constitute a hazard to life or property within the City. 
"(7)  It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or other official charged with responsibility for traffic control in the City to see that all traffic control devices installed and maintained or caused to be installed and maintained (both permanent traffic controls and temporary traffic construction controls) shall be done so in conformance with the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" as adopted by the Department of Transportation of the State of Colorado and adopted by the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration as a standard for application on all classes of highways except as pursuant to Section 115(3). 
"(8)  No person, public utility or department of this City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street or public right-of-way of the City for the purpose of construction and maintenance work, unless of a type approved by the Director of Public Works or other official vested with responsibility for traffic control in the City. 
"(9)  All barricading and traffic control for work or maintenance in public rights-of-way of the City shall be done so in accordance with standards and procedures as issued and authorized by the Director of Public Works or other official of the City responsible for traffic control." 
E.  Section 604(1)(c)(I)(A) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"(A)  Such vehicular traffic, after coming to a stop and yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection, may make a right turn, unless state or local road authorities within their respective jurisdictions have prohibited any such right turn by erecting an official sign at each intersection where such right turn is prohibited." 
F.  Section 606(6) is hereby added to read as follows: 
"(6)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway or within any public right-of-way any unauthorized sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising, nor shall any person, unless authorized by the Director of Public Works or other official responsible for traffic control in the City, paint, or deface any curb, sidewalk, street or highway within the jurisdiction of this City; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to painting of address numbers on a curb surface." 
G.  Section 607(3) is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 607(3). Crossing street construction or improvement site. 
"(3)  No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement, or freshly laid seal coating or freshly painted markings on an street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement, seal coatings, or markings, or when any portion thereof is closed." 
H.  Section 714 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 714. Restricted use of streets and alleys. 
"(1)  For the purpose of road construction and maintenance, any street or portion thereof may be temporarily closed to through traffic or to all vehicular traffic during the work project by action of the City or by first obtaining a written approval of the Director of Public Works. 
"(2)  The provisions of Subsection (1) shall not be construed to prohibit the drivers of any vehicles from traveling over such restricted or prohibited streets, other than controlled-access roadways, for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise or reaching their destinations which occur on these particular streets, provided such vehicles enter such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceed thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
"(3)  No person shall operate a motorized vehicle in an alley for use as a thoroughfare within any residential area, except those persons who reside therein and except official emergency vehicles and authorized vehicles. 
"(4)  No person shall park or stand a vehicle with a rated chassis capacity in excess of one tone, or a tractor, road tractor, semi-tractor trailer, trailer or bus in any residential district on any public right-of-way, except during the process of loading or unloading such vehicles." 
I.  Section 1101(2)(i) is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 1101(2)(i). Twenty miles per hour in any school zone, where official signs are erected giving notice thereof, during hours of official school days, either when children are present or when such signs include flashing amber lights." 
J.  Section 1203 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 1203. Illegal parking. 
"(1)  It is unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle, or other modes of conveyance, whether occupied or not, on any private property, including private driveways in the City, without the consent of the owner or the person in possession of such property. 
"(2)  It is unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle which he or she owns or controls unattended on any portion of a street or highway right-of-way in the City for a period of seven (7) days or longer without moving or using such vehicle. Vehicles not registered to a nearby address shall be considered abandoned and may be ticketed and/or towed at the expense of the owner if such vehicles are not moved every 24 hours. 
"(3)  It is unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle or other personal property in the roadway or public right-of-way of a street, alley, or intersection within the City limits that is offered for sale or barter. 
"(4)  Parking of any vehicle or trailer in the front yard of a residentially zoned lot shall be prohibited unless such vehicle or trailer is parked on an improved area having a surface of paved asphalt or paved concrete or similar hard surface such as brick pavers. The foregoing notwithstanding, a vehicle or trailer may be parked on the area between a paved driveway and the nearest side property line provided that said area is covered entirely with gravel, rock, or similar material, at least one inch thick, contained and kept entire free of weeds. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that no mud, dirt, gravel, rock, or other material is displaced upon any adjacent sidewalk, street, or property. 
"(5)  It is unlawful for any person to leave in the public right-of-way any detached trailer, pickup camper, or boat. Such trailers may be towed by, or at the direction of, the City and such campers and boats may be removed and impounded at the expense of the owner. For purposes of this Section, "trailer" means any wheeled vehicle without motive power and designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. A "pickup camper" means a camper body capable of being loaded or unloaded from or to the bed of a pickup truck. 
"(6)  It is unlawful for any person to park any oversized private vehicle on public right-of-way in the area of the City zoned residential, except for temporary parking of vehicles used for loading or unloading of personal goods or property for a period not to exceed 24 hours. "Oversized private vehicle" shall mean any vehicle registered, licensed, or used for private purposes, including, but not limited to, buses, trucks, truck tractors, mobile homes, and recreation that exceeds 20 feet in length (20 feet combined length for vehicles with trailers), or eight feet or more in width or eight feet or more in height or 8,000 pounds or more in weight. Measurements made in the enforcement of this Section shall be made as follows: The height of vehicles shall be measured perpendicular to the parking surface to the uppermost portion of the vehicle including loads or any projections attached thereto with the exception of radio antennae, exhaust pipes, and vents. The length of vehicles shall be measured parallel to the long axis of the vehicle and shall include any projections permanently or temporarily attached thereto. 
"(7)  It is unlawful for any person to park any oversized commercial vehicle in any area in the City zoned residential, whether on public right-of-way or private residential property, with the exceptions listed below. "Oversized commercial vehicles" means any vehicle or trailer that is registered, licensed, or used for commercial purposes or displaying advertisements and exceeding 20 feet in length (20 feet in combined length for vehicles with trailers), or eight feet or more in width or eight feet or more in height, or 8,000 pounds or more in weight. Measurements made in the enforcement of this section shall be made as follows: The height of vehicles shall be measured perpendicular to the parking surface to the uppermost portion of the vehicle including loads or any projections attached thereto with the exception of radio antennae, exhaust pipes, and vents. The length of vehicles shall be measured parallel to the long axis of the vehicle and shall include any projections permanently or temporarily attached thereto. 
"(a)  Loading or unloading moving vans or similar type vehicles used for moving personal goods for a period of not to exceed 24 hours; 
"(b)  Temporary parking for purposes of pick-up or delivery for a period of not to exceed two hours; 
"(c)  Construction equipment or machinery employed in any authorized construction project for a period not to exceed the completion of such construction or construction project; 
"(d)  Truck tractors parked on paved driveways or approved paved off-street parking areas on the dwelling premises of the owner or regular driver thereof; 
"(e)  Any wrecker truck, designed and used to tow disabled vehicles while the wrecker truck is parked in the street in front of the dwelling of the owner or regular driver thereof, or on the dwelling premises of the owner or regular driver thereof." 
(8)  It is unlawful for any person to park an attached or detached semi-trailer with placarded loads containing hazardous materials on any portion of a street or highway right-of-way in the City, except for the temporary parking of a semi-trailer for the purpose of loading, unloading or any other similar commercial purpose. "Semi-trailer" means a trailer having wheels at the back but supported at the front by a towing vehicle. 
K.  Section 1212 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 1212. Prohibited uses. No person shall use any motor vehicle, bus, trailer, coach, or mobile home, self-propelled motor home, or recreational equipment for living, sleeping, housekeeping, or preparation of food except within a permitted recreational vehicle (RV) park/campground. This section shall not apply to such vehicles used to temporarily house guests of the property on which the vehicle is located, provided the vehicle is located on private residential property and such use does not exceed seven days within any calendar year. This section shall not apply to vehicles used for the temporary preparation and sale of food with a current County Health Department license and located in areas of the City other than those zoned residential." 
L.  Section 1410 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 1410. Operation of motor vehicles on park trails. 
"(1)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or other motorized conveyance on trails or pathways owned or under the control of the City Parks Department, except authorized vehicles designated by the City. Areas in which it shall be prohibited to operate motor vehicles shall be clearly posted." 
M.  Section 1718 is hereby added to read as follows: 
    " Section 1718. Parking violations. 
"(1)  Any vehicle parked or left such that it creates an immediate hazard may be towed without prior notice to the owner by the City at the owner's expense, and the owner of the vehicle shall pay the actual towing and storage fees for the release of the vehicle. 
"(2)  Any vehicle parked or left in violation of this Chapter, but that does not appear to create an immediate hazard in the opinion of the Police Department may be either (1) towed by the City at the owner's expense and the owner of the vehicle shall pay the actual towing and storage fees for the release of the vehicle after an officer of the City has conspicuously affixed to such vehicle a parking violation notice informing the user or owner that a particular parking or stopping violation has occurred at that time and place and after the violation has not been corrected within 24 hours; or (2) assessed a parking violation fine to be paid by the owner of such vehicle within 15 days of the date of such notice. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation, the fine for the particular violation, and the procedure for payment or dispute of the charge. The owner receiving said notice shall pay the fine within 15 days of the date of such notice or contact the Clerk of the Municipal Court and sign a written request in order to dispute the charge. Failure to do so shall cause a late penalty to be added to the fine and cause the assessment to be submitted to a collection agency for the collection of the delinquent fees plus the cost of collection." 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ; Ord. 524-11; 466-09; 431-08; 224-03; 217-03; 007-00; 1080-97; 842-92; 726 89; 725 89; 723 89; 702 88; 515-81; prior code 10.04.020) 
10.04.040 - Violation - penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this Chapter. The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions stated or adopted in this Chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), with the exception that the following Sections of the Model Traffic Code may be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year or by both such fine and imprisonment: 
(1)  Section 1105 Speed Contest; 
(2)  Section 1401 Reckless Driving; 
(3)  Section 1413 Eluding or Attempting to Elude a Police Officer. 
    The Municipal Court may also order persons convicted of driving without insurance under Section 1409 to pay restitution. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ; Ord. 524:11; 466-09; 251-04; 224-03; 1080-97; 837-92; 702 88; 515 81) 
10.04.050 - Application. 
    This Chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within the corporate limits of the City or areas outside the municipal limit the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Section 1401, 1402, and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and requirements concerning accidents and accident reports shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the City. 
(Ord. 524-11; 466-09; 224-03; 1080-97; 702 88; 515 81) 
10.04.060 - Interpretation. 
    This Chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this Chapter and of the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any way affect the scope, meaning, or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. 524-11; 466-09; 224-03; 1080-97; 702 88; 515 81) 
CHAPTER 10.05 - Truck Routes 

10.05.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the establishment and regulation of truck routes within the City that promote compatible land uses and enhance public safety. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.020 - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, a "Truck" shall mean a motor vehicle or combination vehicle/trailer designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation, loading or unloading of material and weighing over ten (10) tons (twenty thousand (20,000) pounds) empty weight. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.030 - Truck routes. 
    Truck routes shall be established by City Council by resolution. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.040 - Mandatory use of designated truck routes. 
A.  Thru Trucks: All Trucks travelling thru the City shall use designated truck routes. 
B.  Local Destination: All Trucks with a destination point in the City shall use the shortest practicable route to and from a point on the designated truck route. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.050 - Erection of signs. 
    The City shall erect signs to provide notice of designated truck routes. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.060 - Exceptions. 
    This Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Emergency vehicles; 
B.  Public and private utility vehicles engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, public utilities or private utilities within the City; 
C.  Government vehicles, including school district vehicles, in performance of their official duties; 
D.  Municipal transit vehicles; 
E.  Trucks ..... that are detoured from the truck route along an officially established alternative route; or 
F.  Recreational vehicles, including motor homes campers and travel trailers. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
10.05.070 - Violation. 
    Any person who violates this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.16 of the Code, except that such person shall not be subject to imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 640-15, 2015 ) 
TITLE 12 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
CHAPTER 12.04 - Excavations and Public Ways 

12.04.010 - Excavations - permit required - exemptions. 
    Any excavation or opening in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way within the limits of the City shall be done by a bonded contractor. Unless acting under a contract with the City or under a public improvements developer's agreement, it is unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized City official or employee in the course of his or her employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any of the above said work, without first acquiring an excavation permit from the City. 
(Ord. 1112-98, 1998; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.010) 
12.04.020 - Permit - application. 
    Any bonded contractor desiring to procure a permit required by Section 12.04.010 above shall file an application with the Director of Public Works at least forty-eight (48) hours before initializing construction. Except for emergencies, no excavation or repair shall be undertaken without a permit. In the case of emergencies, a permit must be acquired for the excavation within twenty-four (24) hours after the work has begun. The Department of Public Works shall be notified by the contractor at least twenty-four (24) hours before planned construction is to commence or upon start-up whenever construction is delayed for any reason. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.020) 
12.04.030 - Permit - deposit requirements. 
    No permit to excavate in any public right-of-way shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall have first deposited with the Director of Public Works a performance bond, cash bond or permit bond in an amount sufficient to cover the entire expense of replacing the surface and subsurface material, as required by this Chapter. If for any reason the amount of the deposit made under this Section is insufficient to cover the cost of work covered by it, or if any damage shall have been done not contemplated in the original estimate, which shall have caused increased expenditure by the City, the amounts of such deficiency or damage shall be certified to the Director of Public Works, who shall collect the same from the contractor to whom the permit was issued. No further permits shall be granted to such contractor, or any other person on his or her behalf, until the amount of such deficiency or damage shall have been paid to the City. Utility franchise holders shall be exempt from submitting such performance bond. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.030) 
12.04.040 - Permit - fees. 
    A fee shall be charged for a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter for an excavation of twenty-five (25) square feet or less (width x length, excluding depth). For excavations larger than twenty-five (25) square feet, an additional permit fee shall be charged for each additional twenty-five (25) square feet or fraction thereof. Such fees are established by the City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.060) 
12.04.050 - Permit - investigation fee for working without first obtaining a permit or not complying with a previously issued permit. 
    Whenever any work for which a permit is required under this Chapter is commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation fee shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued. If a permit is issued and the contractor is not complying with the provisions of this Chapter, the contractor is subject to an investigation fee under the issued permit. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the required permit fee. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.050) 
12.04.060 - Permit - denial of issuance. 
    The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to withhold issuance of a excavation permit to applicants who have failed to comply with regulations for work related to previously issued permits. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.070 - Deposit return conditions. 
    After completion of the work covered by a permit issued under this Chapter, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, the contractor shall certify the cost of any work or materials performed or furnished by the City. After deducting any such amount from the deposit, the Director of Public Works shall pay any surplus remaining from the amount deposited under Section 12.04.030 above to the person making the deposit. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.080 - Supervision of work. 
    All work on any excavation or opening in or under any street, sidewalk, alley or any other public right-of-way shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.070) 
12.04.090 - Rubber-tired equipment required. 
    All equipment placed on public streets and used for the cutting, ditching, backfilling or repairing of asphalt streets shall be on rubber tires, or placed on rubber pads, to prevent the marring or defacing of the asphalt surface. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.180) 
12.04.100 - Open cut method. 
    Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Director of Public Works, all openings and excavations authorized under the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by the open cut method. Asphalt openings shall be cut to the full thickness of the asphalt on a vertical face in a neat and rectangular shape, in order that repair may be made in a proper manner. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.080) 
12.04.110 - Width of openings. 
    The width of any opening or excavation authorized by the provisions of this Chapter shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work. In no case shall more than one-half (1/2) of the width of any street be opened at any one (1) time, and, in all cases, one-half (1/2) of such street shall remain intact for the accommodation of traffic, until the first half is restored for safe use, unless specifically authorized by the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.090) 
12.04.120 - Undercutting prohibited. 
    No opening or excavation made in any street, sidewalk or any other public right-of-way shall be undercut, or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.100) 
12.04.130 - Protection for workmen. 
    Due precautions shall be taken for the protection of workmen when any excavation under this Chapter is undertaken. It is the contractor's responsibility to maintain and secure the safety of himself or herself, his or her subcontractors and the public. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.140) 
12.04.140 - Public convenience required. 
    All work on openings or excavations in or under any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way shall be performed in such a way as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and restriction to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.150) 
12.04.150 - Protection of pipes, poles and other equipment. 
A.  Any contractor making an opening or excavation in or under any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way shall, at his or her expense, sustain, secure and protect any pipes, poles, mains or conduits laid or erected in public right-of-way from damage, and replace and pack the earth wherever the same shall have been removed, loosened or disturbed under or around them, so that they shall be well and substantially supported. 
B.  If any contractor fails to sustain, secure or protect pipes, poles, mains, conduits or similar equipment from damage, or to replace and pack the earth under or around such appurtenances, as the provisions of this Section requires, then the repairs may be done by the owner of such appurtenances, and the cost thereof and all damages sustained by such owner shall be paid by such contractor; and in default thereof, such owner may maintain an action against the contractor therefor. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.130) 
12.04.160 - Traffic control - required. 
    A traffic control plan shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencing work. The contractor/owner shall be responsible for all types of traffic, including pedestrians, in the construction area. The contractor/owner making or causing to be made any excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, or within five (5) feet of a traveled pathway, shall keep the excavation traffic control properly maintained at all times; and between sunset and sunrise on every night the same remains open or danger exists there from, they shall keep such excavation or opening properly lighted so as to warn all persons of such excavation or opening, and all obstructions. All traffic control devices shall be of substantial construction, and shall be furnished by the person doing the work. Safety devices must be in compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and the Colorado Supplement to the MUTCD. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.170 - Traffic control - removal prohibited when. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove or interfere in any way with any traffic control devices or other danger signals placed around the excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.180 - Cuts in pavement - technical specifications - resurfacing. 
A.  The Director of Public Works shall promulgate technical specifications for the repair of street cuts and excavations and provide for the inspection and acceptance of street cut repairs. 
B.  The area surrounding the opening shall be cleared of all debris and left in its original condition. All work areas will be cleaned thoroughly before acceptance by the City. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.190 - Variances from chapter provisions. 
    Applications for a variance or modification to the provisions of this Chapter shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals, such application shall include a statement setting forth the nature and the extent of the requested variance or modification, together with evidence supporting need for such variance. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.200 - Inspections. 
    All work shall be inspected by a designated representative of the Department of Public Works who shall have the authority to halt construction. Whenever any portion is found to be in violation of the approved plans, the Director of Public Works, by written notice, may order that portion of construction which is in violation of this chapter or other approved plans, specifications and materials to cease until such violation is corrected. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the contractor's permit application for future review. If deficiencies are not corrected, performance shall be required of the contractor's surety. A reinspection of constructed facilities shall occur at the end of the one-year warranty period. 
(Ord. 1112-98) 
12.04.210 - Timely completion of work. 
    All openings shall be completely repaired to original condition within ten (10) days after the job for which the cut was made is completed, extensions may be authorized by the Director of Public Works for weather conditions or for other substantial reasoning. Any work not completed within the ten (10) days and does not have an authorized extension is subject to an investigation fee. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.170) 
12.04.220 - Liability limitations. 
    Any contractor who acquires a permit for work within public right-of-way shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all suits, claims, losses or damages which arise from or are connected with or result from such work. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.040) 
12.04.230 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1112-98; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 550 82; prior code 13.20.190) 
CHAPTER 12.08 - Street and Curb Cuts 

12.08.010 - Permit - required when. 
    It is unlawful to cut or open any paved street or alley in the City without first obtaining a permit to make such cut or opening from the City Clerk's office. 
(Ord. 265, 1973) 
12.08.020 - Permit - bond requirements. 
    A performance bond shall be furnished and paid by the applicant and delivered to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of any street cut permit. The bond shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and so drawn that the City may recover such costs as it may incur in any corrective work or repairing of faulty street cuts and excavations. Utility franchise holders shall be exempt from submitting such performance bond. 
(Ord. 265, 1973) 
12.08.030 - Permit - denial of issuance. 
    The City Clerk, upon recommendation of the City Manager, shall withhold issuance of a street cut permit to applicants who have failed to follow the regulations for street repairs in previous street cuts. 
(Ord. 265, 1973) 
12.08.040 - Cuts in pavement - technical specifications - resurfacing. 
    The City Manager shall promulgate technical specifications for the repair of street cuts and excavations, establish a resurfacing fee and provide for the inspection and acceptance of street cut repairs. 
(Ord. 265, 1973) 
12.08.050 - Cuts in pavement - dimensions and other requirements. 
A.  Authorized and allowable curb cuts by the City Manager or City Engineer shall be as follows: 
1.  Commercial cuts: thirty-five (35) feet maximum; 
2.  Residential cuts: twenty-four (24) feet maximum. 
B.  All curb cuts shall be done in a workmanlike manner, and there shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet between curb cuts. 
C.  In manufacturing or industrial zones, as approved in the official zoning map, the City Manager or City Engineer may permit valley gutters and other types of curbs which do not need curb cuts. 
(Ord. 265 (part), 1973) 
12.08.060 - Variances from chapter provisions. 
    Applications for a variance to the provisions of this Chapter may be made to the City Council, and the City Council shall have the authority to grant such variances. 
(Ord. 265, 1973) 
CHAPTER 12.10 - Access to Public Streets 

12.10.010 - Legislative intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find that regulation of private access to public streets is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare to maintain smooth traffic flow, to maintain highway right-of-drainage and to protect the functional level of public streets. 
(Ord. 274-04) 
12.10.020 - Access permit required. 
    No private access to a public street or roadway shall be constructed without the issuance from the Public Works Department of an access permit. The issuance of an access permit shall be based upon consideration of existing and projected traffic volumes, the functional classification of the public roadway or street, local transportation plans and needs, drainage requirements, the character of lands adjoining the streets, adopted land use plans and zoning, the type and volume of traffic to use the driveway or other access, other operational aspects of the access, the availability of vehicular access from other streets and roadways, and reasonable access requirements. 
(Ord. 274-04) 
12.10.030 - Prior access construction. 
    All accesses to public streets constructed prior to the effective date of the provisions of this Chapter are hereby confirmed provided that such access does not pose a danger to the public health, safety and welfare and further provided that all conditions of the previously permitted access, including any development standards have been met, maintained and are not currently in violation of any City requirements, including but not limited to City safety standards and/or development agreements, regulations and requirements. 
(Ord. 274-04) 
12.10.040 - Violations. 
    When a permitted access is constructed or utilized in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, any permit issuance, terms and conditions, development agreements or requirements, the City may revoke the access permit if one has been granted or if not, upon the issuance of reasonable notice, the City may install barriers across or remove any driveway providing direct access to a City street or roadway which is constructed without the appropriate permit or that is otherwise in violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 274-04) 
12.10.050 - Violation - penalty. 
    A person who violates the requirements of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 274-04) 
CHAPTER 12.12 - Improvement Districts 

12.12.010 - Creation of districts - City Council authority. 
    The City Council, on its own initiative, shall have the power and authority to create local improvement districts for making improvements of a local or special nature, including constructing, widening and surfacing streets and alleys; constructing or reconstructing sidewalks, curbs and gutters; extending and constructing sanitation and storm sewers and water lines; setting apart portions of streets and alley rights of way for use as pedestrian malls and constructing improvements on or under such pedestrian malls; creating parks; constructing off street parking facilities; and landscaping nontraveled portions of streets and alley rights of way. The above reference to specific types of local improvements shall not limit the authority of the City Council to create improvement districts for other types of improvements which confer special benefits on property within the local improvement district in addition to the general benefits conferred to the City at large. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.020 - Creation of districts - property owner petitions considered. 
    The City Council shall not be required to create local improvements districts upon petition of property owners; but, in exercising its judgment on the question of creating local improvement districts, the City Council shall consider the desires of real property owners, as expressed by petition, along with other pertinent factors. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.030 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the construction of local improvements or purchase of existing facilities in accordance with applicable provisions of state law or pursuant to private contract. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.040 - Creation of districts - ordinance required - public hearing. 
    If the City Council desires to provide for a local improvement, it shall adopt an ordinance creating an improvement district for that purpose. Immediately following the first reading of the proposed ordinance, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing to take place no sooner than twelve (12) days from the first reading. The creating ordinance shall set forth, insofar as possible: 
A.  A description of the type of improvement proposed; 
B.  The anticipated maximum costs of the improvement or the unit cost; 
C.  The legal descriptions of the lands and lots to be included in the improvement district, and the street addresses of those lands and lots; and 
D.  The names of the apparent owners of such lands or lots. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.050 - Public hearing - notice required. 
A.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given by virtue of publication of the proposed ordinance as required by the City Charter. In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a notice, at least seven (7) days before the public hearing, to each person named in the proposed ordinance to the property address shown therein. 
B.  The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing, the type of local improvement proposed and the anticipated maximum cost or unit cost, and shall contain a statement that a portion of the cost will be assessed against the addressee's property. The notice further shall invite the addressee to attend the public hearing, and shall inform him or her that failure to do so may prejudice his or her rights. The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the County, at least seven (7) days before the public hearing. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.060 - Public hearing - procedures. 
    At the public hearing, the City Council shall consider all petitions, evidence and arguments pertaining generally to whether the proposed improvement is necessary or advisable. The City Council shall thereupon reject the proposed ordinance or finally accept it. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.070 - Public hearing - continuation permitted when. 
    Any hearing provided for under this Chapter may be continued by the City Council for any good reason without any additional notice being given of the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.080 - Property included in districts. 
A.  Local improvement districts created for constructing, widening and surfacing streets or alleys; constructing or reconstructing sidewalks, curbs and gutters and bike paths; and extending or constructing sanitation sewers and water lines may consist of the lots and lands abutting on the right of way to be so improved or in which such sewer or water line is to be installed; or any other reasonable method of assessment so long as such method has some correlation to a special benefit which accrues to the property to be assessed. 
B.  Improvement districts created for making other improvements shall consist of lands or lots comprising the area which the City Council determines will be specifically benefitted by such local improvements. 
(Ord. 951-95; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.090 - Construction of improvements. 
    After final passage of the ordinance creating the improvement district, the City shall make such improvement, or authorize it to be done. Construction of the improvement, or other steps necessary to create it, shall commence within a reasonable time after such final passage. However, construction of sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall not be commenced for a period of thirty (30) days following final passage of the ordinance. During that time, any owner of lands or lots included in the improvement district may deliver to the City engineer a signed and dated statement expressing the landowner's intention to construct or have constructed that portion of the sidewalk, curb or gutter which will abut on his or her property. Upon filing such statement, the landowner shall have the right and duty to construct or have constructed, at his or her sole expense, that portion of the sidewalk, curb or gutter, provided that the construction shall be completed within a reasonable time and shall be completed in strict conformity to the specifications contained on file with the City. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.100 - Surfacing and graveling work. 
    In performing surfacing or graveling work on a street or alley improvement being made pursuant to this Chapter, the City Engineer may authorize the use of gravel or other paving materials owned by the City without including the cost of such materials in computing the total cost of the local improvement. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.110 - Completion of work - cost report - City Council action. 
    Upon completion of the local improvement, the City Engineer shall prepare a report of the costs thereof, including the incidental expenses referred to in Section 12.12.130 below. The report shall also recommend the cost, if any, to be charged against revenues of the City, shall recommend the proposed allocation of the costs among the lands and lots in the improvement district and, if applicable, shall contain a recommendation as to the life expectancy for paving on streets, avenues and alleys, along with a summary of the data upon which such recommendation is made. Such report shall be presented to the City Council at a regular meeting, and the City Council shall thereafter pass on first reading an assessment ordinance. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.120 - Costs - basis of assessment. 
    The costs of those local improvements described in Subsection 12.12.080.A of this Chapter shall be assessed proportionately on the basis of right of way frontage or any other reasonable method of assessment, so long as such method has come correlation to a special benefit which accrues to the property to be assessed against the lots and lands included in the improvement district created for any such improvements, except that assessments for constructing or extending sewers and water lines shall be allocated equally to each lot or parcel of land in the local improvement district. 
(Ord. 951-95; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.130 - Costs - items and interest included. 
    The cost of a local improvement which is to be assessed, or a portion of which is to be assessed, against lots and lands in a local improvement district, shall include not only the cost of labor and materials involved in making the improvement, but also shall include the expense of engineering, inspection, advertisement, abstracting, publishing, postage, collection and other incidental costs, and shall also include interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per year from the date of the City's payment for such construction until the assessment is established by the assessment ordinance. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.140 - Costs - payment from tax revenues when. 
    Nothing in this Section or Sections 12.12.120 or 12.12.130 above shall prevent the City Council from determining that a portion of the costs of any local improvement shall be paid from the general property tax revenues of the City, to the extent that a local improvement confers a general benefit upon the City at large, or a special benefit upon the property owned by the City. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.150 - Bond issuance authorized when. 
    For the purpose of paying all or such portion of the cost of any local improvements constructed under the provisions of this Chapter as may be assessed against property specially benefitted, local improvement district bonds of the City may be issued, subject to any and all limitations as contained in the City Charter. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.160 - Assessment ordinance - contents. 
    The assessment ordinance shall set forth a description of the improvement, the total cost thereof and a separate statement of the total incidental costs, a description of the lots and lands included in the improvement district, the names of the apparent owners of such lands and lots, and the amount being assessed against each lot or parcel of land in the improvement district. The assessment ordinance also shall set forth when such assessments are due and payable, the rate of interest to be charged thereon and, if applicable, the life expectancy as determined by the City Council for the paving on any street, avenue or alley. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.170 - Assessment ordinance - public hearing - notice. 
A.  At the time of passing the assessment ordinance, on first reading, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing to take place no sooner than twenty-eight (28) days thereafter. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by virtue of publication of the proposed ordinance as required by the City Charter. In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a notice, at least seven (7) days before the public hearing, to each person named in the proposed ordinance to the property address shown therein. 
B.  The notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the property address stated in the proposed assessment ordinance. The notice further shall invite the addressee to attend the public hearing and shall inform him or her that failure to do so may prejudice his or her rights. 
(Ord. 115-01; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.180 - Assessment ordinance - public hearing - City Council action. 
    At the public hearing, the City Council shall consider all complaints and objections as to the proposed assessment ordinance and shall make such adjustments as shall be necessary to carry out the purpose and requirements of this Chapter. Thereupon the assessment ordinance shall be passed on final reading or, if necessary to reflect the adjustments, a new assessment ordinance or resolution shall be introduced. In the latter event, no additional notice shall be required. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from finally passing the assessment ordinance initially proposed, and thereafter accomplishing the required adjustments by a supplemental assessment ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.190 - Assessments - payment time. 
    All assessments shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the assessing ordinance, without demand; except that all assessments may be paid, at the election of the owner, in installments with interest as provided in this Chapter. In case of such election to pay in installments, the assessments shall be payable in two (2) or more equal installments or principal with interest in all cases on the unpaid principal payable annually or semiannually. The number of installments and the period of payment shall be determined by the City Council, and set forth in the assessing ordinance. The entire assessment, or the full balance thereof remaining after the payment of one (1) or more annual installments may, at the option of the property owner, be paid at any one (1) installment payment date. 
(Ord. 510 81; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.200 - Assessments - failure to pay - installments elected. 
    Failure to pay the whole assessment within the period of thirty (30) days, as set forth in Section 12.12.190 above, shall be conclusively considered to be an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in installments. All persons so electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively considered to have consented to such improvements. Such election shall be conclusively considered to be a waiver of any right to question the power or jurisdiction of the municipality to construct the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings, the validity or the correctness of the assessments, or the validity of the lien thereof. 
(Ord. 510 81; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.210 - Assessments - late payments. 
    If any required assessment payment is not made when due, the treasurer immediately shall certify the full unpaid portion thereof, together with all accrued interest, and together with a ten percent (10)%) collection charge to the County Treasurer for collection as provided by law. 
(Ord. 510 81; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.220 - Assessments - interest rate. 
    All assessments shall bear interest at a rate to be determined by the City Council and set forth in the assessment ordinance. The rate shall be reflective of the then-prevailing interest rates on local or special improvement district bonds issued to finance comparable improvements. Interest, at the rate so established, shall be charged against the unpaid portion of each assessment from the thirteenth day following the effective date of the assessment ordinance to the time when the assessment is fully paid. 
(Ord. 510 81; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.230 - Assessments - perpetual - liens. 
    All assessments made in substantial compliance with this Chapter shall constitute, from the effective date of the assessment ordinance, a perpetual lien in the amounts assessed against the real property described in the assessment ordinance, and shall have priority over all other liens except prior tax or assessment liens. The lien of any assessment finally fixed by a supplemental assessment ordinance or resolution, as provided in Section 12.12.180 of this Chapter, shall relate back to the effective date of the assessment ordinance so supplemented. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.240 - Assessment proceeds - use restrictions. 
    All assessments collected either directly by the City or through taxation by the county treasurer shall be used to pay the costs of the improvement to which the assessments are applicable, and to redeem or pay any warrants, bonds or other forms of indebtedness incurred by the City on account of such improvements. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.250 - Assessments - recordkeeping - assessment roll. 
    The treasurer shall record all final assessments in an assessment roll to be kept for that purpose, showing the names of landowners, the amounts assessed against such lots and lands, the dates of the assessments, the amounts paid thereon and other appropriate information. 
(Ord. 510 81; Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.260 - Limitations on actions. 
A.  No legal or equitable action shall be brought or maintained to enjoin or in any way challenge the creation of a local improvement district, or the collection of assessments thereunder, unless such action shall be brought within thirty (30) days from the final passage of the applicable assessment ordinance. 
B.  No legal or equitable action shall be brought to enjoin or in any way challenge the issuance of local improvement district bonds by the City Council, unless such action is brought within thirty (30) days following the final passage of the ordinance authorizing such bonds. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.270 - Existing facilities - purchase by City - conditions. 
    The City Council shall have the power and authority to purchase existing facilities, such as those that could have been constructed and financed as local improvements pursuant to Sections 12.12.010, 12.12.030, 12.12.070, 12.12.100, 12.12.260 and 12.12.280 of this Chapter, and to finance any such purchase by creating a local improvement district and including therein the property serviced by such existing facilities. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
12.12.280 - Reconstruction or repair of improvements. 
    The reconstruction of a local improvement previously constructed as a local improvement may be financed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in the same manner as initial construction. The repair of any such local improvement shall not be so financed. The City Engineer shall report to the City Council on the question of whether work proposed to be done is repair work, or is reconstruction work, giving the reasons for his or her determination. The final determination of the question shall rest with the City Council, and such determination shall take into account the life expectancy for paving on any street, avenue and alley as set forth in the assessment ordinance applicable to the local improvement in question. 
(Ord. 266-73) 
CHAPTER 12.16 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 466-09 
CHAPTER 12.24 - Privilege to Use Public Rights-of-Way 

12.24.010 - Legislative intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find, determine and declare: 
A.  Using easements and rights-of-way granted by the City involves the use, availability and potential use of City personnel and facilities and creates the potential for hazards and may require standby and active service by fire, police and other local safety agencies, as well as the Public Works Department, and are matters of local and municipal concern. 
B.  That the nature of demands placed on the municipality with the use of public easements, streets and rights-of-way, and the potential and actual hazards from the operations of such use has a substantial effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and upon the expenditures to be budgeted by the City. 
C.  That the use of the streets, alleys and public rights-of-way located within the City is a valuable special privilege not provided to the public generally and for which the City is entitled to consideration in the form of rental fees. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.020 - Rental fee. 
    A rental fee for occupying and using City right-of-way shall be required by the City and paid by the user of such right-of-way calculated to be ten cents ($0.10) per lineal foot per month of right-of-way occupied. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.030 - Time of payment of fee. 
    The rental fee levied by this Chapter shall accrue against each and every user of public right-of-way and shall be payable in quarterly installments. Such installments shall be paid no later than the tenth day after the end of each quarter. Any quarterly installment not paid on or before said date shall be considered delinquent. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.040 - Interest on deficiency. 
    Interest on any deficiency in payment of this rental fee shall accrue at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.050 - Failure to pay. 
    If any user subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall fail to pay the rental fees as herein provided, the full amount thereof plus costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be due and collected from such user; and the same, together with an additional ten percent (10%) of the amount of rental fees due, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such user to the City. The computation of said ten percent (10%) shall be in addition to interest on the deficiency as set forth in this Section. The City Attorney, upon direction of the City Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect said debt. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.060 - Administrative hearings. 
    Any user subject to the provisions of this Chapter may request a hearing on the levy of the rental fees after receiving a notice of final determination, assessment, demand for payment, or denial of claim for refund. Such hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed hereinafter: 
A.  If a user disputes the reasonableness or applicability of the rental fee, it may seek review of the assessment by filing a protest with the City Treasurer within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the accounting statement. If such a protest is filed, the user shall appear before the City Treasurer at a date specified. The user shall be notified of this hearing date by certified mail, return receipt requested. At this hearing, the user may present evidence regarding the reasonableness or applicability of the rental fee. The user shall bear the burden of proof. 
B.  Said hearing shall be solely for the purpose of hearing protests as to the reasonableness and applicability of the rental fee as calculated for that specific user. 
C.  At said hearing, the City Treasurer shall have all powers necessary to ensure the fair and efficient conduct of the hearing, but shall not be bound by the Colorado Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be open to the public. 
D.  Within sixty (60) days of such hearing, the City Treasurer shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such final order to the protestant and the City Manager. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.070 - Administration of rental fee. 
    The City Treasurer shall administer the provisions of this Article. The City Manager may promulgate rules or regulations to aid in the enforcement and administration of this Chapter, pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.080 - Local purpose. 
    It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Chapter shall be construed to mean that any user subject to this rental fee is granted a franchise by the City. However, if a franchise is granted by the City Council, the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply insofar as it concerns items specifically addressed by the Franchise Agreement. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.090 - Reimbursement of costs. 
    Any entity challenging the validity, legality, applicability or constitutionality of this Chapter, or the rents levied, if unsuccessful, will reimburse the City for all costs incurred, including attorneys' fees, in such litigation. 
(Ord. 269-04) 
12.24.100 - Violation - penalty. 
    A person who violates the requirements of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; 
Ord. 269-04) 
TITLE 13 - Public Services 
CHAPTER 13.04 - Utilities Department and Waterworks System 

13.04.010 - Establishment of Water Utilities Enterprise. 
A.  The City Council hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the Municipal Water System as an Enterprise within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
B.  The City Council hereby formally establishes the City of Evans Water Utilities Enterprise (the "Enterprise"), pursuant to the Act, for the purpose of continuing the operation of the Municipal Water System as a Water Activity Enterprise under the Act and as an Enterprise within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 1030-97; Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552 82; prior code 12.08.010) 
13.04.020 - City Council as governing body - Enterprise funds. 
A.  The City Council hereby designates itself as the governing body of the Enterprise, pursuant to the Act. 
B.  To the extent it deems necessary, the governing body of the Enterprise shall exercise the City's legal authority relating to the Municipal Water System, but shall not levy a tax that is subject to Section 20(4) of Article X of the State Constitution. 
C.  The Enterprise shall have no power to impose or levy any tax. 
D.  Funds of the Enterprise and funds of the City may be commingled for purposes of investment so long as accurate records are kept of the amount of such funds allocable to the Enterprise and to the City. 
E.  All action (not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section) heretofore taken by the City Council or by the officers and employees of the City directed toward the operation of the Municipal Water System as an "Enterprise" under Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. 1030-97, 1997; Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982; prior code 12.08.020) 
13.04.030 - Authorization - required for use of water. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, user or other person to turn on, or cause to be turned on, water for any premises, or to take and use water on any premises, without first obtaining written authorization from the Utilities Director. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982; prior code 12.08.030) 
13.04.040 - Meters - use required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, user or other person to take or use water except through a water meter and without first obtaining authorization from the Utilities Director. 
B.  It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, user or other person to take, use or in any other manner obtain water from the City water system when the meter has been removed; or when the service has been shut-off by the City or otherwise designated unauthorized for use. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982; prior code 12.08.120, 12.08.130) 
13.04.050 - Service and meters - installation, specifications, maintenance and repairs. 
A.  The City may install water meters for the individual users, and charge actual costs to the property and/or owner, including but not limited to: the meter, service line, shut-off valve, all other necessary materials, equipment time, labor and repairs to the street, alley and/or easement which may be caused by the installation as determined by the City. In the case of undeveloped property, the owner, lessee or user of any water shall have the option of requesting that the system development fee established in Sections 13.04.170 and 13.04.180 of this Chapter be paid at the time application is made for building permits. The meter, valve, service line and all other materials shall become and remain the property of the City. 
B.  The City may grant authorization to or require that the installation of the meter, service line, shut-off valve and other necessary construction be performed by contractors who possess the required permits from the City or by persons authorized by employment through the City. All connections or taps shall be installed as prescribed by ordinance, resolution and the International Plumbing Code as currently adopted by the City. 
C.  Meters, valves, services lines and all other materials used in the water service installation shall meet specifications outlined in material standards approved by the City. The method and manner in which installations are accomplished shall be subject to City approval and shall meet construction standards as approved by the City. All materials used and construction performed shall be under the supervision of the Utilities Director, inspected and accepted by the City prior to the water service being turned on. 
D.  The Utilities Director shall have the authority to disconnect or shut-off the water from any main or service line for the purpose of repairing, causing the owner to repair the same when on private property and for making connections or extensions or for the servicing of any part of the water works system. The City shall be responsible for the general maintenance and repair of the meter, shut-off valve and service lines located on City right-of-way and easements established for City utilities. Responsibility for repair and maintenance problems experienced with the service lines, shut-off valve or meters which are determined by the City to have occurred on private property and not right-of-way and easements established for City utilities, shall be that of the property owner. The maintenance and repairs responsibility of property owners shall include problems caused by freezing. All maintenance, repairs and replacements performed are subject to the procedures and requirements established in Subsections A, B and C above. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982; prior code 12.08.110, 12.08.120, 12.08.170, 12.08.180) 
13.04.060 - Compound taps, more than one service line per tap and taps from service line extension prohibited - corrections - exceptions. 
A.  1. Existing services. The use of compound water taps or more than one (1) service line for each tap is prohibited, and in case any such connection has been heretofore made it shall be the duty of the Utilities Director to disconnect the same and separate such service lines in order that each service line be served by a separate tap. The owner of lots or premises being served shall pay the full cost of making the taps and installing new service lines, and shall be required to pay system development fees. The current system development fee schedule shall be the basis of such payment. The owner may apply to the Utilities Director for an exemption to the requirement of payment of system development fees. If the Utilities Director determines that the compound tap was legal at the time it was made, and that separation will not increase demand on the system, he or she shall grant the exemption. If the decision of Utilities Director is to deny such a waiver, the owner may appeal the matter to the Water and Sewer Board. The decision by the Water and Sewer Board shall be final. 
2.  Proposed services. A separate and independent water service shall be provided for every building; except where a building is located or is proposed to be located at the rear of another on the same lot or parcel and, with the prior written approval of the Utilities Director, the service line may be extended to the rear building provided that all buildings and properties are under the same ownership and are being used as accessory uses associated with the primary building (i.e., detached garages, warehouses). 
B.  No connection to the water system or use of water there from shall be made through any extension of the service lines of any other premise. 
C.  The Utilities Director may grant exceptions to the compound tap restriction in certain cases where the water lines and service laterals have been installed and additional utility service is required as a result of rezoning or subdivision of land which increases the number of dwelling units to be served by existing taps. The use of a common service by abutting property owners shall not alter the maintenance responsibility by the users of the common building service. The common service shall not constitute a public responsibility and the Utilities Director shall not perform maintenance or repair on the separate or combined service lines that may serve abutting properties. 
D.  If the request for compound taps is denied, the Utilities Director shall give his or her reason for the denial in writing, upon request of the applicant. If the request is denied and if the applicant desires a review of the matter by the Water Board, the applicant shall apply to the City Clerk, no later than thirty (30) days after notice of denial, to have the matter scheduled as early as reasonably possible for consideration by the Water Board at a regular or special meeting. The Water Board shall make its findings and recommendations regarding the compound tap to the City Council for its final decision. 
(Ord. 1022-96, 1997; Ord. 788-91, 1991) 
13.04.070 - Paving of streets - service lines to be laid and charges paid before paving. 
    Before a street is paved, the owner of every lot constituting separate premises, abutting upon the street where a water main is laid, shall pay the proper connection charges as applicable and the Utilities Director shall ensure that service lines are installed or replaced to meet current specifications prior to the street paving. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991) 
13.04.080 - Service charges - set by City Council. 
A.  There shall be assessments and charges for the use of water. Rates, rents, delivery costs and system development fees shall be established by City Council by resolution. 
B.  Prior to acting upon any change in water rates, rents, delivery costs or system development fees, the City Council shall first receive the report and recommendation of the Water and Sewer Board as provided in Chapter 2.24 of this Code. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 613 85, 1985; Ord. 552 82, 1982; prior code 12.08.140) 
13.04.090 - (Repealed). 
13.04.100 - (Repealed). 
13.04.110 - (Repealed). 
13.04.120 - Procedures and assessment - for notice, past due account, turn on and shut-off. 
A.  Water usage is billed to the property owner or property manager of a service address, at the end of a billing period, for water usage during the billing period. A service account is considered past due when the billing for the current period reflects an unpaid balance from previous billing periods. 
B.  Holders of interest, as shown on the Finance Department records, of service accounts thirty (30) days or more past due shall be notified by separate first class mailing or on the utility billing statement. Notification shall include the date after which water is scheduled to be shut-off and the amount that must be paid. A notification fee will be added to the account balance. 
D.  The failure of any such person to receive notification of impending shut-off shall not affect the validity of any actions taken under this Section and shall not relieve any person from obligations imposed on him or her by this Section. 
E.  The City shall discontinue water service for nonpayment after the specified date. When payment of a past due balance is not received prior to the scheduled shut-off date, a delinquency fee will be added to the past due balance to cover costs to the City in activating shut-off procedures, regardless of actual water shut-off. 
F.  Whenever it is necessary to make a shut-off of water service from inside a user's building or premises, the Utilities Director or authorized representative may enter such building or premises, but shall present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Utilities Director or his or her authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the Utilities Director or authorized representative shall have first obtained a warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Utilities Director or his or her authorized representative. 
G.  Water service which has been shut-off for nonpayment shall be restored when the total past due balance plus all assessments including interest, notification fees, attorney fees and court costs have been paid in full. 
H.  The Utilities Director may recommend the continuation of water service to a customer who can verify exigent circumstances. The recommendation shall include a written alternative arrangement for payment of past due balances, assessments and fees. 
(Ord. 221-03, 2003; Ord. 1124-98, 1998; Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982: prior code 12.08.040) 
13.04.130 - Charges when meter or remote reader not functioning. 
A.  If any meter fails to register water usage in any billing period the service account shall be charged the average usage which occurred during the corresponding billing period of the previous three (3) years, or a reasonable estimated usage when prior usage data is not available, as determined by the Utilities Director. 
B.  If a water meter remote reader indicates a water usage less than usage indicated by the water meter, the water meter shall be removed and tested. If the test results indicate that a meter operates within reasonable limits as certified by the manufacturer and established by the Utilities Director, the meter reading shall be used to calculate water usage to be billed for the billing period in which it is discovered the remote reader malfunctioned. The average usage of the corresponding billing periods of the previous three (3) years shall be charged at the current rate. Excess usage shall be charged at the weighted average rate in effect during the three (3) years prior to the billing period during which the discrepancy between the meter and the remote reader was discovered. The service account may be granted an additional three (3) months to pay the charges for excess usage. 
C.  If a water meter remote reader indicates a water usage greater than usage indicated by the water meter, the water meter shall be removed and tested. If the test results indicate that a meter operates within reasonable limits as certified by the manufacturer and established by the Utilities Director, the meter reading shall be used to calculate water usage to be billed for the billing period in which it is discovered the remote reader malfunctioned. The average usage of the corresponding billing periods of the previous three (3) years shall be charged at the current rate. Excess usage previously billed, shall be credited at the weighted average rate in effect during the three (3) years prior to the billing period during which the discrepancy between the meter and the remote reader was discovered. 
D.  If a situation regarding charges arise and it is a result of a malfunctioning water meter or remote reader and is not addressed by this ordinance or other resolution adopted by the City Council, then the Utilities Director shall make a recommendation to the Water and Sewer Board which shall approve or modify and approve the recommendation for water usage to be charged. 
(Ord. 788-91, 1991; Ord. 552 82, 1982: prior code 12.08.190) 
13.04.140 - Payment of charges - City Treasurer's duties. 
    All charges for the use of water shall be paid to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall make a monthly report to the Utilities Director of all funds collected, customer billings, unpaid bills, amount of water billed for and such other information as required by the Utilities Director. 
(Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552 82; prior code 12.08.070) 
13.04.150 - Unpaid charges made lien on premises. 
A.  All water rates and rents shall be a charge and lien upon the premises to which water is delivered, from the date the same become due and until paid, and the owner of every building, premises, lot or house shall be liable for all water delivered to or taken and used upon his or her or her premises, which lien and liability may be enforced by the City by action at law or suit to enforce the lien. In case the tenant in possession of the premises or building pays the water rent or rates, it shall relieve his or her or her landlord from such obligation and lien; but the City shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of water rents and rates as provided in this Chapter. 
B.  If such water rates and rents remain unpaid after a thirty (30) day demand for payment of the same has been made, such water rates and rents may be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. 
(Ord. 943-94; Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552 82; prior code 12.08.160) 
13.04.160 - Owner requested meter testing and shut-offs - procedures and assessments. 
A.  Water service may be discontinued upon request of the owner, lessee or user of water. The City may require an affidavit signed by the owner, lessee or user prior to shut-off. The affidavit shall include the service address, reason for shut-off request and whether property is owner occupied, tenant occupied or vacant. Water shall not be discontinued if reasons for the requested shut-off is related to a landlord tenant dispute. If the shut-off is granted, there will be a fee assessed to restore the water service. 
B.  Meter testing at owner, lessee or user request shall be granted for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the meter. If the meter is found to be operating within tolerable limits as certified by the manufacturer and as established by the Utilities Director there will be a fee assessed for the testing provided. If the meter is found to be malfunctioning there will be no charge for the meter testing service. 
(Ord. 1124-98; Ord. 788-91) 
13.04.170 - (Repealed). 
13.04.180 - (Repealed). 
13.04.190 - Waterworks Fund. 
    There shall be established a Waterworks Fund, and all fees, rates, rents and charges for water shall be deposited and expended from such Fund; no part of the Fund may be transferred to any other fund or used for purposes other than operations and maintenance and the payment of bonds and interest of waterworks bonds. 
(Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552 82; prior code 12.08.150) 
13.04.200 - Water conservation measures. 
A.  The use of water for sprinkling of lawns, gardens and trees will be permitted on scheduled days except between the hours of 12:00 and 5:00 p.m. For fixing the date upon which water may be used for sprinkling, the water customers of the City are divided into two (2) divisions, as follows: 
1.  Single-family residences with even-numbered building addresses shall use water for sprinkling on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday of each week, and single-family residences with odd-numbered building addresses shall use water for sprinkling on Monday, Wednesday and Saturday of each week. 
2.  All other properties including commercial, multi-family residents, apartments, government, and nonprofit organizations shall use water for sprinkling on Sunday, Tuesday and Friday of each week. 
3.  The use of water for sprinkling of lawns, gardens and trees on certain grounds served by the City water system will be permitted during the twenty-four-hour periods of each day of the week. The grounds to which this Paragraph refers include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  City public grounds, School District 6 grounds and other private properties with multiple addresses having large irrigated areas. 
b.  Newly seeded or sodded lawns less than three (3) months old. 
B.  The above listed restrictions shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on April 15 of each calendar year and shall be in effect until October 15 of each calendar year, except that heavy use athletic fields, as determined by the City, may begin watering as early as March 15 of each calendar year. 
C.  If drought conditions occur, the City Council, by resolution, may declare a drought emergency and implement appropriate procedures and watering restrictions under the most current Drought Management Plan. Those water restrictions will then supersede Subsections A and B above. Once a "drought stage" is implemented a violation of the applicable restrictions shall be a violation of this Code, punishable as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 559-13 1; Ord. 536-12 1; Ord. 536-12; Ord. 515-11; Ord. 490-10; Ord. 438-08; Ord. 400-07; Ord. 376-06; Ord. 371-06; Ord. 232-05; Ord. 289-04; Ord. 263-04; Ord. 216-03; Ord. 171-02; Ord. 162-02; Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552 82; prior code 12.08.090) 
13.04.210-13.04.250 - (Repealed) 
13.04.260 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92; Ord. 788-91; Ord. 552-82; prior code 12.08.250) 
CHAPTER 13.05 - Location and Depth of Water Mains and Service Lines 

13.05.010 - Depth of water mains and service lines. 
    Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, or unless otherwise required or approved by the Director of Public Works, the minimum depth of cover for all water lines from the finished grade to the top of the pipe shall be: 
A.  Four and one-half (41/2) feet for pipelines twenty (20) inches and smaller; 
B.  Four feet (4) for pipelines larger than twenty (20) inches. 
(Ord. 616 85, 1985) 
13.05.020 - Violation unlawful - penalty. 
    Any person who locates, constructs or lays a water pipeline in violation of Section 13.05.010 above is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00). Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; 
Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 616 85, 1985) 
13.05.030 - Damages. 
A.  Any person who constructs a pipeline in violation of Section 13.05.010 above which is located in a street, alley or other easement of the City shall be liable to the City for all costs of repair caused by the freezing of water in the pipeline, or caused by pressures created by ice in the pipeline. 
B.  Any person who constructs a pipeline on private property in violation of Section 13.05.010 above shall be liable to the property owner for the costs of all repair caused by the freezing of water in the pipeline, or caused by pressures created by ice in the pipeline. 
(Ord. 616 85, 1985) 
13.05.040 - Application. 
    This Chapter shall apply to all pipelines constructed or installed within the City distribution system. 
(Ord. 616 85, 1985) 
CHAPTER 13.06 - Non-Potable/Dual Water Systems 

13.06.010 - Non-potable/dual water systems required. 
A.  Mandatory construction of non-potable/dual water systems for irrigation. All new development within those areas of the Urban Growth Boundary of the City, designated by the City Council as suitable for the construction of non-potable/dual water systems, shall be required, as part of any subdivision process, to construct a non-potable/dual water system for irrigation of all lots and common areas within the subdivision. Likewise, proponents of all new development shall provide for adequate non-potable water rights dedication in amounts sufficient in both quantities and quality to operate said system so the system will provide an assured and sufficient amount of water to adequately irrigate all lots and common areas. 
B.  Definitions: 
1.  The language set forth in the text of this Chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
a.  The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; 
b.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present; 
c.  The word shall is mandatory, while the word may is permissive; 
d.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
2.  The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall be construed and defined as follows: 
    Non-potable irrigation means a secondary water system within a subdivision or within a project that includes a dual water system designed solely for outdoor landscape irrigation and not for human or animal consumption or play. 
    Development means any number of lots for construction of any number of dwelling units, including but not limited to single-family and two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, factory built homes and manufactured homes, as well as commercial, industrial, or other types of structures and improvements. 
C.  Dedication of non-potable/dual water systems to the public. As a condition of subdivision approval of any development wherein a non-potable/dual water system shall be required, such system shall be operated, repaired and maintained by the City following the completion of the specified warranty period. The City may provide for credits as may be appropriate for the construction of such system, including reduced raw water dedication requirements reflective of the existence of a non-potable/dual water system, as well as reduced water plant investment fees likewise reflective of the existence of the non-potable/dual water system. All non-potable water resources designated for use within the proposed subdivision for the operation of the non-potable/dual water system shall be available both physically and legally in perpetuity, thereby assuring to the City that adequate water resources will be available to the City for the operation of the non-potable/dual water system. Therefore, the public improvements developer's agreement must provide for the transfer of such water resources, as well as the water acquisition and distribution system, to the City upon completion of said improvements and completion of the warranty period. The adequacy and reliability of the non-potable water resources shall be determined by the City in its sole discretion. 
D.  Annexation. The construction of a non-potable/dual water system at the time of development shall be a condition of annexation when annexation is proposed for development in an area designated as requiring the construction of non-potable/dual water systems. 
E.  Feasibility review and determination. In the event it can be established to the satisfaction of the City Council that construction of a non-potable/dual water system as part of new development in an area designated as requiring the construction of non-potable/dual water systems is not economically feasible and would prove to be an undue hardship, the City Council may relieve the developer from the operation of the ordinance codified herein. Any such determination by the City Council shall be conditioned upon compliance with the following conditions: 
1.  The developer shall submit an application seeking relief from the operation of the ordinance codified herein on a form prescribed by the City and containing such information and supporting documentation as may be required by the City. 
2.  The developer shall submit an analysis of the economic feasibility of the proposed non-potable/dual water system using a standardized cost benefit analysis approved by the City. 
3.  The developer may submit such additional information and documentation as may be deemed relevant in support of its proposition that the construction of a non-potable system is not economically feasible and would work an undue hardship, including but not limited to information concerning the availability and cost of raw water and issues of engineering relating to the delivery of raw water to the system in question. 
4.  Upon receipt of the aforesaid application, cost benefit analysis and additional information and documentation, the Director of Public Works may, in his or her or her sole discretion, employ such engineers, financial analysts and such other experts as may be necessary to review and evaluate the data provided and to submit an independent analysis of the developer's application for relief from the operation of the ordinance codified herein. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the City shall be paid by the developer and shall be advanced by the developer as a condition of this process. 
5.  Upon the completion of the independent analysis as aforesaid, the Director of Public Works, upon notice to the developer, shall schedule a hearing before the City Council. At the time of the hearing, the developer and the City staff shall each be afforded a full opportunity to present all relevant evidence in the form of testimony and exhibits, including a recommendation from the Water and Sewer Board. 
F.  Regulations. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to develop regulations for the construction and operation of non-potable/dual water systems. Such regulations shall include, but shall not be limited to, location of and specifications for transmission lines, valves, connections, pumps, structures and storage requirements for non-potable water. 
(Ord. 594-14, 2014; Ord. 288-04) 
CHAPTER 13.08 - Water Rights Dedication[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 608-14,  1, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, amended Ch. 13.08 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.08,  13.08.010-13.08.090, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1043-97, adopted 1997; and Ord. 026-00, adopted 2000. 

13.08.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City Water Rights Dedication." 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.020 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to require the dedication or transfer of water or water rights to the City sufficient to satisfy any new or additional demand for City water service resulting from the extension of water service, annexation of land to the City or change in land use which will require a new or an additional water supply from the City, and thereby to assure an adequate and stable supply of water to all City water users, to ensure the financial stability of the City water utility and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
B.  Compliance with this Chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for annexation required by the laws of the State and in addition to any other requirements for subdivision required by the laws of the State or ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Annexation means the act of attaching, adding, joining or uniting a parcel of land to the legal entity known as the City of Evans. 
    Appurtenant means belonging to, accessory or incident to, adjunct, appended, annexed to or used in conjunction with. 
    Change in land use shall include expansion of an existing use. 
    City means the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    City Council means the City Council of Evans, Colorado. 
    City Manager means the City Manager of Evans, Colorado. 
    City water service means treated water service furnished by the City. 
    Consumptive use means the amount of water consumed and which does not return to the stream system after use. 
    Conveyance of water rights means the process by which legal title to water rights is transferred by appropriate deed, stock assignment, contract, assignment of contract, or other instrument of conveyance. 
    Dedicate or dedication means to appropriate an interest in land or water to some public use made by the owner and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by the International Building Code, for not more than one family. 
    Equivalent residential unit (EQR) means a receipt issued by the City of Evans for current or future development within the limits of the City in exchange for dedication to the City of sufficient water rights to provide the volume of treatable raw water needed to serve an average dwelling unit housing 3.5 persons and having not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of irrigated area, as such average volume is determined from time to time by the City Engineer or their designee. An EQR is not a share of water nor an interest in a water right and the City does not place a monetary price or value on an EQR. The EQR unit value assigned to uses is set forth in the table of EQR's adopted by resolution. 
    EQR holder means a person who has acquired a right to receive water service from the city as a result of (1) transfer or dedication of water rights to the city in exchange for EQRs as provided in section 13.08.040, (2) payment of fees in lieu of such dedication as provided in Section 13.08.070, or (3) receiving a transfer or conveyance of EQRs from another EQR holder as provided for in Section 13.08.072. 
    Extension of water service means any extension of the City water service for which a tapping charge is assessed or any increase in City water service resulting from a change in use of property, an increased use of property or an increase in irrigated area. 
    Group residence means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation for occupancy by other than a family, such as, but not limited to, nursing home, congregate residence, hospital, shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity/sorority house, jail and similar facilities. For the purpose of this definition, transient rental units, such as hotels and motels, are not considered group residences. 
    Historical use affidavit means a document which sets forth the following information concerning any water right, including shares in a ditch or reservoir company or contract rights to water, proposed for dedication or transfer to the City: 
1.  The names and addresses of the owners; 
2.  The amount of each water right or the number of shares of stock or contract rights; 
3.  If the water right is used for irrigation, the number of acres presently being irrigated and a legal description or map of the acreage irrigated; 
4.  A copy of the stock certificate in any ditch or reservoir company or the certificate for a contract right to water which furnishes water and (unless this requirement is waived by the Director of Public Works) all decrees or judgments determining or adjudicating each water right proposed for dedication or transfer to the City and any other water rights appurtenant to the property; 
5.  A copy of the documents by which the present owners of each water right received title to the water right proposed for dedication or transfer to the City and any other water rights appurtenant to the property; 
6.  A copy of all diversion records for each water right proposed for dedication or transfer to the City (unless this requirement is waived by the Director of Public Works); and 
7.  A description of the historical use of the water right, including the amount and time of diversions and, if the use was irrigation, a legal description of the land or lands historically irrigated by the water right and the years the land or lands were irrigated, the type of irrigation, the number of acres irrigated, the crops grown and a description of any other water rights used on the land irrigated. 
    Laundromat means one or more automatic coin-operated machines for the washing of clothes, including common use machines in apartment complexes. 
    Lease means any grant for permissive use which results in the creation of a landlord-tenant relationship. 
    Person means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a municipality or any other legal entity, public or private. 
    Sufficient priority means that a water right has a date as of which it is entitled to use water in relation to other water rights deriving their supply from the same source which is sufficiently senior that it may reasonably be expected to provide a dependable water supply for the requirements of this Chapter. Factors to be considered in making this determination shall include, but not by way of limitation, the appropriation date and adjudication date of the water right, the decreed uses, the historical use of the water right, the physical flow available and the administrative practices of the office of the State Engineer. 
    Transfer water or water rights means the conveyance of legal title to water or water rights to the City, including all proceedings required under the laws of the State to change a water right so that it can be used by the City for municipal use. 
    Water and Sewer Board means the Water and Sewer Board of Evans, Colorado. 
    Water right means a decreed right to use in accordance with its priority a certain portion of the waters of the State by reason of the appropriation of the same. It shall include both direct-flow and storage rights. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.040 - Dedication or transfer of water rights required in exchange for EQRs. 
A.  From and after the effective date of this Chapter, any person who seeks approval of any of the following: 
1.  An extension of water service; 
2.  Annexation of land to the City; 
3.  Any change in land use, within or outside the limits of the City, if such change in land use will increase the demand for City water service, shall dedicate or transfer to the City a water allotment contract with the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District (C-BT contract) for 0.65 of an acre-foot (which will yield an average of approximately 0.46 of an acre-foot) for each EQR unit calculated in accordance with Subsection D below, provided that the Director of Public Works, with the approval of the Water and Sewer Board, may accept water rights (including shares in a ditch or reservoir company or contract rights to water) of sufficient priority to produce, after dedication or transfer to the City, an amount of water equivalent to a C-BT contract for 0.65 of an acre-foot for each EQR unit and which will be available for diversion at a point or points of diversion as the City may designate for use by the City for municipal purposes; provided that the consumptive use of the proposed use or uses will not be greater than consumptive use for residential use and wastewater from in-house or in-building use will be treated by the City's municipal wastewater treatment facilities or waste treatment facilities of equal efficiency and similar in return flow patterns. If the consumptive use of the proposed use or uses will be greater than residential use or wastewater from in-house or in-building use will not be treated by the City's municipal wastewater treatment facilities or by waste treatment facilities of equal efficiency and similar in return flow patterns, the Director of Public Works shall increase the dedication or transfer requirement so that, after dedication or transfer of such water rights to the City, the water rights to be dedicated or transferred will produce an amount of water per year for each EQR unit which is sufficient to ensure an adequate supply of water to satisfy the proposed use or uses. In the case of a request for annexation of land to the City, the person who seeks approval of the annexation shall comply with this Section. Water under a C-BT contract shall not be accepted to satisfy the requirement of this Subsection without the approval of the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District. The figure of 0.65 acre-foot of C-BT water per EQR, as used in this paragraph, may be revised periodically by the City to reflect changes in the amount of water an acre foot of C-BT contract water will generate, changes in the amount of water needed to supply an average dwelling unit, actual usage of water within the City during a study period, or other circumstances that the City's engineer concludes justify reconsideration of such figure. Such change shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Any person required to dedicate or transfer water or water rights to the City by Subsection A above, shall designate, on forms to be prescribed by the Director of Public Works, all water or water rights proposed to be dedicated or transferred to the City, and shall give a legal description of the land for which an extension of water service is requested or for which approval of annexation or a change in land use is sought; and, in addition, shall specify the proposed use or uses for which City water service is requested and the number of EQR units required for such use or uses. If water rights (including shares in a ditch or reservoir company or contract rights to water) are proposed to be dedicated or transferred to the City, the form shall be accompanied by an historical use affidavit, except that if the total number of EQR units is greater than 300 EQR units, no historical use affidavit shall be required, but an engineering analysis, acceptable to the City, of the historical use of the water rights proposed for dedication or transfer to the City shall be required. 
C.  Upon receipt of a form designating water rights proposed to be dedicated or transferred to the City, accompanied by an historical use affidavit or an engineering analysis for each water right, the Director of Public Works shall make a determination as to whether or not the water rights are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Subsection A above. In determining whether or not the water rights are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Subsection A above, the Director of Public Works shall consult with a person knowledgeable in water rights. 
D.  Except as provided in Subsections E and F below, the Director of Public Works shall make the determination as to whether or not any water rights to be dedicated or transferred to the City are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Subsection above based on the number of EQR units required for the proposed use or uses as determined from the Table of EQR Units. If at any time in the future any person required by this Chapter to dedicate or transfer water or water rights to the City subsequently makes a change in the use of property provided with City water service which would result in a greater number of EQR units than determined by the Director of Public Works under this Chapter, no water service shall be furnished unless additional water or water rights sufficient to comply with the provisions of this Chapter are dedicated or transferred to the City. 
E.  In the case of a proposed use which is not listed in the Table of EQR Units, the requirements of Subsection A above shall be satisfied by the dedication or transfer of water or water rights to the City of sufficient priority as will produce, after dedication or transfer of such water or water rights to the City, an amount of water per year sufficient to supply the requirements of such uses, as determined by the Director of Public Works after consultation with a person knowledgeable in water rights. 
F.  If a person required to dedicate or transfer water or water rights pursuant to this Chapter can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the actual volume of raw water needed to serve a proposed use or uses will be less than that calculated on the basis of EQR units as provided for in Subsection D of this Section, he or she shall be entitled to a proportionate reduction in the dedication or transfer requirement, as approved by the Water and Sewer Board. 
G.  The dedication or transfer requirement shall be satisfied by the person seeking approval of the extension of water service, annexation or a change in land use, whether or not that person will be the ultimate user of the City water service. 
H.  All costs and expenses to transfer water rights (including shares in ditch and reservoir companies or contract rights to water) to the City to satisfy the requirements of Subsection A of this Section, or to transfer water rights which the City has otherwise accepted in accordance with Section 13.08.070 of this Chapter, shall be paid by the person required to dedicate or transfer water rights to the City pursuant to this Chapter. All costs and expenses necessary to change such water rights so they can be diverted and used by the City for municipal use shall be paid by the person required to dedicate or transfer water rights to the City pursuant to this Chapter, and the City shall be the applicant or co-applicant in any application to change such water rights. The Water and Sewer Board, with the consent of the City Council, shall establish and adopt a schedule of costs and expenses to be paid by any person required to dedicate or transfer water rights to the City if such person does not desire to complete the necessary change of water rights at the time of dedication or transfer of the water rights to the City. The schedule shall insure that the City is fully compensated for the costs and expenses necessary to change the water rights so they can be diverted and used by the City for municipal use, and shall be reviewed annually by the Water and Sewer Board and updated as required. Upon dedication or transfer of the water rights to the City and payment of the costs and expenses set forth in the schedule of costs and expenses, the Director of Public Works may approve an extension of water service. 
I.  Any determination made by the Director of Public Works pursuant to this Section shall be submitted to the Water and Sewer Board, which shall review the determination of the Director of Public Works at its next regular or special meeting and shall submit the determination of the Director of Public Works and its recommendation to the City Council at its next regular meeting, and the determination of the Director of Public Works shall not become final until the same has been ratified by the City Council. Any interested person shall have the opportunity to be heard before the City Council prior to any decision ratifying a determination by the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.050 - Dedication or transfer of water or water rights for open space. 
    If the owner of any property proposed to be annexed or on which the land use is proposed to be changed dedicates property to the City pursuant to this Code to be used for open space, park, aesthetic, recreation or irrigation purposes, the owner shall also comply with the provisions of this Chapter for the property to be dedicated. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.060 - Exceptions. 
A.  The City Council may substitute or waive any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to meet the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  The dedication or transfer requirements of this Chapter do not apply to an extension of water service for which the dedication or transfer requirement has been previously satisfied. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.070 - Procedures for transferring water rights to City or paying fees in lieu thereof. 
A.  The City shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to accept or reject any water rights proposed for dedication or transfer to the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter which the Director of Public Works has determined are not of sufficient priority. If the Director of Public Works determines that the water rights proposed for dedication or transfer to the City fail to satisfy the dedication or transfer requirement, the following alternatives, or combination thereof, may be used to otherwise satisfy the dedication or transfer requirement: 
1.  The person required to dedicate or transfer water or water rights to the City may, if permitted by the City, satisfy that the dedication or transfer requirements by payment to the City of an amount equal to the fair market value of water or water rights sufficient to satisfy the dedication or transfer requirement, including the costs to transfer such water rights to the City and all costs and expenses necessary to change such water rights so they can be diverted and used by the city for municipal use. The amount that will be accepted by the City to satisfy the dedication or transfer requirement shall be approved by City Council. 
2.  The Director of Public Works may, in his or her discretion, negotiate with the new user to establish other terms or conditions which will comply with the dedication or transfer requirement. 
B.  A person required to dedicate or transfer water rights to the City pursuant to this Chapter shall, upon notice by the Director of Public Works that the City Council has ratified his or her determination that the water rights to be dedicated or transferred are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Subsection 13.08.040.A or that the City has otherwise accepted the water rights for dedication or transfer, dedicate or transfer the water rights required to satisfy the provisions of this Chapter by delivering documents to the Director of Public Works sufficient to make a conveyance of such water rights to the City. If all proceedings required under the laws of the State to change the water rights so that they can be diverted and used by the City for municipal use have not been completed, legal title to the water rights shall be transferred to the City, but no extension of water service shall be furnished except as provided in Subsection C below. 
C.  No extension of water service, including any new or additional water service, shall be furnished until the requirements of this Chapter have been complied with; provided, however, that if there are matters pending resolution in court concerning the water rights to be dedicated or transferred, or if there is other delay beyond the control of the person required to transfer or dedicate water or water rights to the City by this Chapter, the Director of Public Works may approve an extension of water service prior to the dedication or transfer of water or water rights to the City. 
D.  All costs and expenses related to the conveyance of water or water rights dedicated or transferred to the City shall be borne by the person required to dedicate or transfer water or water rights to the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
E.  Any decision made by the Director of Public Works under the delegation of powers contained within this Chapter shall be submitted by him to the City Council at its next regular meeting, and the decision shall not become final until the same has been ratified by the City Council. Any interested parties shall have the opportunity to be heard with respect to the decision. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014; Ord. 026-00, 2000; Ord. 1043-97, 1997) 
13.08.072 - Transfer of EQRs. 
A.  EQRs issued as a result of water rights transfer and dedication requirements of this Chapter for a specific property may not be used in connection with any other property unless such use is approved in advance by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  All other EQRs may be transferred from one EQR holder to another EQR holder, but such transfer shall not be effective unless and until the transferor provides written notice to the Public Works Director of such transfer. 
C.  An EQR may not be transferred off the land it was originally dedicated to without the express approval of the City. In the event that such a transfer is permitted, the zoning on the land it is being transferred from will be negated, and any platted subdivision will be voided. An EQR may not be traded, sold, transferred, mortgaged or otherwise used as collateral for any private financing without the advance written approval of the City. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.075 - Procedure for utilizing EQRs. 
A.  An EQR holder who intends to utilize EQRs shall notify the Public Works Director and provide the following information: 
1.  All documents requested by the Director of Public Works to confirm: 
a.  That the EQR holder or their predecessor was the owner of the water rights conveyed to the City in exchange for EQRs, 
b.  The subsequent transfer of the water rights to the City, and 
c.  The number of EQRs approved by the City in exchange for such transfer. 
d.  The transfer(s) from the original EQR holder to the current EQR holder. 
2.  All uses for which the water rights conveyed to the City in exchange for the EQRs have been decreed, including a copy of such decrees. 
3.  The EQR holder's proposed use of the water requested from the City, including: 
a.  Type of use. 
b.  Description of the property on which the water will be used. 
c.  The description of the property that will be benefitted from such use, if different from the property on which the use is to be made. 
d.  Whether such properties are located within the City or the City's service area, if such service area is different from the City's corporate limits. 
B.  Upon receiving a complete application to utilize EQRs, the Director of Public Works shall determine the sufficiency of the application and the purposes for which the water the City provides may be used. Use of water the City supplies pursuant to EQRs may be limited to the purposes for which the water rights provided to the City are decreed. 
C.  EQRs issued to satisfy the water demands associated with development of a specific property shall be deemed sufficient and no additional EQRs will be required by the City, provided the proposed development of the subject property has not changed substantially between the time the EQRs were initially issued and the time the EQR holder seeks to utilize their EQRs. 
D.  EQRs that were not issued to satisfy the water demands associated with development of any specific property will be evaluated by the Director of Public Works based on the C-BT conversion factor set forth in Section 13.08.040.A., as it exists at the time the EQR holder seeks to utilize their EQRs, in order to determine the number of EQRs needed for a proposed development or use. 
E.  EQRs may be used: 
1.  By applying water provided by the City to beneficial use on lands and property within the City. 
2.  By applying the water provided by the City to beneficial use on lands outside the City, provided such use is for the benefit of specific lands, property, or businesses within the City. 
3.  By applying the water provided by the City to beneficial use outside the City, if the City Council expressly determines by resolution that such use is of substantial benefit to the City or its residents or businesses. 
    No other uses of EQRs are permitted. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.080 - Agricultural and open space property. 
    If the owner of the property proposed to be annexed or on which the land use is proposed to be changed, desires to retain the land or any portion thereof in agricultural production or as open space prior to development, he or she shall be permitted to lease back, on an annual basis and for irrigation, aesthetic and recreational purposes only, water rights dedicated or transferred to the City pursuant to this Chapter. The terms of the lease shall be negotiated with the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.090 - Option to purchase. 
A.  Time. Prior to any extension of service, any person required to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall also grant to the City the option for one (1) year to purchase any and all water rights which are appurtenant to the land to be annexed, or on which the land use is proposed to be changed, but which are in excess of the dedication or transfer requirement of this Chapter. The option may be exercised by the City at any time for a period of one year following the date of the grant to the City with regard to any or all of the water rights subject to the grant. 
B.  Price. 
1.  The option price shall be that price agreed upon by the parties. If the parties cannot agree upon an option price within 30 days after notice of the City's intent to exercise its option is received by the owner, appraisal at the City's expense will establish the price that reflects the fair market value of the water rights. 
2.  The appraisal shall be conducted by one appraiser appointed by the City, one appraiser appointed by the owner of the water rights and a third appraiser who shall be appointed by both parties. The average of the three appraisals shall be the option price. 
C.  Right of first refusal. 
1.  Grant of right. In addition to the grant to the City of the option to purchase water rights as provided in Subsection A above, any person required to comply with the dedication or transfer requirement shall also grant to the City a right of first refusal regarding any water rights subject to said option to purchase. If the City for any reason should choose not to exercise its option to purchase water rights as provided in Subsection A above, the City shall have the right of first refusal in the event the water rights are to be sold separately from the land, for a period of ten (10) years following annexation or final approval of a development plan. 
2.  Notice period. If the owner of the water rights subject to the right of first refusal wishes to sell the water rights to a third party, he or she shall give the City at least ninety (90) days' notice of his or her intention to effect a sale of the water rights by delivering to the City a bona fide written offer to purchase made by a third party. 
3.  Exercise of right. During the ninety-day notice period provided for in Paragraph 2 above, the City shall enjoy its right of first refusal entitling it to purchase the water rights proposed for sale. If within 90 days following notice by the owner of his or her intention to sell his or her water rights, the City chooses to exercise its right to purchase, then the City shall pay to the owner the fair market price of the water rights prevailing at the time of the offer, which price shall be at least equal to the amount tendered to the owner in the bona fide offer by the third party. In the event that the City determines not to exercise its right to purchase the water rights offered for sale, the owner shall be free to sell the water rights to the third party; provided, however, that any such sale to the third party shall be for a price which is at least equal to that price which was tendered to and refused by the City. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
13.08.100 - EQR accounting. 
A.  At such times as the director of public works deems necessary, he or she may provide notice, by first class mail or newspaper publication or such other means as the director of public works deems appropriate, to all persons claiming to hold EQRs requiring them to provide, within a specified period of time, the following information in written form and supporting documentation: 
1.  Number of EQRs claimed. 
2.  All documents relating to the water rights that were transferred to the City in exchange for EQRs. 
3.  All documents needed to confirm: 
a.  The ownership of water rights by the EQR holder and its predecessors before they were conveyed to the City in exchange for EQRs, 
b.  The subsequent conveyance of the water rights to the City in exchange for EQRs, 
c.  The number of EQRs approved by the City in exchange for such transfer, 
d.  All uses for which the water rights conveyed to the City in exchange for EQRs have been decreed, including a copy of such decrees. 
4.  The description of the property on which the EQRs are intended to be used, 
5.  The description of the property that will be benefitted from such use if different from the property on which the use is intended to be made, 
6.  Whether such properties are located within the City of Evans (or Evans service area). 
B.  Any person who fails to provide full and complete information within the time specified shall be presumed not to hold any EQRs unless and until they have (1) provided all of the information set forth in subsection A, above, and (2) overcome the presumption that they own no EQRs to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 608-14, 2014) 
CHAPTER 13.09 - Groundwater and Water Service Plan 

13.09.010 - Incorporation of groundwater from certain aquifers into City water service plan. 
    The City hereby incorporates the groundwater from all aquifers, including the Dawson, Denver, Arapahoe, Laramie Fox Hills or Dakota Aquifers, underlying all property within the boundaries of the City into the City water service plan. 
(Ord. 621 85, 1985) 
13.09.020 - Property owner groundwater withdrawal consent. 
    All property owners within the City shall be deemed to have consented to the withdrawal of groundwater by the City, in accord with Section 37-90-137, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 621 85, 1985) 
CHAPTER 13.12 - Evans Ditch 

13.12.010 - Rules and regulations - applicability. 
    The City Council shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations by resolution for the use and management of the Evans Ditch. Permit holders shall agree to abide by all such rules, or be denied water from the Evans Ditch. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.020 - Use of water - permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, corporation or association to use or cause to be used any water from the Evans Ditch without making application to the City Manager or his or her representative and having obtained his or her approval and a permit from the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.030 - Application for permit - contents. 
    Any person or persons making an application for the use of Evans Ditch water shall state the number of acres, blocks or lots to be watered or irrigated, or for whatever purpose the water is to be used. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.040 - Commercial or industrial uses - City Council permission required. 
    Water from the Evans Ditch, when used for other than irrigation, such as commercial and industrial uses, shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.050 - Rates. 
    The City Council shall, at a regular meeting prior to the first of April of each year, establish the irrigation rates for the ensuing irrigation season. Rates for other uses shall be established by contract. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.060 - Deposit of collected moneys. 
    All moneys collected from the issuance of permits or from contracts for use of ditch water shall be deposited with other water department funds. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
13.12.070 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
    The City Treasurer shall make an annual report to the City Manager of all funds collected, acreage or blocks and lots irrigated and other uses of ditch water. 
(Ord. 274, 1973) 
CHAPTER 13.16 - Storm Sewers 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section: 
    Contaminated water shall mean that water which contains constituents at concentrations which could cause, directly or indirectly, impairment of human health or the environment, and which would not be present in such concentrations in a natural state. This includes any water contaminated from industrial processes, land use activities, development or other man-induced practices. 
    Director shall mean the duly appointed Director of Public Works/Planning or the designated representative of such Director of Public Works/Planning. 
    Major stormwater system means all stormwater facilities identified in the master drainage plan that facilitate the conveyance of stormwater runoff on a basin-wide or regional basis. 
    Minor stormwater system means all stormwater facilities used for the conveyance, control or storage of storm runoff of local benefit only. These facilities generally direct storm runoff to major stormwater systems. 
    Nonstormwater runoff shall mean flow arising from man-induced activities, including but not limited to industrial processes, domestic irrigation, subdrains, groundwater wells and municipal water supply systems. 
    On-site detention shall mean stormwater detention which is not part of a major stormwater system and which is sized for the benefit of specified tributary area, part or all of which is being subdivided. Such on-site detention shall be located within an easement or parcel dedicated to and accepted by the City for drainage purposes. 
    Stormwater facilities means any one (1) or more of various devices used in the collection, treatment or disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including manmade structures and natural watercourses and/or floodplains for the conveyance of runoff, such as detention or retention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, channels, bridges, gulches, streams, rivers, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catch basins, inlets and other equipment and appurtenances and all extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; and any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities. 
    Stormwater runoff means that part of snowfall, rainfall or other stormwater which is not absorbed, transpired, evaporated or left in surface depressions, and which then flows controlled or uncontrolled into a watercourse or body of water. 
    Subdivider or developer shall mean any person, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation who shall participate as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale and lease of a subdivision, planned unit development, lot or building expansion. 
    Subdivision shall mean the platting of a lot or the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots or sites. 
    Suitable treatment shall mean that treatment process authorized by and undertaken pursuant to an appropriate permits to discharge treated water under the State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment's, Colorado Discharge Permit System ("CPDS"), and which the Director has approved the discharge thereof. 
    Utility or Enterprise , as used in this Chapter, shall mean the Stormwater Utility of the City of Evans, Colorado. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.020 - Establishment of Storm Water Utilities Enterprise. 
A.  The City Council hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the Municipal Storm Water System as an "Enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
B.  The City Council hereby formally establishes the City of Evans, Colorado, Storm Water Utilities Enterprise (the "Enterprise"), pursuant to the Act, for the purpose of continuing the operation of the Municipal Storm Water System as a Storm Water Activity Enterprise under the Act and as an "Enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.030 - City Council as governing body - Enterprise funds. 
A.  The City Council hereby designates itself as the governing body of the Enterprise, pursuant to the Act. 
B.  To the extent it deems necessary, the governing body of the Enterprise shall exercise the City's legal authority relating to the Municipal Storm Water System, but shall not levy a tax, which is subject to Section 20(4) of Article X of the State Constitution. 
C.  The Enterprise shall have no power to impose or levy any tax. 
D.  Funds of the Enterprise and funds of the City may be commingled for purposes of investment, so long as accurate records are kept of the amount of such funds allocable to the Enterprise and to the City. 
E.  All action (not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section) heretofore taken by the City Council or by the officers and employees of the City directed toward the operation of the Municipal Storm Water System as an "Enterprise" under Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.040 - Declaration of purpose. 
    The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing stormwater facilities for the drainage and control of flood and surface waters within the City, including areas to be subdivided and developed, in order that storm and surface waters may be properly drained and controlled, pollution may be reduced and the environment enhanced and that the health, property, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants may be safeguarded and protected. All revenues and expenditures of the City or of the enterprise relating to the stormwater system shall be considered revenues and expenditures of the Enterprise. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.050 - Flood insurance. 
    Floods from stormwater runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of stormwater facilities constructed and maintained by funds made available under this Chapter. This Chapter does not imply that property liable for the fees and charges established in this Chapter will always be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage. This Chapter does not purport to reduce the need or the necessity for the owner obtaining flood insurance. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.060 - Water and Sewer Board. 
    The Water and Sewer Board created in Chapter 2.24 of this Code shall assist in administering this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.070 - Administration to be by Director. 
    Director = of the Water and Sewer Board? 
    The administration of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the Director who may prescribe forms and rules and regulations in conformity with this Chapter or for the ascertainment, computation and collection of the fees and charges imposed in this Chapter and for the proper administration and enforcement. The Director may delegate the administration of this Chapter, or any part thereof, subject to the limitations of the Charter and Code to duly qualified deputies and agents of the Director. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.080 - Fees - Developments inside City limits. 
    For the purpose of providing storm sewers, systems and additions to present storm sewer systems, each builder or developer of an undeveloped lot or fraction thereof inside the City limits shall pay fees as adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.090 - Stormwater basin fees. 
A.  After adopting the stormwater basins, as presented in the Comprehensive Drainage Study, and after receiving a report from the Water and Sewer Board on a particular stormwater basin, the City Council may establish by resolution, stormwater fees to be paid by the owners of property in the stormwater basin. Such stormwater fees shall be established in amounts which will provide sufficient funds, proportionately calculated and assessed, to construct the facilities which need to be installed in the basin. The amount of the fees assessed against individual properties and the method of collecting the fees shall be established by the resolution. 
B.  The City may require the payment of the stormwater basin fees as a condition of issuance of a full building permit, or if no building permit is required, upon commencement of construction. The stormwater basin fee shall be payable at any time as determined by City Council and the Water and Sewer Board after the approval of the plat of a subdivision or, in the case of unplatted property, upon the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Any fees not otherwise collected may be collected through special assessments levied in a local assessment district created pursuant to Chapter 12.12 of this Code. Such fee shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.100 - Stormwater utility fee. 
    There is hereby imposed on each and every lot or parcel of land within the City and the owners thereof a stormwater utility fee. This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the operation, maintenance, administration and routine functions of the existing City stormwater facilities and the operation, maintenance and administration of such future stormwater facilities as may be established within the City and to pay for the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of major and minor stormwater facilities to the extent that such costs have been determined to be the responsibility of developed properties. All of the proceeds of this fee are deemed to be in payment for use of the City stormwater system by the real property on and with respect to which the charge is imposed on the owners. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.110 - Reestablishment of stormwater fees. 
    The City Council may by resolution change the amount of the stormwater utility or basin fees for a stormwater basin based upon revised estimates of the cost of installing facilities in the basin. Any change in the amount of the stormwater basin fee shall be effective only as to properties in a stormwater basin which have not paid in full the stormwater basin fee assessed against the property. After collection of the stormwater basin fee is completed as to particular property, the amount of the fee shall not be increased. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.120 - Billing for stormwater utility fee. 
    The stormwater utility fee shall be billed and collected with the regularly scheduled utility bill for those lots or parcels of land within the City, billed and collected separately as stormwater utility fees for those lots or parcels of land and owners thereof not utilizing other City utilities. All such bills for stormwater utility fees shall be rendered with the regularly scheduled utility bill by the Finance Director and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City pertaining to the collection of utility fees. The Finance Director shall place all such fees collected into the storm drainage fund to be deposited and separately kept as a fund to be used only for the purposes stated herein. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.130 - Certain properties exempt from stormwater utility fee. 
    The stormwater utility fee shall not be collected in connection with any City street, road or alley, or any railroad right-of-way used exclusively for trackage and related safety appurtenances. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.140 - Enforcement. 
    Any charge due hereunder which shall not be paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the City. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this Chapter or the Code, failure of any user of City utilities within the City to pay the charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of such utility services and the City Manager is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this provision as to any and all delinquent users. The employees of the City shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the City for inspection, repair or the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.150 - Unpaid charges to be a lien. 
    All fees made pursuant to this Chapter shall be a lien upon the property to which such fee is associated from the date the fee becomes due until such fee is paid. The owner of record of every building, premises, lot or house shall be obligated to pay the fee for all service provided for the premises which obligation may be enforced by the City by action at law or suit to enforce the lien. In the case that a tenant in possession of any premises or buildings shall pay the charges, it shall relieve the landowner from such obligation and lien but the City shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of such charges. No changes of ownership or occupation shall affect the application of this Chapter and the failure of any owner to learn that he or she purchased property against which a lien for stormwater utility fees exists shall in no way affect the responsibility for such payment. Any delinquent amount may be enforced by assessment upon the property and premises served and certification to the County Treasurer for collection under and pursuant to the authority and procedure provided in Chapter 12.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.160 - Disposition of fees and charges. 
    The fees and charges paid and collected by virtue of this Chapter shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for the equitable share of the costs of accounting, management and government thereof. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the costs of operation, repair, maintenance, improvements, renewal, replacement, reconstruction, design, right-of-way acquisition and construction of public stormwater facilities and costs incidental thereto. If there are amounts in the fund in excess of the amount required to satisfy the purpose of the fund, the City Council may by ordinance authorize the transfer of such excess amount to any other fund of the City. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.170 - Property owners to provide stormwater facilities. 
    The City Council further finds, determines and declares under all attendant circumstances that the owners of property within stormwater basins in the City should provide the stormwater facilities necessary for the drainage and control of flood and surface waters within stormwater basins and should provide the facilities required to convey such waters from the stormwater basin to major drainage ways. Therefore, the cost of installing stormwater facilities in a stormwater basin should be assessed in whole or in part against the lands in the stormwater basin. The City Council further finds, determines and declares that all real property within a stormwater basin will be benefitted by the installation of stormwater facilities within the basin since the development of elevated lands increases the runoff of stormwaters from such lands causing increased amounts of stormwater to flow onto adjoining lands of lower elevation. The owner of such elevated land has a duty to prevent such increased runoff from doing damage to other lands, which duty will be met if adequate stormwater facilities are installed in the stormwater basin. To the extent possible, the charges assessed against lands in a stormwater basin for construction of stormwater facilities should take into account the amount of stormwater which will run off such lands after they have been developed. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.180 - Establishment of stormwater basins. 
    After receiving a report and recommendation from the Director, the Water and Sewer Board shall officially adopt a stormwater map which is on file with the City delineating the boundaries of the stormwater basin in the City and in areas which may be annexed. Such map may also indicate existing development of properties within the basin, zoning of properties and such other information as may be determined to be advisable. Such map shall after adoption serve as official designation of the respective stormwater basins of the City, but such map may be revised from time to time to conform with existing conditions. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.190 - Comprehensive Study. 
A.  The City's most current Comprehensive Drainage Study is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. 
B.  The Comprehensive Drainage Study is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The City may adopt additional master drainage plans by reference and declare them to be a part of this Chapter and copies of such master drainage plans shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. The plans may be modified by the Director, for the sole purpose of enhancing such plan, provided that such enhancement does not diminish the general purpose and specific objectives of the adopted plan and does not diminish the ability of the plan to address the disposition of stormwater runoff in the applicable basin, and if modified, the modifications shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.200 - Stormwater facilities required for subdivisions. 
    Prior to the final approval of the plat of any subdivision, or prior to commencement of construction upon any lot or parcel of land for which a drainage report and construction plan for the installation of stormwater facilities has not been prepared and approved by the City, the owners of the property being subdivided or upon which construction is being commenced shall, at such owners' cost, prepare a detailed drainage report and construction plans for the installation of all stormwater facilities required for such subdivision or lot, including any off-site facilities required to convey stormwater to existing drains, channels, streams, detention ponds or to other points, all in conformity with the Comprehensive Drainage Study of the City. The Director shall review such reports, plans and cost estimates; and after approval of the same, the plat of the subdivision or the building permit, if applicable, may be approved subject to the City's being furnished with acceptable assurance that such facilities will be constructed and installed as indicated approved. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.210 - City to maintain stormwater facilities; exception. 
    The City shall maintain all accepted public stormwater facilities located within City-owned land, City rights-of-way and City easements and may maintain other accepted public stormwater facilities located within or adjacent to the City. Such public facilities include those facilities which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public. Such public stormwater facilities do not include facilities not accepted by the City for maintenance. For purposes of this Section, for use by the general public means direct use and benefit of the general public. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
13.16.220 - Additional fees authorized when. 
    Sections 13.16.010 and 13.16.020 of this Chapter establish the basic drainage fee for all undeveloped areas. The City Council may by resolution determine, as each subdivision or area is formed, that additional fees, if any, shall be charged over and above the fees stated in this Chapter, which shall be based upon the actual or estimated increase costs above such stated fees in the drainage requirements for the district or area and/or upon the existing overall drainage system. 
(Ord. 1116-98, 1998) 
CHAPTER 13.20 - Sewer System 

13.20.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20) Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    City means the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    City Manager means the City Manager or acting City Manager of the City. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Director means the director or acting director of the utilities department. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries stormwaters, surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.020 - Establishment of Wastewater Utilities Enterprise. 
A.  The City Council hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the Municipal Wastewater System as an "Enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
B.  The City Council hereby formally establishes the City of Evans, Colorado, Wastewater Utilities Enterprise (the "Enterprise"), pursuant to the Act, for the purpose of continuing the operation of the Municipal Wastewater System as a Water Activity Enterprise under the Act and as an "Enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution. 
C.  The City Council hereby designates itself as the governing body of the Enterprise, pursuant to the Act. 
D.  To the extent it deems necessary, the governing body of the Enterprise shall exercise the City's legal authority relating to the Municipal Wastewater System, but shall not levy a tax, which is subject to Section 20(4) of Article X of the State Constitution. 
E.  The Enterprise shall have no power to impose or levy any tax. 
F.  Funds of the Enterprise and funds of the City may be commingled for purposes of investment so long as accurate records are kept of the amount of such funds allocable to the Enterprise and to the City. 
G.  All action (not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section) heretofore taken by the City Council or by the officers and employees of the City directed toward the operation of the Municipal Wastewater System as an "Enterprise" under Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. 1031-97, 1997; Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.030 - Use of public sewers required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Expect as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
D.  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City is required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.040 - Private sewage disposal. 
A.  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Subsection 13.20.030.D above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the City Clerk, after first being approved by the City Council. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the City Council. A permit and inspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. 
C.  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Utilities Department. The Utilities Department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the utilities department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy-two (72) hours of the receipt of notice by the Utilities Department. 
D.  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Public Health and Environment. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than required by the State Department of Public Health and the Weld County health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
E.  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage system, as provided in Subsection D above, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer, in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
F.  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City. 
G.  No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the State or County Department of Health. 
H.  When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean, bank run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.050 - Building sewers and connections. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. 
B.  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee of 0 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit, and 0 dollars for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. 
C.  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
D.  1. Existing services. The use of compound sewer taps or more than one (1) service line for each tap is prohibited, and in case any such connection has been heretofore made it shall be the duty of the Utilities Director to disconnect the same and separate such service lines in order that each service line be served by a separate tap. The owner of lots or premises being served shall pay the full cost of making the taps and installing new service lines, and shall be required to pay system development fees. The current system development fee schedule shall be the basis of such payment. The owner may apply to the Utilities Director for an exemption to the requirement of payment of system development fees. If the Utilities Director determines that the compound tap was legal at the time it was made and that separation will not increase demand on the system, he shall grant the exemption. If the decision of Utilities Director is to deny such a waiver, the owner may appeal the matter to the Water and Sewer Board. The decision by the Water and Sewer Board shall be final. 
2.  Proposed services. A separate and independent sewer service shall be provided for every building; except where a building is located or is proposed to be located at the rear of another on the same lot or parcel and, with the prior written approval of the Utilities Director, the service line may be extended to the rear building provided that all buildings and properties are under the same ownership and are being used as accessory uses associated with the primary building (i.e., detached garages, warehouses). 
E.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this Chapter. 
F.  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
G.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
H.  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
I.  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
J.  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director or his or her representative. 
K.  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, park ways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. 
(Ord. 1022-96, 1997; Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.060 - Use of public sewers. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
B.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
C.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
2.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous soils, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, institute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes discharged to the public sewer; 
3.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; 
4.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
D.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Director, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
1.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150) Fahrenheit (sixty-five degrees (65) Centigrade). 
2.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32) and one hundred fifty degrees (150) Fahrenheit (zero and sixty five degrees Centigrade). 
3.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director. 
4.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
5.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or waster exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials. 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
7.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
8.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
9.  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chlorine and sodium sulfate; 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load in the sewage treatment works; and 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs, as defined in this Chapter. 
10.  Waters or wasters containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
E.  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsection D above, and which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise crease a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
4.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Subsection J below. 
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
F.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
G.  Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective cooperation by the owner at his or her expense. 
H.  When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
I.  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite if all outfalls of a premises is appropriate, or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
J.  No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.070 - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
13.20.080 - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
A.  The director and other duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The director or his or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers of waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
B.  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Subsection A above, the director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees, and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damages asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Subsection 13.20.060.H above. 
C.  The director and other duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement, for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 609 85 1 (part), 1985) 
13.20.090 - Rates. 
A.  The rates and charges and the manner of payment of such rates and charges for the use of the sanitary sewers and sewage system of the City, for property located both within and without the corporate limits of the City shall be as adopted by resolution by the City Council. Such rates may be amended from time to time as the City Council determines necessary. 
B.  Each industry creating a special or unusual treating or handling problem, in the opinion of the City Council, will be charged in accordance with the costs of handling and treating the actual waste load, at such rates and charges to be established through contract with the individual industry and/or resolution of the City Council. 
C.  For property other than residence property situated without the limits of the City, the user shall make application to the council for such use, and a rate shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Sewer rates and charges shall be due and payable and shall be collected at the time and in the manner in which water rates are due and collected. 
E.  All rates and charges for use of the sewer system of the City shall constitute a lien upon the land, buildings and premises served, and in the event such charges shall not be paid when due, the City Treasurer shall certify delinquent charges to the County Treasurer, and the same shall be collected and paid over to the City in the same manner as other taxes, and all laws of the State for the collection of general taxes shall apply, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of same. 
F.  All revenue derived from the rates and charges imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited in a special sewer fund in accordance with the laws of the State, and paid out only in accordance with such laws. 
(Ord. 779-90 1, 1990; Ord. 609 85 1 (part), 1985) 
13.20.100 - Violation - penalties. 
A.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except Section 13.20.070 above, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
B.  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 13.20.070 above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
C.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 609 85, 1985) 
CHAPTER 13.24 - Plumbing Cross Connection Control 

13.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter and the manual adopted herein is to provide for the preservation and promotion of the public health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the City and of the public and for the preservation and promotion of the convenience, good order, tranquility, prosperity, happiness, morals, best interests and general welfare of said people, and further for the following purposes: 
A.  The Colorado Cross Connection Control Manual is designed to provide the City and plumbing officials and other persons and agencies responsible for public water systems with information and procedures for the development, implementation, maintenance and enforcement of backflow prevention practices pursuant to federal and state regulations pertaining to cross connection control. 
(Ord. 712 88, 1988) 
13.24.020 - Adoption of manual. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Parts 1 and 2, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference the 1988 Edition of the Colorado Cross Connection Control, promulgated and published by the State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 4210 East 11th Avenue, Denver, CO 80220. 
(Ord. 712 88, 1988) 
13.24.030 - Penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of the 1988 Edition of the Colorado Cross Connection Manual within the City. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation in violation of any of the provisions of this manual shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the manual is committed continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 842-92, 1992; Ord. 712 88, 1988) 
CHAPTER 13.28 - Water, Sewer and Storm Sewer System Reimbursement 

13.28.010 - Water, sewer, and storm sewer system reimbursement - purpose. 
    It is the intention of the City Council in providing a reimbursement procedure under this Chapter to provide an appropriate incentive for developers of private property to pay for the initial construction of water, sewer and storm sewer systems to connect their property with existing public water, sewer and storm sewer systems by providing a process whereby a developer can recoup a portion of the initial construction cost of such water, sewer, or storm sewer systems. The City Council also recognizes that it is necessary for a developer to timely apply to the City for reimbursement and further that there shall be a limitation on the period of time expressed in years whereby a developer may recoup his or her cost. 
(Ord. 025-00, 2000; Ord. 1000-96, 1996) 
13.28.020 - Conditions invoking eligibility for reimbursement for connections to public water, sewer and storm sewer systems. 
    Property benefitting from water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer service can be either contiguous or noncontiguous to the system. Noncontiguous development requires the construction of off-premise mains. Off-premise mains are defined as mains constructed to serve a property which is not contiguous to existing water, sewer and storm sewer systems and which cross other private property or properties. Excluded from this definition are water sewer and storm sewer systems in the interior of the property initially served. Storm water detention or retention facilities constructed solely for the benefit of the property initially served are also excluded from this definition. The measurement of the off-premise systems shall be from the point of connection to the existing public system along such main to the point of connection for future line extensions or services. All persons desiring water sewer and storm sewer service for property abutting or in the drainage area of an off-premise main shall be required to pay reimbursement if all of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  The off-premises system was constructed in accordance with City specifications and requirements with prior approval of the City, at the expense of one (1) or more private persons who have obtained approval for reimbursement from the Water and Sewer Board pursuant to Section 13.28.030 below; 
B.  The person against whom the reimbursement is to be assessed requests approval for additional line extensions or services which connect to the off-premise system either directly or indirectly within ten (10) years of the completion of the construction. The initial ten-year period may be renewed for an additional five-year period or periods by action of the Water and Sewer Board upon petition by the person or persons who paid for such initial construction. If such renewal petition is not filed prior to the lapse of an initial or renewal period, such renewal shall not be allowed; the granting or denial of a renewal period shall be completely at the discretion of the City Council. The City Council shall first consider the recommendation of the Water and Sewer Board and such recommendation may only be overridden by a vote of five (5) members of the City Council; 
C.  The property to be served with water sewer or storm sewer service was owned at the time of construction by a person or persons who did not participate in the cost of construction; 
D.  The property owners against whom the reimbursement may be assessed were notified by the initial developer of their opportunity to participate in the cost of construction prior to the completion of construction. With respect to all owners of property directly abutting the off-premise system, such notification shall be by both certified and first-class mail, postage pre-paid. With respect to all owners of property not directly abutting the off-premise system but in the drainage area of such off-premise system, such notification shall be in the form of signs (as approved by the Public Works Director) announcing such opportunity erected at the intersection of the off-premises main with all public streets and roads, and left standing at all times during construction of the off-premise system. 
(Ord. 025-00, 2000; Ord. 1000-96, 1996) 
13.28.030 - Computation of reimbursement for connection to public mains. 
    To be eligible for reimbursement for an initial ten-year period, a developer must seek prior approval from the Water and Sewer Board. The area subject to the reimbursement procedure described in Section 13.28.020 above shall consist of land tracts which the Water and Sewer Board determines benefit from the off-premise system. Costs shall be proportionally allocated by the Water and Sewer Board to the land area on a frontage, flow capacity, drainage area or other equitable basis if all conditions are met. The developers seeking reimbursement approval shall submit to the Water and Sewer Board a proposed formula for approval. The allocations shall be calculated on a gross acreage if allocated on a drainage area basis, and shall include all rights of way, storm water facilities, parks and other private land which may be dedicated to public purposes within each tract. In each case, the reimbursement will be computed by prorating the construction cost, without any additional charges other than interest, against the property served by the off-premise system. The reimbursement shall be paid prior to the approval of plans for construction of additional extensions or when service taps are requested, whichever comes first. An interest component may be added, but shall apply to the first ten-year period only, and not to subsequent periods, and it shall be equal to that of ten-year U.S. treasury bills at the completion of construction as evidenced by the date of final approval by the City Council. Eligibility for reimbursement and reimbursement formulas, after recommendation of the Water and Sewer Board must have final approval of the City Council, such approval to be had by a majority of those members present and voting. 
(Ord. 025-00, 2000: Ord. 1000-96, 1996) 
13.28.040 - Reimbursement procedure for private payment. 
    Private persons who pay for the construction of sections of public water, sewer and storm sewer systems and who desire partial reimbursement for such payment shall deliver a written document to the Public Works Director setting forth the total construction cost, and setting forth the name and address of an individual, bank or other organization authorized to receive payments from the City pursuant to this Section. Only water, sewer and storm sewer systems constructed with prior approval of the administrative authority, and in strict compliance with City standard specifications, will be considered for reimbursement. As reimbursement charges are paid to the City pursuant to Sections 13.28.020 and 13.28.030 above, the City shall transmit such payments to such authorized individuals, bank or other organization. The City shall have no responsibility to see that such individual, bank or other organization properly deals with such funds. The City shall not recognize any recipients or claimants other than the named individual, bank or other organization. 
(Ord. 025-00, 2000; Ord. 1000-96, 1996) 
CHAPTER 13.32 - Illicit Discharges Into Evans Storm Drainage System 

13.32.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the City of Evans designated to enforce this Chapter. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section F of this chapter. 
    Illicit connections means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permit. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4s) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including but not limited to roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) owned or operated by the state, City, town, county, or other public body (created to or pursuant to state law) including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges into waters of the United States designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, that is not a combined sewer, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, chapters and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; noxious or offensive matter of any kind; and any soil, rock and any type of landscaping. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document that describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility, including but limited to portable urinals. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.020 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.030 - Responsibility for administration. 
    The City shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated by the Director of Public Works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.040 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.050 - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Chapter are minimum standards; therefore this Chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.060 - Discharge prohibitions. 
A.  Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
1.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
2.  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, natural springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City prior to the time of the test. 
The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations and that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
B.  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable, or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  A person is considered to be in violation of this Chapter, if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drain system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.070 - Suspension of storm drain system access. 
A.  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City may, without prior notice, suspend storm drain system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
B.  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm drain system in violation of this Chapter may have their storm drain system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm drain system access. The violator may petition the City for a reconsideration and hearing. 
C.  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm drain system access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.080 - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.090 - Monitoring of discharges. 
A.  Applicability. This Section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
B.  Access to facilities. 
1.  The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
2.  Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
3.  The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
4.  The City has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Chapter. 
C.  If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the City is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe there may be a violation of this Chapter, or there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from district court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.100 - Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The City has adopted requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a land development, commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this Section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.110 - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.120 - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting, or may result in, illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City within (3) three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  Notice of violation. Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition, or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
1.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
2.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
3.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
4.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
5.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
6.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
B.  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.140 - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the City. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.150 - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fourteen (14) days of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals upholding the decision of the City, then representatives of the City shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.160 - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within fourteen (14) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within fourteen (14) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner, as determined by the decision of the City, or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The City may then certify the balance due to the County Treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the ninetieth day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.170 - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Chapter, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.180 - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this Chapter, the City may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.190 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.200 - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
13.32.210 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. The City may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. 404-07) 
CHAPTER 13.34 - Erosion Control Practices 

13.34.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the City of Evans designated to enforce this Chapter. 
    Certified contractor means a person who has received training and is licensed by Colorado Department of Transportation to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
    Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Drainage way means any channel that conveys surface runoff. 
    Erosion control means a measure that prevents erosion. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Site means a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Site development permit means a permit issued by the City for the construction or alteration of improvements and structures for the control of erosion and runoff. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
    Watercourse means any body of water, including but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams and bodies of water delineated by the City of Evans. 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.020 - Permits. 
A.  A site development permit is required for all land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one (1) acre or more. The applicant is required to submit an erosion and sediment control plan to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment if greater than five (5) acres or the City of Evans if greater than one (1) acre and less than or equal to five (5) acres. 
B.  No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
1.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
2.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
C.  Each application shall bear the names and addresses of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
D.  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan and that a certified contractor shall be on site on all days when construction or grading activity takes place. 
E.  The applicant will be required to file with the City an amount in escrow deemed sufficient by the City to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of improvements, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site for a period from the beginning of construction to the end of the two-year warranty period. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.030 - Review and approval. 
A.  The City will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City shall, in writing: 
1.  Approve the permit application; or, 
2.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or, 
3.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reasons and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
B.  Failure of the City to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the City. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the City. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.040 - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following: 
A.  An existing condition map identifying soils, wetlands, drainage ways and resources protected under this Code. This map should be at a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'. 
B.  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
C.  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of local and state regulations throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each construction season. 
D.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
E.  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance. 
F.  Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as defined under Subsection C above may be authorized by the City for smaller developments and by the CDPHE for larger developments by written authorization to the permittee, and shall include: 
1.  Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan; 
2.  Field modifications of a minor nature. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.050 - Design requirements. 
A.  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the erosion and sediment control manual, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the City. 
B.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
C.  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
1.  Soil stabilization shall be completed within thirty (30) days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
2.  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within thirty (30) days or the City may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed. 
3.  Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District Drainage Criteria Manual on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
4.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday. 
5.  The entire site must be stabilized, using crimped straw or another method approved by the City at the end of rough grading, at the close of the construction season and/or at the initial acceptance. 
6.  Techniques approved by the City shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site within fourteen (14) days of the end of initial rough grading. 
7.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
8.  Protection for adjacent properties and existing lakes and waters of the state by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
9.  Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
a.  A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction. 
b.  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during and after any in-channel work. 
c.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the City's Drainage Criteria Manual. 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
10.  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
a.  A temporary tracking control strip provided at all sites. 
b.  Other measures required by the City or the State in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.060 - Inspection. 
A.  The City or its designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City or the State shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the City at least two (2) working days before the following: 
1.  Start of construction. 
2.  Installation of sediment and erosion measures. 
3.  Completion of site clearing. 
4.  Completion of rough grading. 
5.  Completion of final grading. 
6.  Close of the construction season. 
7.  Completion of final landscaping. 
B.  The permittee or his or her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plans. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the City within twenty-four (24) hours after inspection. 
C.  The City, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment or its designated agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the permittee's erosion control inspection reports filed in accordance with Subsection B above. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Stop-work order; revocation of permit. 
1.  In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this Chapter violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the City may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
2.  The City will issue a stop-work order to any person that disturbs a land area greater than one (1) acre without submitting an erosion control plan to the City and/or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
B.  Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership or corporation may be punished by a fine for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this Section, any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.080 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.090 - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the City. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.100 - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within fourteen (14) days of the decision of the City upholding the decision, then representatives of the City shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.110 - Cost of abatement of violation. 
    Within fourteen (14) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within fourteen (14) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the City, or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The City may then certify the balance due to the County Treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the ninetieth day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.120 - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Chapter, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.130 - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this Chapter, the City may impose upon a violator, alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.140 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.150 - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
13.34.160 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. The City may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. 405-07) 
CHAPTER 13.36 - Post Construction Stormwater Management 

13.36.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Acknowledgement certificate means a document an applicant signs certifying that they have received, read and fully understand the information within this Code regarding stormwater management. 
    Applicant means a landowner or agent of a landowner who has filed an application for development. 
    Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the City designated to enforce this Chapter. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of state waters. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage of leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Certified contractor means a person who has received training and is licensed by the Colorado Department of Transportation to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that carries continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    City Inspector means the person or persons authorized by the City to inspect a site for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
    Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Compliance date means the final deadline by which a user is required to correct a violation of a prohibition or limitation or to meet a pretreatment standard or requirement as specified in a compliance schedule, industrial discharge permit or federal, state or local regulation adopting and applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Compliance schedule or schedule of compliance means an enforceable schedule specifying a date or dates by which a user must comply with a pretreatment standard, a pretreatment requirement or a prohibition or limitation and which may include increments of progress to achieve such compliance. 
    Construction activities means clearing, grading, excavation and other ground disturbance activities. Construction does not include routine maintenance performed by public agencies or their agents to maintain original line grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of facility. 
    Construction Site Stormwater Management Plan (CSSMP) means a plan submitted to the City that addresses erosion, sediment erosion control and water quality issues pertaining to a site for which an application for a storm water qualify permit is filed. A CSSMP shall contain such information as site description, location and description of appropriate temporary or permanent BMPs, inspection and maintenance procedures and other matters necessary or appropriate to comply with a site development permit. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
    Development means any activity, excavation or fill, alteration, subdivision, change in land use or practice, undertaken by private or public entities that affect the discharge of stormwater runoff. The term development does not include the maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities. 
    Disturbed area means that area of the land's surface disturbed by any work activity upon the property by means, including but not limited to grading; excavating; stockpiling soil, fill or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned agricultural or the tillage of a parcel zoned PUD (planned unit development) within the area identified for agricultural uses. It also does not include performance of emergency work necessary to prevent or ameliorate an immediate threat to life, property or the environment. Any persons performing such emergency work shall immediately notify the authorized enforcement agency of the situation and the actions taken. 
    Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private lands for stormwater management purposes. 
    Drainage way means any channel that conveys surface runoff. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction. 
    Erosion control means a measure that prevents erosion. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff, with some exceptions. These exceptions are discharges from NPDES-permitted industrial sources and those stated in Chapter 13.32 of this Title. 
    Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.) 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
    Land disturbance activity means any activity, which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. 
    Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Permanent BMPs means those permanent stormwater quality BMPs, such as, but not limited to, grass buffers and swales, modular block porous pavement, porous pavement and landscape detention, sand filter and extended detention basins, constructed wetlands basins and channels and proprietary (underground) BMPs to be properly installed and regularly maintained in order to treat stormwater runoff and ensure long term water quality enhancements. 
    Phasing means the clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Site means a parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Site development permit means a permit issued by the City for the construction or alteration of improvements and structures for the control of erosion and runoff. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings, such as garages. 
    State water means any and all surface and subsurface waters which are contained in or flow in or through this State, but does not include waters in sewage systems, waters in treatment works or disposal systems, waters in potable water distribution systems and all water withdrawn for use until used and treatment have been completed. 
    Stormwater runoff means flows on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation. 
    Watercourse means any body of water, including but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams and bodies of water delineated by the City. 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
13.36.020 - Maintenance requirements. 
A.  Developers, builders, business owners and landowners shall be responsible for ensuring that all BMPs identified in the site development permit or stormwater management plan are properly installed, maintained and are in good working order as hereafter provided. 
B.  Developers shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
1.  Any temporary and/or permanent BMPs are installed as called for in a CSSMP and are properly maintained and are in good working order; 
2.  The site is fully developed, stabilized, and acceptable vegetative cover has been established and maintained; 
3.  Any deficiencies noted by the City prior to the expiration of the two-year warranty period for public improvements have been corrected; 
4.  Individual lots have been sold to one (1) or more builders; and 
5.  Stormwater runoff quality requirements of individual lots are shared with builders at time of closing. 
C.  Builders shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
1.  Any temporary and/or permanent BMPs installed prior to lot purchase from developer and/or landowner as part of CSSMP are being properly maintained and are in good working order; 
2.  Acceptable vegetative cover has been established and maintained; 
3.  Any temporary and/or permanent BMPs called for in the CSSMP and/or necessary for the site has been properly installed, maintained and remain in good working order until the property has been sold to a business or landowner; and 
4.  Stormwater runoff quality requirements of individual sites are shared with purchasers at time of closing. 
D.  Business owners and landowners shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
1.  Any temporary and/or permanent BMPs installed prior to lot purchase from developer, landowner and/or builder as part of CSSMP are properly maintained and remain in good working order until the lot is stabilized; 
2.  Acceptable vegetative cover has been established and maintained; 
3.  If not installed prior to individual lot purchase, temporary and/or permanent BMPs will be installed within ten (10) days from date of purchase at the base of all gutter downspouts and maintained until the property is sufficiently stabilized; and 
4.  If not installed prior to individual lot purchase, temporary and/or permanent BMPs will be installed within ten (10) days from date of purchase around the perimeter of the site where needed to prevent sediment from moving off-site. 
E.  Stormwater runoff quality requirements of individual lots or sites are shared with purchasers at time of closing. 
F.  Business owners and landowners shall be responsible for the maintenance of all temporary and/or permanent BMPs constructed or installed on their property pursuant to this chapter. All temporary BMPs shall be removed within fourteen (14) calendar days after work on the site has been completed and/or the measures are no longer needed. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
13.36.030 - Inspection. 
    The City Inspector shall enforce all the requirements of this Chapter as described in Section 13.36.050 and 13.36.060 below. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
13.36.040 - Assessment. 
    If the permittee or other responsible party does not successfully complete all required work or violates any requirement of the permit or this Chapter, the City may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such to the permittee and/or other responsible party. Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the City plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and penalties. The permittee shall be responsible for payment of the balance within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of an accounting of and a bill for such from the City. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
13.36.050 - Permanent BMPs. 
    Any business owner or landowner shall adequately operate and maintain all permanent BMPs on their property that are required in connection with the City's approval of the annexation, subdivision or improvement of their real property pursuant to approved plats, plans, specifications, studies, agreements or permits. Any business owner or landowner failing to adequately operate and maintain such BMPs shall be subject to the remedies in Section 13.36.060 below. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
13.36.060 - Remedies for noncompliance. 
A.  City Inspector. If a City Inspector determines that: eroded Soils are leaving a disturbed area; there is any violation of a Site Development Permit and/or SWMP; there is evidence of an illicit discharge prohibited under Section 13.32.060 of this Chapter; there is a failure to adequately operate and maintain a permanent BMP; or there is any other violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter; the City inspector may, in writing, direct the business owner, landowner, developer, builder and/or agents or representatives of such person on the site to repair, replace and/or install any temporary or permanent BMPs required under a site development permit and/or an SWMP for the site, suggest additional BMPs be installed if deemed necessary by the City inspector to minimize the identified condition or mitigate an illicit discharge, including the issuance of stop work orders and/or suspension or revocation of any permit. It shall be unlawful for any business owner, landowner, developer, builder or the agents or representatives of such persons to fail to take all necessary measures to comply with such written directive and take all measures necessary to prevent soil erosion from migrating off site, correct violation of a site development permit and/or a SWMP, or eliminate and/or mitigate an illicit discharge or remedy any other violation of the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Right of entry. In accordance with the terms of the signed acknowledgement certificate, the City Inspector may, where reasonable cause exists, with or without a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction and where the City has given verbal notice to the landowners, or such owner's agents or representatives, if such owners or representatives are immediately accessible, enter upon any property or site for examination of the same to ascertain whether a violation of the requirements of this Chapter exists, and shall be exempt from any legal action or liability on account thereof. The City will verbally communicate a findings summary of such inspection at the conclusion of the inspection to the landowner, or such owner's agents or representatives if such owners or representatives are immediately available. The City will mail a written summary of the findings of such inspection within thirty (30) days of such inspection to the legal address of the noncompliant site. 
C.  Remediation procedures. 
1.  Compliance orders. 
a.  Whenever the City determines that any activity is occurring that is not in compliance with a stormwater quality permit, SWMP and/or the requirements of this Chapter, the City may issue a written compliance order to the operator or landowner containing a compliance schedule. The schedule shall contain specific actions that must be completed, including dates for the completion of the actions. It shall be unlawful for any operator or landowner to fail to comply with any compliance order requirement. 
b.  Should any person cause, permit, cause to be permitted or maintain a condition on any property that may result in the failure of operation and maintenance of any permanent BMP, the City may issue a written compliance order setting forth the action required to operate and maintain the permanent BMP. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a written compliance order for operation or maintenance of a permanent BMP within twenty-four (24) hours after the date specified in the compliance order. 
2.  Suspension and revocation of permit. The City may suspend or revoke a stormwater quality permit for violation of any provision of this chapter, violation of the permit or SWMP, and/or misrepresentations by the permittee or the permittee's agents, employees or independent contractors. 
D.  Violations and penalties. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of a stormwater quality permit, an SWMP and/or the requirements of this Chapter, as adopted and modified by the City. 
2.  Any person violating any provision of a stormwater quality permit, a SWMP and/or the requirements of this Chapter, as adopted and modified by the City, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the penalties as set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
3.  In the event of a violation of Section 13.36.140 of this Chapter regarding Permanent BMPs, the City may, after written issuance of a compliance order for mitigation and the failure to perform such mitigation within twenty-four (24) hours after the date specified in the written compliance order (or such addition a time for mitigation as may be specified by the City) enter the affected property and perform or cause to be performed the mitigation work and assess the charges for such work against the person, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 13.36.040 above. The remedy set forth in this Section 13.36.060(C)(3)(c) shall be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed pursuant to Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
E.  Business owner or landowner. Should any business owner or landowner fail to adequately maintain the temporary or permanent BMPs or fail to remove temporary BMPs within the time limit provided in this Chapter, the City may, after notification of the required maintenance and/or removal and the business owner or landowner fails to perform such maintenance and/or removal, enter the affected property and perform or cause to be performed the required work and assess the charge for such work, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 13.36.060 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 513-11) 
TITLE 15 - Buildings and Construction 
CHAPTER 15.04 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 548-12 1 
CHAPTER 15.08 - International Building Code (IBC)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.08,  15.08.010-15.08.130, and enacted a new Ch. 15.08 as set out herein. A new  15.08.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  2. 

15.08.010 - International Building Code adopted. 
    The International Building Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. Chapters 1 through 35 inclusive and Appendix Chapter I, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Building Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions deletions insertions and changes as follows: 
IBC Section 101.1. IBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IBC Section 101.4.3. IBC Section 101.4.3 (Plumbing) is amended by deletion of the last sentence. 
IBC Section 101.4.5. IBC Section 101.4.5 (Fire prevention) is amended by replacing "International Fire Code" with "adopted fire code". 
IBC Section 101.4.6. IBC Section 101.4.6 (Energy) is amended by replacing the words "International Energy Conservation Code" to "2009 International Energy Conservation Code". 
IBC Section 105.1. IBC Section 105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "city". 
IBC Section 105.2. IBC Section 105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by deleting; 
Exception #1 and replacing with "One-Story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the roof height does not exceed 10 (ten) feet above grade measured from a point directly outside the exterior walls of the structure." 
Exception #2 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with "Fences not over 6 feet (2134mm) high." 
Adding Exception #14 "Shingle repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building. 
IBC Section 105.5. IBC Section 105.5 (Expiration) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety and replaced with "Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee." 
IBC Section 109.4. IBC Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with "Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to an investigation fee established by the city. The amount of the investigation fee may be in the amount up to the amount of the permit fee that would normally be accessed for the specific type of construction activity, with any such investigation fee being in addition to all other required permit fees. The investigation fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued." 
IBC Section 109.6. IBC Section 109.6 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
"The city may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The city may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The city may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The city shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
IBC Section 111.3. IBC Section 111.3 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentence and replacing it with "city". 
IBC Section 114.2. IBC Section 114.2 (Notice of Violation) is amended by adding "Notice of Violations shall be delivered in accordance with section 107 of the IPMC" after the last paragraph. 
IBC Section 202. IBC Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by addition of the following: 
"Sleeping Room" (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IBC Section 1208 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms. 
IBC Section 501.2. IBC Section 501.2 (Address Identification) is amended by deleting the second paragraph and replacing with "Each character shall be not less than 3 inches in height and not less than 0.5 inch in width." 
IBC Section 1013.2. IBC Section 1013.2 (Where required) is amended by the addition of a second paragraph inserted before the exceptions as follows: 
"All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914.4 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier. 
IBC Section 1029.5.1. IBC Section 1029.5.1 (Minimum Size) is amended by the addition of the following: 
"For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 667-17, of July 1, 2017, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Building Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 667-17, of July 1, 2017, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the City's regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the city." 
IBC Section 1301.1.1. IBC Section 1301.1.1 (Criteria) is amended by replacing "International Energy Conservation Code" with the "2009 International Energy Conservation Code". 
IBC Section 1612.3. IBC Section 1612.3 (Establishment of flood hazard areas) is amended by the insertion of "City of Evans" where indicated in [Name of Jurisdiction] and the date of the latest flood insurance study of January 20, 2016, where indicated in [Date of Issuance]. 
IBC Section 3401.3. IBC Section 3401.3 (Compliance with other codes) is amended by deleting International Fire Code and inserting in its place "adopted fire code", deleting International Private Sewage Disposal Code, and deleting NFPA 70 and inserting in its place "National Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado" 
IBC Section 3412.2. IBC Section 3412.2 (Applicability) is amended by the insertion of 07/01/2017 as the effective date of building codes for the city where indicated in [DATE TO BE INSERTED BY JURISDICTION]. 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.09 - International Residential Code (IRC)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.09,  15.09.010-15.09.390, and enacted a new Ch. 15.09 as set out herein. A new  15.09.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.09 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  3. 

15.09.010 - International Residential Code adopted. 
    The International Residential Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 43 inclusive and Appendix Chapters G and H, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Residential Building Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions deletions insertions and changes as follows: 
IRC Section R101.1. IRC Section R101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IRC Section R105.1. IRC Section R105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "city". 
IRC Section R105.2. IRC Section R105.2 (Work Exempt from Permit) is amended by deleting: 
Exception #1 and replacing with "One-Story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the roof height does not exceed 10 (ten) feet above grade measured from a point directly outside the exterior walls of the structure." 
Exception #2 is deleted in its entirety. 
Exception #10 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with "Shingle repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building." 
IRC Section 105.5. IRC Section 105.5 (Expiration) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety and replaced with "Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee." 
IRC Section R108.4. Section R108.4 (Related Fees) is amended by creating a new subsection as follows: 
"Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to an investigation fee established by the city. The amount of the investigation fee may be in the amount up to the amount of the permit fee that would normally be accessed for the specific type of construction activity, with any such investigation fee being in addition to all other required permit fees. The investigation fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued. 
IRC Section R108.5. IRC Section R108.5 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
"The city may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The city may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The city may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The city shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
IRC Section R109.1.5. IRC Section R109.1.5 (Other inspections) is amended by the addition of a new subsection as follows: 
R109.1.5.2. Insulation Inspection. Inspection of the structure shall be made following installation of the wall, ceiling and floor insulation and exterior windows and before wall coverings are installed. 
IRC Section R110.4. IRC Section R110.4 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentence and replacing it with "city". 
IRC Section R112.3. IRC Section R112.3 (Qualifications) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
IRC Section R113.2. IRC Section R113.2 (Notice of Violation) is amended by adding "Notice of Violations shall be delivered in accordance with section 107 of the IPMC" after the last paragraph. 
IRC Section R202. IRC Section R202 (Definitions) is amended by addition of the following: 
"Sleeping Room" (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IRC Sections R304 and R305 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms. 
IRC Table R301.2(1). IRC Table R301.2 (1) is filled to provide the following: 
Table R301.2(1) 
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria 
Ground 
Snow 
Load Wind Design Seismic 
Design 
Category Subject to Damage From Winter 
Design 
Temp Ice barrier 
Underlayment 
Required Flood 
Hazard Air 
Freezing 
Index Mean 
Annual 
Temp Speed 
(mph) Topographic 
effects Weathering Frost 
Line 
Depth Termite 30psf 90 No B Severe 30 in. Slight to Moderate 1 NO * 1000 45F  
*As Identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Evans, Colorado" dated January 20, 2016. 
IRC Section R302.1. IRC Section R302.1 (Exterior walls) is amended by the deletion of the wording; "or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section P2904 shall comply with table R302.1(2)." 
IRC Table R302.1(2). IRC Table R302.1 (2) is deleted in its entirety. 
IRC Section R302.2. IRC Section R302.2 (Townhouses) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire resistance-rated wall" with "2-Hour fire resistance-rated wall". 
IRC Section R302.3. IRC Section R302.3 (Two-family dwelling) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire-resistance rating" with "2-Hour fire-resistance rating". 
IRC Section R303.4. IRC Section R303.4 (Mechanical Ventilation) is amended by replacing "5 air changes per hour" with "7 air changes per hour" and replacing the words "in accordance with section N1102.4.1.2" with "in accordance with section 402.4.2.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code 2009 Edition." 
IRC Section R309.5. IRC Section R309.5 (Fire sprinklers) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IRC Section R310.1. IRC Section R310.1 (Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings) is amended by the deletion of the first paragraph and replaced with "All windows located in basements, habitable attics and sleeping rooms shall meet all the requirements of section R310.1 through R310.2.2". 
IRC Section R310.1.1. IRC Section R310.1.1 (Minimum opening area) is amended by the deletion of the exception. 
IRC Section R310.2. IRC Section R310.2 (Window wells) is amended by the addition of the following; 
"For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 667-17, of July 1, 2017, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Residential Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 667-17, of July 1, 2017, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the City's regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the city." 
IRC Section R310.2.1. IRC Section R310.2.1 (Ladder and steps) is amended by the addition of the following exception to read as follows: 
"Exception: Only one window well ladder shall be required in an unfinished basement." 
IRC Section R312.1. IRC Section R312.1 (Guards required) is amended by the addition of a third paragraph as follows: 
"All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The access side of stairways need not be protected. 
2.  Area and window wells provided for emergency escape and rescue windows may be protected with approved grates or covers that comply with Section R310.4 of this code. 
3.  Covers and grates may be used over stairways and other openings used exclusively for service access or for admitting light or ventilation." 
IRC Section R313. IRC Section R313 (Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IRC Section R401.2. IRC Section R401.2 (Requirements) is amended by the addition of the following: 
"Foundations shall be designed and the construction drawings stamped by a Colorado registered design professional. The foundation design must be based on an engineer's soils report. The drawings must be noted with the engineering firm name, specific location for design and soils report number. A site certification prepared by State of Colorado registered design professional is required for setback verification on all new Group R Division 3 occupancies." 
IRC Section R405.1. IRC Section R405.1 (Concrete or masonry foundations) is amended with the addition of the following after the first sentence: All foundation drains shall be designed and inspected by a State of Colorado registered design professional. 
IRC Section R501.3. IRC Section R501.3 (Fire protection of floors) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IRC Chapter 11. IRC Chapter 11 (Energy Efficiency) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code. 
IRC Section M1502.4.4.2. IRC Section M1502.4.4.2 (Manufactures instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IRC Section G2415.12. IRC Section G2415.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. 
IRC Section G2415.12.1. IRC Section G2415.12.1 (Individual outside appliances) is deleted in its entirety. 
IRC Section G2417.4.1. IRC Section G2417.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing 3 psig to 10 psig. 
IRC Section G2417.4.2. IRC Section G2417.4.2 (Test Duration) is amended by replacing "10 Minutes" with "15 Minutes". 
IRC Section P2503.5.1. IRC Section P2503.5.1 (Rough plumbing) is amended by deleting the first paragraph and replacing with "DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water or air with no evidence of leakage." 
IRC Section P2603.5.1. IRC Section P2603.5.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)". 
IRC Section P3103.1. IRC Section P3103.1 (Roof extension) is amended by replacing the words "6 inches" with "12 inches". 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.10 - Guidelines For Manufactured Housing Installation (GMHI) 

15.10.010 - Document adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to Section 31-16-201 et seq., C.R.S., there is adopted as the guidelines for manufactured housing installation code of the City, by reference thereto, the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation , 1991 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5630 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601. 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.020 - Title for citation. 
    The ordinance codified in this Chapter may be known and cited as "the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code of the City of Evans, Colorado." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is to provide minimum standard to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of materials for foundation systems and building service equipment connections which are necessary to provide for the permanent installation of manufactured homes on privately owned (nonrental) lots within this jurisdiction and to provide for alterations, additions and repairs to such manufactured homes. 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.040 - Scope of regulations. 
    The subject matter of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of manufactured homes within the City. 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.050 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    This Chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform building regulations related to manufactured housing. 
(Ord. 1100-98 1, 1998) 
15.10.060 - Applicability. 
    This Chapter shall apply to every building or structure, as defined in the ordinance codified herein, which is now in existence or which may hereafter be erected, constructed, altered, moved, demolished or repaired. 
(Ord. 1100-98 1, 1998) 
15.10.070 - GMHI Sec. 214 amended. 
    Section 214 of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 214. Manufactured Home. A single-family dwelling which is: 1) partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; 2) is not less than 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length: 3) is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; 4) has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; 5) and is certified pursuant to ?National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. as amended." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.080 - GMHI Sec. 304(a) amended. 
    Section 304(a) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 304 (a), Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in Table No. 3-A of the Uniform Building Code, as adopted." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.090 - GMHI Sec 304(b) amended. 
    Section 304(b) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 304 (b), Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by Subsection (b) of Section 302, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in Table No. 3-A of the Uniform Building code, as adopted. 
    "The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 304(a) and are in addition to the permit fees. Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at a rate as established by this jurisdiction." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.100 - GMHI Sections 401(c),(d),(e),(f) & (g) added. 
A.  Section 401(c) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 401(c), Use or Occupancy. 
    "Buildings or structures shall not be used or occupied nor shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or position thereof be made until the building official has issued a Certificate of Occupancy therefor as provided herein. The Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid." 
B.  Section 401(d) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 401(d), Change in Use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in the Building Code. 
C.  Section 401(e) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 401(e), Certificate Issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency, the building official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy which shall contain the following: 
"1.  The building permit number. 
"2.  The address of the building. 
"3.  The name and address of the owner. 
"4.  A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
"5.  A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
"6.  The name of the building official." 
D.  Section 401(f) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 401(f), Temporary Certificate. If the building official finds that substantial hazard will not result from occupancy of a building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure may be issued prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. 
E.  Section 401(g) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 401(g), Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this code when the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of an ordinance, regulation or the provisions of this code." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.110 - GMHI Sec 502(c) amended. 
    Section 502(c) of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " 502(c) Footings and Foundations. Footings and foundations, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall be constructed of materials specified by the Building Code for the intended use and in all cases shall extend below the frost line. Footings of concrete and masonry shall be of solid material. Foundations supporting untreated wood shall extend at least 6 inches above the adjacent finish grade. Footings shall have a minimum depth below finished grade of 30 inches unless a greater depth is recommended by a foundation investigation. 
    "Piers and bearing walls shall be supported on masonry or concrete foundations or piles or other approved foundation systems which shall be of sufficient capacity to support all loads. The ?stacking? of non-reinforced masonry blocks shall not be considered adequate for use at load bearing locations. Masonry blocks, when used, must be installed in accordance with an approved engineer designed system as provided for in Appendix A of this code." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.120 - GMHI Sec 503 amended. 
    Section 503 of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code is amended as follows: 
    " Sec. 503 Permanent Perimeter Enclosures. Permanent perimeter enclosures are required on all manufactured homes. Permanent perimeter enclosures shall be of masonry or concrete materials designed and installed to resist the lateral displacements of soil or other materials and shall conform to the Uniform Building Code as specified for foundation walls including compensation for possible frost heave. 
    " EXCEPTION: Enclosures may be constructed of approved treated wood or other approved materials or combination of materials as for foundations as specified by the Uniform Building Code upon submittal and approval of an engineer designed system plan if all of the following conditions are met: 
"1.  Plans shall bear the stamp of a state licensed engineer certified to practice in the State of Colorado. 
"2.  Plans must be designed for a specific site and structure. 
"3.  Plans shall contain soil classification information, engineering calculations, diagrams, attachment details and all pertinent data deemed necessary by the building official to ensure compliance with the code. 
"4.  All plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations." 
(Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
15.10.130 - Compliance with code required - penalty for violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure, or building service equipment in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation Code. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the code adopted in this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation code are committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), or by imprisonment for not more than one year (1), or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 1100-98, 1998) 
CHAPTER 15.12 - International Mechanical Code (IMC)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.12,  15.12.010-15.12.070, and enacted a new Ch. 15.12 as set out herein. A new  15.12.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  4. 

15.12.010 - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
    The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Mechanical Code as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
IMC Section 101.1. IMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IMC Section 504.6.4.2. IMC Section 504.6.4.2 (Manufactures Instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.16 - International Plumbing Code (IPC)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.16,  15.16.010-15.16.220, and enacted a new Ch. 15.16 as set out herein. A new  15.16.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  5. 

15.16.010 - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 13 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Plumbing Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
IPC Section 101.1. IPC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IPC Section 305.4.1. IPC Section 305.4.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)". 
IPC Section 312.3. IPC Section 312.3 (Drainage and vent air test) is amended by deleting the first paragraph. 
IPC Section 904.1. IPC Section 904.1 (Roof extension) is amended by inserting the number "12" (152.4 mm) where indicated in the second sentence. 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.18 - International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC)[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.18,  15.18.010-15.18.120, and enacted a new Ch. 15.18 as set out herein. A new  15.18.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  6. 

15.18.010 - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478 , Chapters 1 through 8 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Fuel Gas Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
IFGC Section 101.1. IFGC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IFGC Section 404.12. IFGC Section 404.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. ;hg11; IFGC Section 406.4.1. IFGC Section 406.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing 3 psig to 10 psig. 
IFGC Section 406.4.2. IFGC Section 406.4.2 (Test duration) is amended by changing the second paragraph to read: "When testing a system having a volume less than 10 cubic feet or a system in a single family dwelling, the test duration shall be not less than 15 minutes". 
IFGC Section 614.6.5.2. IFGC Section 614.6.5.2 (Manufactures instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.20 - National Electrical Code (NEC)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 624-15,  1, adopted June 15, 2015 , repealed the former Ch. 15.20,  15.20.010-15.20.250, and enacted a new Ch. 15.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 539-12,  1;. 

15.20.010 - Document adopted by reference. 
    The National Electrical Code &reg; , 2014 Edition, referred to in this Chapter as this Code or the NEC &reg; , is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Evans. The National Electrical Code &reg; is published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269 and is referenced as NFPA 70. The City of Evans finds that The National Electrical Code &reg; provides for the minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of electrical systems. To ensure the safety of the public, this Code is to be enforced as published or as amended in this Chapter. Enforcement and administrative procedures are also established in this Chapter. 
Amendments, deletions, and additions designated. 
NEC &reg; Articles 90.8(A), 110.14(A), 110.14(B), 210.1l(C)(3), 210.52(G), 230.70(A)(l), 250.118, 334.10, 342.10(B), 344.10(B), 348.60, 350.60,408.4 and 422.12 of the National Electrical Code &reg; are hereby amended; Annex H of the NEC &reg; is hereby deleted; and Articles 210.52(1), 210.52(K), and 210.52(L) are added as set out in Sections 16.32.080 through 16.32.091. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.020 - Title for citation. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may be known and cited as "the National Electric Code of the City of Evans, Colorado." 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of electrical systems. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.040 - Scope of provisions. 
    The subject matter of the electrical code establishes comprehensive provisions, standards and regulations for materials, installation methods, inspection, and other matters relating to electrical systems in connection with the erection, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.050 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform electrical regulations. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.060 - Applicability of regulations. 
    This chapter shall apply to every building or structure, as defined in said ordinance, which is now in existence or which may hereafter be erected, constructed, altered, moved, demolished or repaired. Electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and location and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such electrical system. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.070 - NEC Article 90.8(A) amended; 90.8 Wiring Planning. 
    NEC Article 90.8(A) is amended to read: 
90.8 Wiring Planning. 
(A)  Future Expansion and Convenience. Plans and specifications that provide ample space in raceways, spare raceways, and additional spaces allow for future increases in electric power and communication circuits. Distribution centers located in readily accessible locations provide convenience and safety of operation. 
Provisions shall be provided in the initial electrical installations to allow for future additional loads, feeders and branch circuits. A minimum of three (3), full size breaker spaces shall be shall be provided in each panelboard at the time of final inspection. In addition, a minimum of a one (I) inch spare conduit or adequate pull wire provision shall be provided from each flush mounted panelboard into the attic space and also into the basement or crawl spacefor future use. 
(B)  Number of Circuits in Enclosures. It is elsewhere provided in this Code that the number of wires and circuits confined in a single enclosure be varyingly restricted. Limiting the number of circuits in a single enclosure minimizes the effects from a short circuit or ground fault. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.080 - Article 110.14(A), amended; Terminals. 
    110.14(A) Terminals. Connection of conductors to terminal parts shall ensure a thoroughly good connection without damaging the conductors and shall be made by means of pressure connectors (including set-screw type), solder lugs, or splices to flexible leads. A listed oxide inhibitor compound shall be applied to all aluminum conductor terminations per the manufacturer's installation instructions prior to terminating or landing a conductor to a lug or terminal. Connection by means of wire-binding screws or studs and nuts that have upturned lugs or the equivalent shall be permitted for 10 AWG or smaller conductors. 
    Terminals for more than one conductor and terminals used to connect aluminum shall be so identified. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.090 - Article 110.14(B), amended; Splices. 
    110.14(B) Splices. Conductors shall be spliced or joined with splicing devices identified for the use or by brazing, welding, or soldering with a fusible metal or alloy. Soldered splices shall first be spliced or joined so as to be mechanically and electrically secure without solder and then be soldered. A listed oxide inhibitor compound shall be applied to all aluminum conductor splices per the manufacturer's installation instructions prior to splicing aluminum conductors with wing nuts, split bolts, or other approved devices. All splices and joints and the free ends of conductors shall be covered with an insulation equivalent to that of the conductors or with an identified insulation device. 
    Wire connectors or splicing means installed on conductors for direct burial shall be listed for such use. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.100 - Article 210.ll(C)(3) amended; Bathroom branch circuits. 
    210.11(C)(3) Bathroom Branch Circuits. In addition to the number of branch circuits required by other parts of this section, at least one 120-volt, 20-ampere branch circuit shall be provided to supply bathroom receptacle outlet(s). Such circuits shall have no other outlets. 
    Exception: Where the 20-ampere circuit supplies a single bathroom, outlets for other equipment within the same bathroom shall be permitted to be supplied in accordance with 210.23(A)(l) and (A)(2). A minimum of one lighting outlet (not required by this Code to be GFCI protected) shall be connected so as not to be protected by the GFCI personnel protection. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.110 - Article 210.52(G) amended; Basements, garages, and accessory buildings. 
    210.52(G) Basements, Garages, and Accessory Buildings. For a one-family dwelling, at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed, in the areas specified in 210.52(0)(1) through (3). These receptacles shall be in addition to receptacles required for specific equipment. 
(1)  Garages. In each attached garage, and in each detached garage with electric power. The receptacle outlet shall at least 450 mm (18 inches) above and no more than 2.0 (61/2 feet) above the garage floor. All openings for receptacles, luminaires, heating, refrigeration, and motor loads shall be a minimum of 450 mm (18 inches) above the floor. The branch circuit supplying this receptacle(s) shall not supply outlets outside of the garage. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space. 
(2)  Accessory Buildings. In each accessory building with electric power. 
(3)  Basements. In each separate unfinished portion of a basement, or where a portion of the basement is finished into one or more habitable rooms, each separate unfinished portion, in addition to those for specific equipment. 
(a)  In new construction and remodels, if all or any part of the walls of an unfinished basement are framed, the electrical receptacle outlets as required by NEC&reg;; 210.52, and switch and luminaire outlets as required by NEC&reg; 210.70 shall be installed. 
(b)  If the walls, floors and ceilings will not be finished, the outlet devices are not required to be installed, however, the outlet boxes shall have blank cover plates installed on them prior to final inspection approval. 
(c)  If receptacle outlets are installed, they shall have GFCI protection for personnel, iffloor covering is not installed at the time of final inspection. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.120 - Article 210.52(1) added; Framing in basements. 
    210.52 (J) Sump Pit Receptacle Outlets. A 125-volt, single-phase, 15- or 20-ampere receptacle outlet shall be installed adjacent to and within 18" of the sump pit as required by 16.28.460. This receptacle outlet shall be on a dedicated branch circuit and shall be GFCI protected. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.130 - Article 210.52(L) added; Igniters for gas-fired appliances. 
    210.52(L) Igniters for gas-fired appliances. The branch circuit supplying power to an outlet for a gas-fired appliance with an igniter shall not be GFCI protected. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.140 - NEC Article 230.70(A)(l) amended; Readily accessible location. 
    230.70(A)(1) Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. 
    For a one-family dwelling, the service disconnecting means shall be located on the exterior of the structure adjacent to or combined with the utility meter enclosure. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.150 - NEC Article 250.118 amended; Types of equipment grounding conductors. 
    250.118 Types of Equipment Grounding Conductors. 
    The equipment grounding conductor run with or enclosing the circuit conductors shall be one or more or a combination of the following: 
(1)  A copper, aluminum, or copper-clad aluminum conductor. This conductor shall be solid or stranded; insulated, covered, or bare; and in the form of a wire or a busbar of any shape. 
(2)  Rigid metal conduit. 
(3)  Intermediate metal conduit. 
(4)  Electrical metallic tubing. 
(5)  Deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  Deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Flexible metallic tubing where the tubing is terminated in fittings listed for grounding and meeting the following conditions: 
a.  The circuit conductors contained in the tubing are protected by overcurrent devices rated at 20 amperes or less. 
b.  The combined length of flexible metal tubing in the same ground return path does not exceed 1.8 m (6 ft.). 
(8)  Armor of Type AC cable as provided in 320.108. 
(9)  The copper sheath of mineral-insulated, metal/sheathed cable. 
(10)  Type MC cable where listed and identified for grounding in accordance with the following: 
a.  The combined metallic sheath and grounding conductor of interlocked metal tape-type MC cable. 
b.  The metallic sheath or the combined metallic sheath and grounding conductors of the smooth or corrugated tube-type MC. 
(11)  Cable trays as permitted in 392.3(C) and 392.7. 
(12)  Cablebus framework as permitted in 370.3. 
(13)  Other listed electrically continuous metal raceways and listed auxiliary gutters. 
(14)  Surface metal raceways listed for grounding. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.160 - NEC Article 334.10 amended; Uses permitted. 
    334.10 Uses permitted. Type NM, Type NMC and Type NMS cables shall be permitted to be used in the following: 
(1)  One- and two-family dwellings and their attached or detached garages, and their storage buildings. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings permitted to be of Types III, IV, and V construction up to 3 stories in height only and their accessory structures, except as prohibited in 334.12. 
(3)  Deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Cable trays in structures permitted to be Types III, IV, and V where the cables are identified for the use. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.170 - NEC Article 342.1O(B), amended; Corrosive environments. 
    342.10(B) Corrosive Environments. IMC, elbows, couplings, and fittings shall be provided with approved supplementary corrosion protection where incased in concrete or in direct contact with the earth. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.180 - NEC Article 344.1O(B), amended: Corrosion environments. 
    344.10(B) Corrosive Environments. 
(1)  Stainless Steel and Red Brass RMC, Elbows, Couplings, and Fittings. Stainless steel and red brass RMC elbows, couplings, and fittings shall be permitted to be installed in concrete, in direct contact with the earth, or in areas subject to severe corrosive influences where protected by corrosion protection and judged suitable for the condition. 
(2)  Supplementary Protection of Galvanized Steel and Aluminum RMC. Galvanized steel and aluminum RMC shall be provided with approved supplementary corrosion protection where encased in concrete or in direct contact with the earth. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.190 - NEC Article 348.60, amended; Grounding and bonding. 
    348.60 Grounding and Bonding. Flexible Metallic Conduit shall not be permitted to be used as an equipment grounding conductor. 
    An equipment grounding conductor shall be installed in all flexible metallic conduits and shall be installed in accordance with 250.134(B). 
    Equipment bonding jumpers shall be installed in accordance with 250.102. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.200 - NEC Article 350.60 amended; Grounding and bonding. 
    350.60 Grounding and Bonding. Liquidtight Flexible Metallic Conduit shall not be permitted to be used as an equipment grounding conductor. 
    An equipment grounding conductor shall be installed in allliquidtight flexible metallic conduits and shall be installed in accordance with 250.134(B). 
    Equipment bondingjumpers shall be installed in accordance 250.102. 
    FPN: See 501.30(8), 502.30(8), and 503.30(8) for types of equipment grounding conductors. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.210 - NEC Article 408.40 amended; Circuit directory or identification. 
    408.4 Circuit Directory or Circuit Identification. Every circuit and circuit modification shall be legibly identified in typewritten form as to its clear, evident, and specific purpose or use on all electrical equipment in all occupancies except residential construction. In other than new construction, and when approved by the AHJ, the identification may be legibly handwritten. The identification shall include an approved degree of detail that allows each circuit to be distinguished from all others. Spare positions that contain unused overcurrent devices or switches shall be described accordingly. The identification shall be included in a circuit directory that is located on the face or inside of the panel door in the case of a panelboard, and located at each switch or circuit breaker in a switchboard. No circuit shall be described in a manner that depends on transient conditions of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.220 - NEC Article 422.12 amended; Central heating equipment. 
    422.12 Central Heating Equipment. Central heating equipment other than fixed electric space-heating equipment shall be supplied by an individual branch circuit. 
    A combination switch/fuse holder unit such as a SSU or SSY shall be installed as the discounting means for central heating equipment such as gas, forced-air furnaces and unit heaters. The fuse shall be sized at 125% of the nameplate rating of the heating equipment. 
    Exception No.1: Auxiliary equipment such as a pump, valve, humidifier, or electrostatic air cleaner directly associated with the heating equipment, shall be permitted to be connected to the same branch circuit. 
    Exception No 2: Permanently connected air-conditioning equipment shall be permitted to be connected to the same branch circuit. 
    Exception No. 3. A door chime transformer shall be permitted to be connected to the same branch circuit. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.240 - Permits and approvals. 
(A)  Permits required. No person, whether or not required to be licensed by the Colorado State Electrical Board as an Electrical Contractor, Master Electrician, Journeyman Electrician or Residential Wireman, shall install, alter, or repair any electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment unless a permit for such electrical work has been issued. A permit must be obtained for each separate project. Application for permits shall be made on forms provided by the Building Inspection Division and the required permit fee shall accompany each application. 
(B)  Homeowner permit. Any person who obtains a permit to personally install electrical work on their own property or residence shall be required to sign a notarized affidavit stating that they are knowledgeable of the requirements of the National Electrical Code(r) and that they will be personally responsible for performing the installation of the electrical work outlined on the permit application. 
(C)  Working without permit; penalty. Any person who commences any electrical work for which a permit is required without first having obtained such permit shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1.16, and, in addition, shall be obligated to pay a permit fee equal to twice the regular permit fee. However, the foregoing provision regarding punishment and payment of double fees shall not apply to emergency electrical work when it appears to the satisfaction of the chief electrical inspector that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the commencement of the work. The foregoing exculpatory provision shall apply only if the person required to obtain the permit does apply for the permit as soon as practical following the installation of the electrical work. 
(D)  Application. 
(1)  Activity authorized by a permit issued under this Code shall be conducted by the permittee or the permittee's agents or employees in compliance with all requirements of this Code applicable thereto and in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. No permit issued under this Code shall be interpreted to justify a violation of any provision of this Code or any other applicable law or regulation. Any addition or alteration of approved plans or specifications shall be approved in advance by the authority having jurisdiction, as evidence by the issuance of a new or amended permit. 
(2)  A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible at each work site or carried by the permit holder as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(E)  Content. Permits shall be issued by the authority having jurisdiction and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Operation or activities for which the permit is issued. 
(2)  Address or location where the operation or activity is to be conducted. 
(3)  Name and address ofthe permittee. 
(4)  Permit number and date of issuance. 
(5)  Name of licensed Electrical Contractor (if applicable). 
(6)  Inspection requirements. 
(F)  Issuance of permits. The authority having jurisdiction shall be authorized to establish and issue permits, certificates, notices, and approvals, or orders pertaining to electrical safety hazards, except that no permit shall be required to execute any of the classes of electrical work specified in the following: 
(1)  Installation or replacement of equipment such as lamps and of electric utilization equipment approved for connection to suitable permanently installed receptacles. Replacement of flush or snap switches, fuses, circuit breakers, lamp sockets, and receptacles, and other minor maintenance and repair work, such as replacing worn cords and tightening connections on a wiring device. 
(2)  The process of manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairing electric equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Installation of equipment and circuits operating at less than 50 volts, unless required by the International Fire Code&reg; for fire alarm systems; however, all work installed under this exception shall meet the applicable requirements of NEC&reg; Article 720, Article 725, Article 760, Article 770, Article 800, Article 810, Article 820, and/or Article 830 and is subject to inspection by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Note: This exception shall not be applicable to NEC&reg; Article 411-Lighting Systems Operating at 30 Volts or Less. 
(G)  Permit fee schedule. The permit fee schedule as adopted by the Evans City Council through resolution is adopted for all electrical permits issued under the scope of this Code. 
(H)  Inspection and approvals. 
(1)  Upon the completion of any installation of electrical equipment that has been made under a permit, it shall be the duty of the person, firm, or corporation making the installation to notify the Electrical Inspector having jurisdiction, who shall inspect the work within a reasonable time. 
(2)  Where the Electrical Inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with this Code, local ordinances and all rules and regulations of the Colorado State Electrical Board, the Inspector shall issue to the person, firm, or corporation making the installation a certificate of approval, authorizing the connection to the supply of electricity and shall send written notice of such authorization to the electric utility company. This connection to the utility company's supply shall be revocable by the Electrical Inspector for cause. 
(3)  When any portion of the electrical installation within the jurisdiction of an Electrical Inspector is to be hidden from view by the placement of parts of the building, the person, firm, or corporation installing the electrical equipment or system shall notify the Electrical Inspector, and such electrical equipment or system shall not be concealed until it has been approved by the Electrical Inspector or until two (2) work days have elapsed from the time of the notification, provided that on large installations, where the concealment of equipment and systems proceeds continuously, the person, firm, or corporation installing the equipment and systems shall give the electrical inspector due notice in advance, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(4)  If, upon inspection, any installation is found not to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this Code, and all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, the inspector making the inspection shall at once forward to the person, firm, or corporation making the installation a written notice stating the defects that have been found to exist. 
(I)  Revocation of permits. Revocation of permits shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation of this Code is found upon inspection or in case there have been false statements or misrepresentations submitted in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Any attempt to defraud or otherwise deliberately or knowingly design install, service, maintain, operate, sell, represent for sale, falsify records, reports, or applications, or other related activity in violation of the requirements prescribed by this Code shall be in violation of this Code. Such violations shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of any related certificates or permits issued by this jurisdiction. In addition, any such violation shall be subject to any other criminal or civil penalties as available by the ordinances of the City of Evans and statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(3)  Revocation shall be constituted when the permittee is duly notified by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(4)  Any person who engages in any business, operation, or occupation, or uses any premises, after the permit issued therefore has been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this Code, and before such suspended permit has been reinstated or a new permit issued, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(5)  A permit shall be predicated upon compliance with the requirement of this Code and shall constitute written authority issued by the authority having jurisdiction to install electrical work. Any permit issued under this Code shall not take the place of any other license or permit required by other regulations or ordinances of the City of Evans. 
(6)  The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to require an inspection prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(7)  A permit issued under this Code shall continue until revoked or for the period of time designated on the permit. The permit shall be issued to one person or business only and for the location or purpose described in the permit. Any change that affects any of the conditions of the permit shall require a new or amended permit. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
15.20.250 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Notice of violations and penalties shall conform to (A) and (B). 
(A)  Violations. 
(1)  Whenever the authority having jurisdiction determines that there are violations of this Code, a written notice shall be issued to confirm such findings. 
(2)  Any order or notice issued pursuant to this Code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service or mail or be delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such order or notice shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the order or notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or both. 
(B)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this Code or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval, or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by the City of Evans as provided in Chapter 1.16. 
(2)  Failure to comply with the time limits of an abatement notice or other corrective notice issued by the authority having jurisdiction shall result in each day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(3)  Any person, firm, or corporation who shall willfully violate any of the applicable provisions of this article shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.16. 
( Ord. No. 624-15,  1, 2015 ) 
CHAPTER 15.24 - International Property Maintenance Code[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.24,  15.24.010-15.24.160, and enacted a new Ch. 15.24 as set out herein. A new  15.24.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  7. 

15.24.010 - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 8 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Property Maintenance Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
IPMC Section 101.1. IPMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IPMC Section 102.3. IPMC Section 102.3 (Application of Other Codes) is amended by the deletion of the last paragraph. 
IPMC Section 103.5. IPMC Section 103.5 (Fees) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.2.1. IPMC Section 111.2.1 (Alternate Members) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.2.2. IPMC Section 111.2.2 (Chairman) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.2.3. IPMC Section 111.2.3 (Disqualification of member) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.2.4. IPMC Section 111.2.4 (Secretary) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.2.5. IPMC Section 111.2.5 (Compensation of members) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.3. IPMC Section 111.3 (Notice of Meeting) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 111.4. IPMC Section 111.4 (Open Hearing) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 302.3. IPMC Section 302.3 (Sidewalks and Driveways) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 302.4. IPMC Section 302.4 (Weeds) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 302.8. IPMC Section 302.8 (Motor Vehicles) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 304.3. IPMC Section 304.3 (Premises Identification) is amended by deleting the 4 th paragraph and replacing with "Numbers shall be a minimum 3 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of .5 inch." 
IPMC Section 304.14. IPMC Section 304.14 (Insect Screens) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 308. IPMC Section 308 (Rubbish and Garbage) is amended by the deleting this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 309. IPMC Section 309 (Pest Elimination) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
IPMC Section 604.2. IPMC Section 604.2 (Service) is amended by replacing "NFPA 70" with "Electrical Code adopted by the state of Colorado." 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.28 - International Existing Building Code[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed former Ch. 15.28,  15.28.010-15.28.050, and enacted a new Ch. 15.28 as set out herein. A new  15.28.010 has been added at the editor's discretion. The former Ch. 15.28 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548-12,  8. 

15.28.010 - International Existing Building Code adopted. 
    The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Existing Building Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
International Existing Building Code is amended by replacing all references to "ICC Electrical Code" with "Electrical Code adopted by the state of Colorado". 
IEBC Section 101.1. IEBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IEBC Section 1301.1. IEBC Section 1301.1 (Conformance) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing it with the following: "Structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provision of this code for new structures." 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
Chapter 15.34 - International Energy Conservation Code[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 667-17 ,  1, adopted May 16, 2017, set out provisions designated as Section 15.36. Inasmuch as Ch. 15.36 pertains to different subject matter, said provisions have been redesignated as a new Ch. 15.34,  15.34.010, at the discretion of the editor. 

15.34.010 - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 5 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of Evans Energy Conservation Code as if fully set out in this Chapter with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
IECC Section C101.1. IECC Section C101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "City of Evans" where indicated. 
IECC Section 109.3. IECC Section 109.3 (Qualifications) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
( Ord. 667-17 ,  1, 2017) 
CHAPTER 15.36 - Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards 

15.36.010 - Document adopted by reference. 
A.  Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the energy efficiency construction and renovation standards for nonresidential buildings of the City, by reference thereto, the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings, adopted November, 1977, and published March, 1978, by the State of Colorado, Office of State Planning and Budgeting, Board for Energy Efficient Non-residential Building Standards, 1525 Sherman Street, Denver, Colorado, 80203, and as the energy efficiency construction and renovation standards for residential buildings of the city, by reference thereto, the Colorado Recommended Energy Conservation "Performance" Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings, adopted November, 1977, and published March, 1978 by the State of Colorado, Division of Housing, State Housing Board, 1313 Sherman Street, Denver, Colorado, 80203, both to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. 
B.  The subject matter of the adopted standards includes comprehensive provisions and stand-ards regulating energy efficiency in the design, construction, renovation, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, conversion, occupancy, equipment and maintenance of certain nonresidential and residential buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.020 - Copies on file in City Clerk's office. 
    At least three (3) copies of the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings and Colorado Recommended Energy Conservation "Performance" Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings, which may be found at Appendix B of the preceding mentioned code, shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.030 - Section 108.0 added; Administrative and appeal procedures. 
    Section 108.0 is added to the code adopted in Section 15.36.010 of this chapter, to read as follows: 
    " 108.0 Administrative and Appeal Procedures. Administrative and appeal procedures set forth in Sections 201, 202, and 204, and Chapter 3 of the Uniform Building Code, 1982 Edition, shall be applicable and followed in the administration of this code." 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.040 - Section 302.1 amended; Temperatures. 
    Section 302.1 of the code adopted in Section 15.36.010 above is amended by the inclusion of the following temperatures: 
    "Winter Design Dry Bulb .....   4 F. 
    "Summer Design Dry Bulb .....   94 F. 
    "Summer Design Wet Bulb .....   64 F. 
    "Degree Days Heating .....   6200 
    "Degrees North Latitude .....   40." 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.050 - Section 502.2(a), Table amended; Heating and cooling values. 
    Section 502.2(a), Table 5 1 of the code adopted in Section 15.36.010 above is amended by the addition of the following specific values: 
    "Walls, 3 stories or less, Heating, U not exceeding .....   .270 
    "Walls, 3 stories or less, Cooling, OTTV not exceeding .....   33.600 
    "Walls, over 3 stories, Heating, U not exceeding .....   .325 
    "Walls, over 3 stories, Cooling, OTTV not exceeding .....   33.600 
    "Roof/Ceiling, Heating or Cooling, U not exceeding .....   .070 
    "Floors over unheated spaces, Heating U not exceeding .....   .080 
    "Slab on Grade, Heating, minimum R value .....   5 
    "Solar Factor, Cooling .....   100." 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.060 - Section 701.0 amended; Definitions. 
    Section 701.0 of the code adopted in Section 15.36.010 above is amended by addition of the following: 
    "SMACNA refers to Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association. NESCA refers to National Environmental System Contractors Association. NWMA refers to National Woodwork Manufacturers Association, Inc." 
(Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
15.36.070 - Violation; penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, renovate, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings, or the Colorado Recommended Energy Conservation "Performance" Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings, or the Colorado Recommended Energy Conservation "Performance" Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings, or of this Chapter, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 658-16 , 2016; Ord. 842-92, 1992: Ord. 380 78, 1978) 
CHAPTER 15.48 - International Fire Code (IFC)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), adopted May 7, 2019, repealed Ch. 15.48 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.48,  15.48.010-15.48.090, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 552-13,  1-11; Ord. No. 614-14, adopted in 2014; and Ord. No. 630-15, adopted in 2015. 

15.48.010 - Document adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant to Section 31-16-201 et seq., C.R.S., there is hereby adopted as the fire code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Fire Code, 2018 edition of the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. Copies of the IFC are on file in the Fire District's Office and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.020 - Title for citation. 
    The ordinance codified in this Chapter may be known and cited as "The Fire Code of the City of Evans, Colorado." 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.030 - Purpose. 
    The fire code is adopted in order to preserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the purposes of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire explosion and conditions affecting the safety of firefighters during emergency operations. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.040 - Scope of regulations. 
    The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions, standards and regulations concerning conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosions; establishes a department of fire prevention and defines its duties; and provides for officers and defines their duties. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.050 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    This Chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform administration and enforcement of the City's technical codes. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.060 - Applicability of Chapter. 
    This Chapter shall apply to every building, structure, process, hazardous substance, material or device, as defined in the ordinance codified herein, which is now in existence or which may hereafter be erected, constructed, altered, moved, demolished or repaired. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.070 - Definitions. 
    As used in the International Fire Code: 
    City means the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Evans. 
    Corporation Counsel means the City Attorney. 
    Fire Code Official means the Chief of the Evans Fire Protection District, or his/her designee. 
    IFC means the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code. 
    International Fire Code means the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code. 
    Jurisdiction means the City of Evans. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.080 - IFC local amendments. 
    The following IFC sections are amended as follows: 
1.  Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Evans, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
2.  Section 101.2.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
The following appendices published by the International Code Council and NFPA standards are specifically adopted as technical references and may be used by the Fire Code Official to interpret, administer and enforce the Fire Code of the City of Evans: 
1.  Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings 
2.  Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution 
3.  Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads 
4.  Appendix E, Hazard Categories 
5.  Appendix F, Hazard Ranking 
6.  Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents 
7.  Appendix H, Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statements (HMIS) Instructions 
8.  Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions 
9.  Appendix J, Building Information Sign 
10.  Appendix K, Construction Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care Facilities 
11.  Appendix L, Requirements for Fire Fighter Air Replenishment Systems 
12.  Appendix N, Indoor Trade Shows and Exhibitions 
13.  The Fire Protection Handbook 
14.  IFSTA Fire Inspection and Code Enforcement 
3.  Section 103.2 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be appointed by the Fire Chief of the Evans Fire Protection District. 
4.  IFC Sec. 104 is amended to read: 
104.11.4 Evacuation. The fire department official in charge of an incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the fire department official in charge of the incident. 
5.  IFC Sec. 108 is amended to read: "108 Fire Code Appeals Process Established "108.1 Administrative review established The fire code official shall establish an internal review process by which decisions and interpretations of the deputy code officials can be questioned. An application for review shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is proposed. " 
108.2 Appeals board established. The result of the internal administrative review process may be appealed to the City of Evans Zoning Board of Appeals as established in Chapter 2.56 following the procedures established elsewhere in the City of Evans Municipal Code. 
108.3 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is proposed. The Board shall not have the authority to waive requirements of this code. 
6.  IFC Sec. 307 is amended to read: 
"307 Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor fireplaces. 
"307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions, or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous, shall be prohibited. The burning of trash, debris and refuse shall be prohibited. 
"Exception: Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official. 
"307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildfire management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a recreational fire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
"307.2.1 Authorization. The permit is for compliance with fire safety and control alone, and is not a permit to violate any existing state or local laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances regarding fire, zoning, building, or air quality and pollution standards. The owner is responsible for obtaining any additional permits and/or clearances from any appropriate local or state agency or other official prior to beginning the burn, including but not limited to any prior approval from the state or local air and water quality management authority. 
"307.5 Attendance. Open burning, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
7.  IFC 2018 319.0 is added to read. 
Mobile Food Preparations Vehicles currently licensed and operating shall comply with sections of Chapter 319 except for: 319.3, 319.4.1, 319.10.1 and 319.10.2. 
Mobile Food Preparations Vehicles Food Trucks manufactured after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with all provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.090 - Violation - Administrative citation, enforcement and abatement. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Chapter 15.48 of the Evans Municipal Code, as amended from time to time, shall be subject to the following administrative citation, enforcement, and abatement procedures: 
1.  The term "Fire Chief" as used in this Section refers to the Fire Chief of the Evans Fire Protection District and his or her designee(s). Upon a determination by the Fire Chief of a violation of the Fire Code of the City of Evans, Colorado, the Fire Chief may serve, or cause to be served, a notice of violation(s) and an order to correct upon the responsible party. The notice of violation(s) shall be in writing and shall describe with reasonable detail the violation so that the responsible party may properly correct it. The notice of violation shall provide a reasonable time (typically seven (7) days) for correction given the circumstances of the violation, unless a longer period of time is specified in the notice based on the Fire Chief's determination of the amount of time reasonably needed to correct the violations. In circumstances involving the public health, safety or welfare, the Fire Chief may designate a period of less than seven (7) days to correct the violation. 
2.  If the violations causing the issuance of the notice of violation(s) are not corrected within the specified time period, the Fire Chief may issue a final notice to correct. The final notice to correct shall be in writing and shall describe the violation(s) with sufficient detail to enable the responsible party to correct the violations. A copy of the preceding notice of violation(s) and order to correct may be attached to the final notice to correct. The final notice to correct shall advise the responsible party that if the violations are not remedied by the proscribed date, a citation into municipal court will be issued. 
3.  Citations into Municipal Court may be issued by the Fire Chief or a police officer at any point, regardless of whether a notice of violation(s) or a final notice to correct has previously [been] issued. 
4.  All citations into Municipal Court shall be processed according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Evans Municipal Code and shall be subject to the penalties set forth therein. 
B.  Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of the Fire Code of the City of Evans. 
C.  The City may abate any violation not corrected within the time specified in a final notice to correct or a citation into Evans Municipal Court pursuant to the authority and procedures set forth in Section 1.16.050 of the Evans Municipal Code. The need to exercise the City's ability to abate shall constitute good cause for the court to award attorney's fees and costs in addition to the costs associated with the abatement of the violation(s). 
D.  Administrative citation, enforcement, and abatement actions are intended to be cumulative in nature. The City may pursue one or more civil, criminal, and administrative actions, fees, fines, sentences, penalties, judgments and remedies and may do so simultaneously or in succession. The enactment of these remedies shall in no way interfere with the City's right or ability to prosecute violations, seek temporary restraining orders, or preliminary injunctions from a court of competent jurisdiction or to exercise other available remedies. 
( Ord. No. 695-19 ,  1(Exh. A), 2019) 
15.48.100-15.48.260 - Repealed by Ord. 552-13 9 
CHAPTER 15.56 - Pools and Enclosures 

15.56.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows: 
    Private pool means any receptacle for water or artificial pool of water designed, used and maintained for swimming, bathing or recreation purposes by an individual for use by the individual's household and guests, having a depth at some point greater than twenty-four (24) inches and/or a water surface area exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet, and located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. 
    Public or semipublic pool shall mean as defined in the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health and Environment and the Weld County board of health, and shall be constructed, operated and maintained accordingly. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.020 - Permit - required. 
    Permits and permit fees for all private, public or semi-public pools shall be in accordance with the fees as established in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.030 - Permit - application - submittal documents. 
    All applications for a permit for construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of a private, public or semi-public pool shall be in accordance with requirements as established in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.040 - Fences, gates and doors. 
    All private, public or semi-public pools shall be completely surrounded by a fence enclosure having intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern such that a sphere four (4) inches in diameter cannot pass through and must be not less than four (4) feet in height; provided, however, that another structure may form portions of the required enclosure. All gates or doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use, with such latch located so as to prevent small children from opening any door or gate; provided, however, that the door of any building forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.050 - Water supply. 
    The water supply to any pool shall be installed as required by the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City Council, and no potable water supply shall be introduced into a pool or appurtenances thereof by either direct connection or hose line unless such connection is installed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and State Health Department regulations. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.060 - Wastewater discharge conditions - pools. 
A.  Wastewater from any private, public or semi-public pool shall be discharged into a storm sewer, if such is available, and shall be done in accordance with plans approved by the Utilities Director. The discharging of wastewater from any private, public or semi-public pool into a public sanitary sewer is strictly prohibited except in cases where a special permit has been authorized by the Utilities Director. The Evans Water and Sewer Board, with the final approval of City Council, is hereby authorized to establish rates and charge fees consistent with costs associated with the processing of such wastewater. 
B.  Where space and conditions are such that no hazard, nuisance or unsanitary condition will result, pool wastewater may be used for irrigation by surface or subsurface irrigation. 
C.  Submittal documents presented as part of an application for a building permit to install a pool discharge line shall include sufficient information and details in order to determine the proper place and type of connection with the drainage system. The Utilities Director may grant special permission to discharge water from a pool at a curb or upon the surface of any street provided that no hazard, nuisance or unsanitary condition will result. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
15.56.070 - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1134-98, 1998: Ord. 842-92, 1992: Ord. 356-77, 1977) 
CHAPTER 15.58 - Sight Distance 

15.58.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the sight distance Chapter is to provide for the preservation and promotion of the public health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the City by establishing minimum standards for the unobstructed cross visibility at intersections of two (2) public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.020 - Definitions. 
    Administrative authority means the City Manager or his or her designated representative. 
    Controlled streets means a street on which vehicular traffic is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a through street or highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign or other traffic control device. 
    Corner triangular area means the area formed by two (2) overlapping triangles at a corner intersection of two (2) public streets. 
    Flowline means the transition between the gutter and the face of the curb within a public road right of way. For a cross or valley pan, it is the center of the pan. Where no curb exists, the flowline will be considered the edge of pavement or roadway of the outside traveled lane. 
    Sight distance means the unobstructed view of a driver of a motor vehicle or a pedestrian within a corner triangular area at the intersection of two (2) public road rights-of-way. 
(1)  The first triangle shall be described with two (2) equal sides formed by the intersection of the flowlines of the respective streets and measured from the point where they meet twenty-five (25) feet along each respective flowline. The third side shall be the line connecting the two (2) other sides. If a public alley intersects a public street, the first two (2) sides of the triangle will measure only fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  The second triangle shall be described as having a base measured along the flowline of the through street from the point where the flowline meets the centerline of the controlled street three hundred (300) feet in each direction along the flowline of the through street. The height of the triangle is described as being measured from the point where the flowline of the through street meets the centerline of the controlled street ten (10) feet along such centerline. From this point the remaining two (2) sides are constructed by connecting lines to each end point of the base of the triangle. 
    Sight distance obstruction - public nuisance means any object or objects that interfere with the ability of motor vehicle operators or pedestrians to adequately view traffic or control devices for the purpose of safe and proper use of public rights-of-way; such objects shall include, but not be limited to; walls, fences, hedges, shrubs, trees, signs, benches, vehicles and other such objects extending more than three (3) feet above flowline; or suspended less than eight (8) feet above the surrounding grade; or, obstructing more than ten percent (10%) of the sight distance. A sight distance obstruction is hereby declared by the City Council to be a safety hazard and thereby a public nuisance. 
(1)  Exempted shall be permanent buildings, suitable for human occupancy, for which a valid building permit had been issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter. 
(2)  The provisions of Chapter 19.56 of this Code, concerning nonconforming uses and buildings, shall not apply to sight distance obstructions . 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.030 - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is an owner, occupant or other person in charge of any lot, block or parcel of land on which a sight distance obstruction exists to fail to remove such an obstruction within the time and manner prescribed by a "Notice of Abatement" duly served on such person as provided below. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.040 - Abatement of sight distance obstruction - notice required. 
    If any owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot, block or parcel or land within the city fails to remove a sight distance obstruction within ninety (90) days after being notified to do so by the administrative authority of the City by certified and first-class mail or personal service, (in any case notice must always be provided to the owner), the administrative authority may direct that the sight distance obstruction be removed by an employee or subcontractor of the City and charge the total cost thereof to such owner, occupant or person in charge of such lot, block or parcel of land together with five percent (5%) additional for inspection and other incidentals. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.050 - Abatement by City - collection of cost. 
A.  In the event a sight distance obstruction is removed by order of the administrative authority of the City, the total cost of removing such sight distance obstruction shall be paid to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after mailing by the City Clerk to the owner of such lot, block or parcel of land by certified and first class mail, notice of assessment of such cost. 
B.  Failure to pay such assessment within such period of thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against such property and shall have priority over all liens except general taxes and prior special assessments and the same shall be certified at any time after such failure to so pay the same within thirty (30) days by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 718 89 1989) 
15.58.060 - Right of entry on property. 
    Upon presentation or proper credentials the administrative authority or agents of the City may enter upon any property, vacant lots or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.070 - Property owner's right to hearing. 
    The persons to whom notice required under Section 15.58.040 of this Chapter is directed, may file a written request for a hearing before the Building and Fire Code Board of Appeals within the ninety-day period of compliance prescribed above by filing a written request with the City Clerk. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after such filing. The persons to whom notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof. The decision of the Building and Fire Code Board of Appeals after hearing shall be final and, until such decision, the City shall not commence any of the procedures under Section 15.58.040 above for removal. However, if the decision of the Building and Fire Code Board of Appeals is adverse to the person requesting the hearing, then he or she shall have ten (10) days from such decision to perform the work himself; and if such work is not performed within such ten (10) days; the City may then implement its removal procedures. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.080 - Immediate hazard. 
    If the administrative authority determines that a particular "site distance obstruction" constitutes an imminent danger such obstruction may be removed immediately and prior to the notice period provided in Section 15.58.040 above. Notice, however, shall be provided as soon as practicable and the persons in interest shall have a right to request a hearing as provided in Section 15.58.070 above within thirty (30) days of such notice. 
(Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
15.58.090 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92, 1992: Ord. 718 89, 1989) 
TITLE 16 - Environment 
CHAPTER 16.04 - Flood Damage Prevention [1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 631-15 ,  1(Exh. 1), adopted Oct. 6, 2015, amended Ch. 16.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 16.04,  16.04.010-16.04.260, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 579-13,  1. 

16.04.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State has, in Title 29, Article 20, C.R.S., delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, City Council hereby adopts the following floodplain management regulations. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
B.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities, such as water sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter uses the following methods: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.050 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms one-hundred-year flood and one (1) percent chance flood are synonymous with the term 100-year flood. The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project which does not revise an effective floodplain map that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 16.04.620 of this Chapter that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Section 16.04.620 of this Chapter. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM database means the database, usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs. The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means the FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas, such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by FEMA. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain Administrator means the City official designated by City Council to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this Chapter. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six [6] inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and boat building and boat repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on the State's inventory of historic places as part of an historic preservation program which has been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places as part of an historic preservation program that has been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved Colorado state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs) or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 C.F.R.  65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National flood insurance program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in Title 44, C.F.R. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Safety Data Sheets (SDS) includes information such as the properties of each chemical; the physical, health, and environmental health hazards; protective measures; and safety precautions for handling, storing, and transporting the chemical. The information contained in the SDS must be in English (although it may be in other languages as well). In addition, OSHA requires that SDS preparers provide specific minimum information as detailed in Appendix D of 29 CFR 1910.1200. The SDS preparers may also include additional information in various section(s). 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the City's designee. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the City's code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this Chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Chapter. For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.060 - Lands to which this Chapter applies. 
    This Chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.070 - Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. 
A.  The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Evans, Colorado," dated January 20, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary as adopted by ordinance. 
B.  Floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by resolution of the City Council. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 644-16, 2016 ; Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.080 - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.090 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.100 - Abrogation and greater restrictions 
    This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.110 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the City; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.120 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
A.  The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
B.  This Chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.130 - Severability. 
    This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.140 - Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
    The City Manager is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.150 - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Section 16.04.160 below. 
B.  Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this Chapter. 
C.  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
D.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.  1334, from which prior approval is required. 
E.  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Chapter, including proper elevation of the structure. 
F.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
G.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 16.04.070 of this Chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of Sections 16.04.190 through 16.04.210 of this Chapter. 
H.  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the community. 
I.  Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE or AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
J.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
K.  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.160 - Permit procedures. 
A.  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and shall include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed; 
3.  A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Paragraph 16.04.200.B.2 of this Chapter; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 16.04.150 above. 
B.  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Chapter and the following non-exclusive list of relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.170 - Variance procedures. 
A.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be heard and determined using the process set forth in Chapter 19.58 of the Evans Municipal Code, except as modified in this Section. 
B.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to FEMA upon request. 
C.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.58 or the procedures set forth in the remainder of this ordinance. 
D.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this ordinance have been fully considered. 
E.  Upon consideration of the factors noted in this Section and the intent of this ordinance, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this ordinance as stated in Section 16.04.030. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
H.  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
i.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
ii.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause, and 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
iii.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
I.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
i.  The criteria outlined herein are met, and 
ii.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.180 - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall be cited, prosecuted and punished pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code. Nothing contained in this Chapter or in Chapter 1.16 shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.190 - General standards for construction in special flood hazard areas. 
    In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
A.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
C.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
D.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
E.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
F.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
G.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
H.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.200 - Specific standards for construction in special flood hazard areas. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Sections 16.04.070, 16.04.150 or 16.04.260 of this Chapter, the following provisions are required: 
A.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to thirty-six (36) inches above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. 
1.  With the exception of critical facilities, as defined herein, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
2.  A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
C.  Enclosures. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
2.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
D.  Manufactured homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones Al-30, AH and AE on the City's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including ductwork, are elevated to thirty-six (36) inches above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Paragraph 1. above shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including ductwork, are thirty-six (36) inches above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
E.  Recreational vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the City's FIRM must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 16.04.160 of this Chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Subsection D above. 
2.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
F.  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the City or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to the effective date of this Chapter may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this Chapter if it meets such standards. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.210 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard area established in Section 16.04.070 of this Chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including ductwork, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the City's FIRM (at least three [3] feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 16.04.260 of this Chapter, all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including ductwork, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the City's FIRM (at least three [3] feet if no depth number is specified) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 16.04.160 of this Chapter are satisfied. Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.220 - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of floodway in Article 2). Located within special flood hazard area established in Section 16.04.070 of this Chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If the above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Article. 
C.  Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.230 - Alteration of watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
A.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
B.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
C.  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
D.  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
E.  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and City floodplain requirements and regulations. 
F.  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the City first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 16.04.220 above. 
G.  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.240 - Properties removed from floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
A.  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including ductwork, must be elevated to eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to eighteen [18] inches above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.250 - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
A.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
B.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Sections 16.04.080 and 16.04.160 of this Chapter and the provisions of flood hazard reduction of this Chapter. 
C.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Sections 16.04.070 or 16.04.150 of this Chapter. 
D.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
E.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
16.04.260 - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
A.  Classification of critical facilities. Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. Specific structures in the City shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities and transportation lifelines. 
a.  These facilities consist of: 
(1)  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage and emergency operation centers); 
(2)  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures, but excluding clinics, doctor offices and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
(3)  Designated emergency shelters; 
(4)  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables and conduits); 
(5)  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines and service lines); and 
(6)  Air transportation lifelines (airports [municipal and larger], helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure [aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency equipment aircraft hangars]). 
b.  Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
c.  Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
2.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
a.  These facilities may include: 
(1)  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
(2)  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
(3)  Refineries; 
(4)  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
(5)  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
b.  Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (SDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010), as amended from time to time, also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Department of Public Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for SDS can be found in 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this Chapter, as well as amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
c.  Specific exemptions to this category include: 
(1)  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
(2)  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Council by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the City Council) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
(3)  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this Article. 
3.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Elder care ( nursing homes); 
b.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
c.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children. 
4.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
a.  These facilities consist of: 
(1)  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
(2)  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices and classrooms only). 
b.  These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this Chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
B.  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this Chapter, protection shall include at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
2.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
C.  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the City Council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
( Ord. No. 631-15, 2015 ) 
CHAPTER 16.28 - Oil and Gas Exploration and Development 

16.28.010 - Legislative purpose. 
    It is found and declared that the location and operation of drilling and producing oil, liquid petroleum and natural gas wells within the City shall be subject to regulation under the police power. The business of drilling, producing, storing and handling of flammable and explosive liquids and the noxious odors, noise, environmental damages, aesthetic diminution and hazards that emanate from such an activity make the regulation of the location of oil and gas wells and the operation thereof necessary and reasonable to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to require zoning regulation pursuant to criteria of this Chapter for use by special review. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.020 - Legislative intent. 
    The legislative intent of this Chapter is to: 
A.  Recognize that oil and gas wells are a necessary facet of natural energy production; 
B.  Recognize and ensure the rights of those concerned to extract petroleum resources from the earth; 
C.  Recognize and ensure the rights of those concerned with the use and development of the surface of the land; 
D.  Ensure that the petroleum resource land uses are compatible with the total environment of the community; and 
E.  Protect the public from the hazards of oil and gas well drilling and development. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.030 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the construction, drilling, alteration, repair, erection, location and maintenance of any gas or oil well, accessory equipment or structure within the City. 
B.  For the purposes of this Chapter, application for use by special review may be sought by an individual who has a property interest in underlying oil and gas sufficient to allow use of the surface for extraction. 
C.  Where, in any specific case, the gas and oil well requirements of any other agency or other provision of this Code are in conflict with this Chapter, the more restrictive requirements shall be imposed. 
D.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to diminish the applicability of the other development-related codes of the City. It is particularly noted that this Chapter allows oil and gas drilling and development as a special use under the zoning code of the City. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.040 - Definitions and word usage. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this Section govern the meaning and the interpretation of these regulations. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. Words not defined in this Section shall have the meanings commonly given to them in the petroleum industry. 
    Abandonment means the disuse of a well for exploration or for producing oil or gas for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days unless, upon application submitted prior to the expiration of that time, the planning director finds that such discontinued use was the result of adverse market conditions or absence of equipment, in which case the period shall be extended for a time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
    Co-located means grouped in proximity to one another; sometimes referred to as "twinning." 
    Gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas and associated hydrocarbons. 
    Oil well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of liquid petroleum or petroleum products or for the enhancement of production from an existing well. 
    Operator means an individual, partnership, company or corporation holding a mineral interest in property and who is exercising that interest through oil and gas drilling on that property. 
    Person means and includes both the singular and the plural and means and includes any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, club, society, cooperative, trust, municipal corporation or political subdivision whatsoever. 
    Place of assembly means any structure, room or space, whether indoor or outdoor, for the congregation or seating of fifty (50) or more persons. 
    Proposed construction means construction for which the City has received an application for a building permit; however, if actual construction is not commenced within six (6) months of the application, the request and any submission attached to the request will not be considered proposed construction. If submitted within six (6) months of the expiration of the aforementioned time period, the reapplication for a building permit at the same site or general site for which a previous building permit has expired shall not be deemed proposed construction. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected that has three (3) or more walls and a roof. 
    Well means and includes any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon or any combination of them. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.050 - Permit required. 
    No person shall commence operations for the drilling, completion or production of an oil and gas well within the City without first having lawfully complied with this Chapter, the zoning code set out in Title 19 of this Code and all other provisions of this Code and any amendments thereto. It is unlawful for any person to commence operations for the drilling, completion or production of an oil or gas well within the City without first having lawfully complied with the requirements of this Chapter and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.060 - Oil and gas well locations and setbacks for structures, utility easements and rights-of-way. 
A.  Drilling. The drilling and operation of wells shall comply with the regulations established by the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. 
B.  Setbacks from wellheads. The following distances are hereby established as minimum setbacks related to oil and gas wells: 
1.  One hundred fifty (150) feet for all structures not necessary to the operation of the well; and 
2.  Three hundred (300) feet for all structures and places used as a place of assembly. 
C.  Setbacks from all tank batteries. The minimum distance setback from all gas and oil well tank batteries, separators and ancillary equipment is three hundred (300) feet for all structures not necessary to the operation of the well and for structures and places used as a place of assembly. 
D.  Setbacks from any street, alley or right-of-way. The minimum distance separation between any public street, alley or right-of-way and a wellhead and/or any tank battery, separator and ancillary equipment is seventy-five (75) feet. 
E.  Setbacks from any utility easement. The minimum distance separation between any utility easement and a wellhead and/or any tank battery, separator and ancillary equipment is twenty (20) feet. 
F.  A three hundred-foot minimum setback is required between new oil and gas facilities and wellheads, and building units, or a three hundred-foot setback from property lines, whichever is greater. 
G.  A minimum safety setback of two hundred (200) feet is required between wells and tank batteries, and any building, public road, major above ground utility line, or railroad is required at the time of drilling. 
(Ord. 605-14, 2014; Ord. 403-07; Ord. 1070-97; Ord. 818-91; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.070 - Application for use by special review. 
    Persons or firms desiring to drill any gas or oil well, with or without accessory equipment or structures, shall file a written application with the planning director. Such application shall meet the standards set forth in this Chapter as well as all other standards prescribed for use by special review under the zoning code. The written application shall contain the following general information: 
A.  Request for approval for use by special review under the form and procedures of the zoning code. This request shall include a full description of the intended use, site improvements and characteristics of installation, operation, maintenance, site restoration and abandonment. 
B.  Evidence of leasehold, resource ownership or owner's authorization. 
C.  The name and address of each owner of an interest of record in the oil and gas leases under which such well is to be drilled, operated, maintained or abandoned. 
D.  The name and address of the person or firm in charge of the operation and maintenance of such well. 
E.  The name and address of the person or firm in charge of the work to be done under such permit. 
F.  A true and accurate listing of the names and addresses of the owners of all real estate situated within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed well, accessory equipment and structure site, according to county assessor records current at the time of the application. 
G.  Notice of the public hearing for the use by special review shall be given in accordance with Chapter 19.64 of this Code. 
H.  Evidence of satisfaction of the bond requirement (see Sections 16.28.080 and 16.28.090 of this Chapter). 
I.  Evidence of satisfaction of the insurance requirement (see Section 16.28.100 of this Chapter). 
J.  Site or master plan for intended use (see Section 16.28.120 of this Chapter). The number of copies to be submitted shall be as specified by the planning director. 
K.  Conceptual restoration plan (see Section 16.28.130 of this Chapter). 
L.  Specification and graphic representation of the equipment to be used and the improvements to be made. Specific attention shall be given to the intended measures of noise mitigation and ensuring the public safety. 
M.  Certification that the owners of the leasehold interest and the persons in charge of the drilling, operation maintenance or abandonment of such well are familiar with the ordinances of the City and will abide by the provisions thereof. 
N.  Waste and storage plan (see Section 16.28.140 of this Chapter). 
(Ord. 451-08; Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.080 - Bond requirements. 
A.  Every operator shall, prior to commencing drilling, submit and maintain a bond in favor of the City in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each well to be drilled. The bond is to be executed by the operator and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State and conditioned that the operator shall pay all fees and sums due the City under this Chapter and comply and abide by the ordinances of the City and laws of the State, and, should the operator fail to do so, to pay all costs and expenses incident for such determination by test or otherwise determine whether such failure to comply with such ordinances and laws has resulted in any damage to the City or others, and if so, pay the expenses and costs of correcting such condition created by such failure and all damages resulting therefrom. 
B.  Any bond required in this Chapter that lapses or becomes void for any reason whatsoever shall cause the drilling and/or operation of the well covered by such bond to be in violation of this Code until a new bond shall be provided and filed with the administrative official or the existing bond reinstated in full force, and such well shall be suspended and discontinued, consistent with safety consideration, until the filing of such new bond or reinstatement of such existing bond. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.090 - Blanket bond. 
    In lieu of the requirements provided in Section 16.28.080 above, an operator may file with the planning director a blanket bond designed to cover all drilling operations within the City. At no time shall the amount of such blanket bond be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) times the number of wells being drilled. Additionally, an operator may file with the planning director a blanket bond for all wells completed and in operation within the City. The amount of the operation blanket bond shall be two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for all such wells within the City limits. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.100 - Insurance requirements. 
    Every operator shall also submit a copy of a policy of insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) insuring the applicant and the City against all claims or causes of action made against either or both applicant and City for damages to persons or property arising out of the drilling, maintenance, production and other work done with respect to such proposed oil or gas well. Such policies shall be written by a company authorized to do business in the State. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.110 - Site and master plan. 
A.  Site plan. Every applicant shall, at the time of filing an application, submit a site plan showing dimensions of the proposed well location lot and property lines, with a complete legal description of the proposed well site and with reference thereon to the surface owners of all such property within approximately three hundred (300) feet, potential accessory equipment, proposed roads and permanent structures. 
B.  Master plan. In lieu of the site plan required by Subsection A of this Section, the applicant may submit a master plan if more than one (1) well is to be drilled in a two-year period and within a single geographical area. Such plan shall include the following: 
1.  A full legal description of the single area covered by the master plan; 
2.  For each well proposed in the area, all information required by Subsection A of this Section; and 
3.  If a battery of accessory equipment will serve all or part of the proposed area, the site of such battery shall be included. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.120 - Well site restoration. 
A.  Upon abandonment of an oil or gas well or exploration hole, the operator shall plug the hole in accordance with Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission regulations. 
B.  Wells that have penetrated a water-bearing stratum shall be lined sufficiently above and below the stratum to prevent contamination. 
C.  When a well site is abandoned, all tanks, pumps, rigs, separators, treators, batteries and any other facilities equipment and structures associated with these installations shall be removed. 
D.  An abandoned well site shall be restored to a condition substantially similar to the original contours and condition, or better. 
E.  Site restorations shall include leveling and reseeding all on-site roads, access roads and areas disturbed by well activity. 
F.  To assure site revegetation, the City may require special treatment, such as temporary irrigation, windbreaks, soil treatment, addition of topsoil and protective groundcover and erosion control measures. 
G.  Site recovery shall be consistent with Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission regulations and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.130 - Waste and storage requirements. 
A.  No oil and gas produced from any well shall be saved, stored or confined in any tank or place or device of confinement at the well site, except as such may be permitted by the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the City. 
B.  To the maximum extent possible, no oil and gas produced shall be permitted to escape the confines of the well, the wellhead or the transmission lines into the surrounding environment. Flaring of an oil or gas well shall be allowed under the rules of the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission and the chief of the City Fire Department. Burning of refuse waste material and other open fires is unlawful. 
C.  At no time shall fluids of any kind or type be run into, stored or collected in unlined earthen pits. During the period of drilling, completion, operation, repair or maintenance of any well, the operator shall provide watertight tanks, vessels or pits lined with an impervious material to contain drilling mud, water or other types of liquid or solid waste. Solid and liquid waste shall be regularly removed from the premises to spill outside of the working area. 
D.  The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the enforcement official. It is unlawful for any operator, their agent or employee, to permit within the corporate limits of the City the discharge of any mud, water, waste oil, slush or other waste matter from any slush pit, storage tank, or oil or gas well into the alleys, streets, lots, land or leases within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.140 - Public hearings - notice - issuance or denial of use by special review. 
A.  Upon receipt of all necessary application materials, as specified in this Chapter and as necessary under the use by special review provisions of the zoning code, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall conduct the public hearings as prescribed for use by special review. 
B.  Public notice shall be given prior to the public hearings in the manner and form prescribed for use by special review. 
C.  Conditions precedent to granting use by special review for oil and gas drilling and production: 
1.  The City Council must first find that in no event shall the density of oil and/or gas wells exceed the limits placed on such wells by the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. Wells shall be co-located to the extent allowed by statute and/or the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission and to the extent feasible, as determined by the City Council. 
2.  Tanks, heaters, separators and accessory equipment shall be limited to one (1) clustered installation ("battery") per leasehold up to one-half (1/2) section, to the extent feasible, as determined by the City Council. Where mineral right leaseholds or ownerships are less than one-quarter (1/4) section in size, such accessories and their location shall be coordinated from one leasehold to the next in such fashion that the apparent number of installations is minimized. 
3.  The City Council must find that the applicant has presented satisfactory evidence of insurance as required by Section 16.28.100 of this Chapter. 
4.  The City Council must find that the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence fulfilling the bond requirement required by Sections 16.28.080 and 16.28.090 of this Chapter. 
5.  The City Council must find that the applicant has provided the master or site plan as required by Section 16.28.120 of this Chapter and that such plan fulfills the requirements of said Section. 
6.  The City Council must find that the applicant has a legitimate property interest sufficient to meet the requirements of this Section. 
D.  If the City Council finds that all the requirements of the Paragraphs 1 through 5 of Subsection C of this Section have been met and further finds that the criteria of Chapter 19.44 of this Code have been, or by appropriate condition will be met, and if the Council further finds that the granting of the permit will not be injurious to the neighborhood in which the well is to be drilled or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, then the permit shall be approved by resolution. Otherwise, the permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. 451-08; Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.150 - Drilling, completion, production and maintenance regulations. 
A.  All operations shall be conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, the laws of the State, and the rules and regulations of the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. Failure to follow these requirements will subject the user to the following sanctions: 
1.  Enforcement of the penalty provisions of this Code; 
2.  Cessation and closure of drilling and production by the City under the following terms and conditions: 
a.  The site of drilling and production operations shall, at all times, be open for inspection by the enforcement official or his or her authorized representative; 
b.  If the enforcement official or his or her authorized representative determines that drilling or completion operations are not proceeding in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, that person shall immediately notify the operator or producer in writing of the specific nature of the noncompliance or default. The operator shall have forty-eight (48) hours from the time of such notice to remedy any noncompliance or default. If the operator does not remedy any noncompliance or default within that time period, his or her use by special review shall be terminated. Once terminated, a use by special review shall be reinstated upon full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The foregoing provision regarding notice and time to correct shall not apply to any violation creating a danger to human life or safety. For a safety violation, the enforcement officer may order immediate cessation of operations. 
B.  Within twenty-four (24) hours subsequent to an order to cease operations, the operator may request, in writing, a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals to review that order. Such request shall be submitted to the enforcement official. Such request shall be forwarded forthwith to the chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The hearing shall be held within seven (7) working days of the receipt of the request by the enforcement official. The chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall provide at least three (3) days' notice to the operator of the date, place and time of hearing. This hearing may be held at either a regular or special meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals. After reviewing evidence in support of the enforcement official's order and evidence from the operator protesting that order, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render findings. If the Zoning Board of Appeals finds substantial evidence in support of the order to cease operations, it shall affirm the decision of the enforcement official. If the Zoning Board of Appeals does not find such evidence, it shall strike the order and reestablish the use by right, reversing the decision of the enforcement official. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final subject to review by City Council. An affirmative vote of five (5) members of the City Council shall be required to overturn the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
C.  Surface pipe shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission and all applicable laws and ordinances. All gas piping shall be installed in conformance with the International Mechanical Code, as amended and adopted in this Code. 
D.  Adequate precautions shall be taken and necessary wellhead safety devices used at all times during the drilling, completion, production, repair and maintenance of the well. 
E.  Operations for the drilling, completion and equipping of any well to be drilled under the terms of this Chapter shall be completed within a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of commencement thereof, and all drilling equipment, pulling and swabbing equipment removed on or before the expiration of such period. 
F.  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to and during drilling operations, the operator shall maintain adequate access to the well site. During operation of the well, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the drill site itself shall be graded for adequate drainage and shall be surfaced and maintained to prevent dust and mud and to provide access for fire protection. 
G.  Blowout protection. Appropriate blowout prevention shall be provided to prevent the blowout of an oil or gas well during drilling and re-drilling operation. 
H.  Electric motors for pumping operations. Only electric power motors shall be used for pumping units. Power for such motors shall be derived from a public utility outlet. Where preexisting wells fail to meet this requirement, they shall be deemed to be nonconforming and subject to compliance within a six-month period. 
I.  Fencing. All drilling locations and equipment as well as all pumps and equipment used in the operation of a complete well shall be enclosed on all sides by a chain-link fence at least six (6) feet in height and, in addition, have not less than three (3) strands of barbed wire sloping outward at approximately a 45-degree (45) angle for eighteen (18) inches from the top of the fence. There shall be no aperture below such fence greater than four (4) inches. 
J.  Landscaping and/or screening. The City may require landscaping or screening. Landscaping shall be required where necessary in light of locational factors (i.e., proximity to residential areas) and shall be appropriate to the surrounding environment. All apparatus located above ground shall be painted in muted tones to be compatible with the surrounding areas. 
K.  Noise and vibration requirements. During all operations from commencement through abandonment, all noise and vibration shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
L.  Control of noxious fumes. The operator and a producer shall make a good faith effort to control the escape of noxious fumes and in no event shall they be allowed to become a nuisance to abutting properties. 
M.  Signs. An approved sign having a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet and not more than six (6) square feet, bearing the current name and/or insignia of the operator, shall be displayed at all times for the commencement of operations until abandonment. The sign shall warn of safety hazards to the public. Advertising signs are prohibited. 
N.  Adequate fire-fighting apparatus and supplies, approved by the City Fire Department, shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling, completion and repair operations. All machinery, equipment and installations on all drilling sites within the City limits shall conform to such requirements as may from time to time be issued by the Fire Department. 
O.  Building permits and all other applicable permits shall be obtained by the applicant pursuant to federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.160 - Deeper drilling. 
    Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it is unlawful and an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper depth than that reached in the prior drilling operations without providing evidence of the following to the administrative official: 
A.  The then condition of the well and the casing therein; 
B.  The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened; 
C.  The proposed casing program to be used in connection with proposed deepening operations; 
D.  Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings in the well currently pass the same tests as are provided for in this Chapter in case of the drilling of the original well. In the event the Planning Commission and the City Council are satisfied that the well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed in the original well, a supplemental use by special review may be issued without an additional filing fee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for. In any deeper drilling, or any deeper completion of any deeper production operations, the applicant shall comply with all other provisions contained in this Chapter and applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well or wells. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.170 - Transfer of operations. 
    Subsequent to a grant of use by special review, no operator shall sell, transfer, assign or convey the drilling site, equipment or operations without notifying the Planning Department of such action. Prior to the commencing of drilling or production, the new operator shall submit evidence, satisfactory to the administrative official, of compliance with all of the provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, appropriate insurance bonds. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.180 - Revocation. 
    The violation or breach of any of the terms or conditions of this Chapter, the ceasing to exist of any of the conditions precedent listed in this Chapter or the breach of any of the terms or conditions of any use by special review pursuant hereto shall be grounds for the revocation of any use by special review permitted under this Chapter. Such revocation shall take place only upon a hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in Subparagraph b of Paragraph 16.28.160.A.2 above. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
16.28.190 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
B.  In the event an operator fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the City may perform the required action and invoice the operator responsible, plus a ten percent (10%) fee for inspection and other administrative costs. The City shall first give written notice to the operator of the required action and allow at least fourteen (14) days to comply, except in the case of emergency. In the event an operator fails to pay an invoice from the City for such costs and fees within thirty (30) days of receipt of such invoice, the City may file a lien on the mineral property with the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with an additional ten percent (10%) penalty to defray the cost of collection. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior assessments. Nothing in this Section shall preclude or prevent the City from punishing violations of this Code in accordance with Section 1.16.010 of this Code or any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. 403-07; Ord. 602-84) 
CHAPTER 16.40 - Parks 

16.40.010 - Administration of public parks by Director of Parks and Recreation - appointment. 
    The construction, development, planning, operation and maintenance of public parks in the City shall be under the administration of the Director of Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1150-99; Ord. 768-90; Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.020 - Closed hours of parks - designated. 
    All public parks within the City shall be closed to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 652 86; Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.030 - Closed hours of parks - posting notices. 
    The Director of Parks and Recreation shall post notices at the entrances of all City parks in conspicuous places therein in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter as to closing hours, sufficient to inform the public of the closing hours in such parks. 
(Ord. 369-06; Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.040 - Closed hours of parks - violation unlawful - exceptions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to be within the parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless travel on park streets therein is necessary for through traffic for those residing in areas adjoining such parks or unless on occasions or events of a public nature for which a permit has been previously granted by authority of the City. This prohibition shall not extend to persons employed within such parks or to persons who have obtained permission, in writing, from the Director of Parks and Recreation for entry into parks during such hours. 
(Ord. 369-06; Ord. 1150-99; Ord. 652 86; Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.050 - Vandalism and interference with facilities or vegetation unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to injure, damage, remove, deface or destroy any City park facility, tree, shrub, vine, flower or other property within any City park or to commit any act of vandalism therein. 
(Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.060 - Orderly conduct required - certain behavior prohibited. 
    All persons making use of any public park in the City shall at all times conduct themselves in an orderly manner and shall not disport themselves in a loud, boisterous or unseemly manner or in such fashion as to disturb, be offensive to or annoy other users of such park or residents adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. 595 84) 
16.40.070 - Glass containers prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to bring, use or possess a glass container in a public park within the City. 
(Ord. 652 86) 
16.40.080 - Alcohol restricted - public parks and facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, consume or have any open container of alcoholic beverages within the Riverside Park Ball Fields and the adjacent parking area without the issuance of a special permit. It is also unlawful for any person to serve, consume or have any open container of alcoholic beverage (except as permitted by Section 12-47-411(3.5),C.R.S., for vinous liquor) when on, in or using, by conveyance or otherwise, any public street, parking lot, alley, park, public place, avenue or sidewalk within the City, with the exception that alcoholic beverages with six percent (6%) or less alcohol content may be consumed in the parks of the City (outside the Riverside Park Ball Fields and adjacent parking area) and with the exception that alcohol may be consumed upon issuance of a special permit within the confines of the Evans Community Complex. (See also Subsections 5.08.230A and 5.08.230B of this Chapter). Any consumption of alcohol at the Evans Community Complex or within Riverside Park Ball Fields and its adjacent parking area will be restricted to approved City issued permit holders and such permit holders shall follow all rules and regulations set forth at the Complex and all other applicable laws pertaining to the consumption of alcohol in the City. 
(Ord. 292-04; Ord. 022-00; Ord. 1044-97) 
16.40.090 - No smoking at Riverside Park Ball Fields. 
    As provided in Section 8.18.030 of this Code, and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in any area within the fenced area of the Riverside Park Ball Fields. 
(Ord. 427-08) 
16.40.100 - No open fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start or maintain an open fire except in designated receptacles provided in the park by the City and except for persons employed within such parks by the City or to persons who have obtained permission, in writing, from the Fire Chief and the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. 1150-99; Ord. 768-90) 
16.40.110 - No boating or swimming - variance provision. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any type of boat, floatation device or inflatable boat on any City lake. It shall further be unlawful for any person to swim, wade or enter the water at any City lake. 
B.  Application for a variance to this Section shall be submitted to the Parks and Recreation Commission. Such application shall include a statement setting forth the nature and extent of the requested variance, together with evidence supporting need for such variance. Once a completed application for a variance has been submitted to and heard by the Parks and Recreation Commission, its recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration and final decision at the next regular council meeting. 
(Ord. 1150-99; Ord. 768-90) 
16.40.111 - Dogs in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dog to be in any public lake or body of water and will be considered a public nuisance when in any lake or body of water. Controlled dogs are allowed on City-owned parks, trails and open space. A controlled dog must be on a leash ten (10) feet or less in length, attached to the dog and held by or tied to a person (see also Section 6.04.020, "Control required - running at large prohibited" of this Code). Any owner, taking the animal upon any public way or other public property in the City, shall immediately remove or cause to be removed and lawfully dispose of all fecal matter left on such property by the animal (see also Section 6.04.130, "Animal defecation - owner responsibility" of this Code). 
(Ord. 426-08; Ord. 369-06) 
16.40.112 - Off-leash dog park. 
    Dogs may be allowed off-leash only within designated off-leash dog parks in the City. Dogs must be under voice control and in sight of the owner at all times and owners must follow all posted rules and regulations while in the dog park. Any owner, taking the animal in to any dog park, shall immediately remove or cause to be removed and lawfully dispose of all fecal matter left on such property by the animal. 
(Ord. 426-08) 
16.40.120 - Violation - penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 842-92; Ord. 768-90) 
CHAPTER 16.42 - Regulations for Dedication of Land and/or Payment of Fees for Public Park Land in Subdivisions 

16.42.010 - Intent. 
    This Section is intended to provide adequate sites for the location of public park land necessitated by the impacts created by new development. Such sites may be dedicated to the City or a homeowner's association for eventual construction and maintenance. The intent is to require appropriate mitigation in proportion to the impacts being created by new development. It is further the intent of this Section to have dedicated park land as the highest priority although a cash-in-lieu process is identified. An annexation agreement and/or developer's agreement, when appropriate, will outline the specific requirements pertaining to this Section and specifics as to land dedication and/or cash-in-lieu for land. This Section is in addition to park development impact fees, of which said fees are to be used for the design and construction of park lands. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
16.42.020 - General requirements. 
    The developer shall provide, at no cost to the City, for the construction of all roads adjacent to the park area being platted in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, including all roads adjoining publicly dedicated park sites, traffic signalization to serve the site, extensions of all utilities to the site and other public infrastructure as required by the City Council. Security needed to ensure such improvements shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permits. All park and trail development and facilities shall conform to the standards and criteria as outlined in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan, as amended. 
A.  Parks, trails and open land. Whenever land is proposed for residential subdividing, or if land is replatted which would add to, or change, the original residential impact, the developer shall provide land or cash-in-lieu of land for active and specialized recreation generated by the proposed use. In general, these lands shall be suitable for the development of active play areas, trails or in some instances to serve to preserve unique land forms or natural areas. Where no suitable land is available in a development, cash-in-lieu of land or the equivalent monetary value or the donation of recreation facilities may be substituted at the City's discretion. Additional dedication for open land may be required by the City if deemed necessary to preserve areas of special significance. 
1.  The following formula is used to calculate the minimum amount of land dedication required in residential developments by the City, which is deemed necessary to provide adequate land for parks. This formula is based upon a total of six and one-quarter (6.25) acres of developed park land per one thousand (1,000) population as recommended in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. Furthermore, for purposes of population impact, each residential unit is assumed to house an average of two and nine-tenths (2.9) individuals per unit (2000 U.S. Census figures). 
3.5 ac of neighborhood with a minimum size of 6.0 acres or 2.75 ac of community parks with a minimum size of 25.0 acres: 
Neighborhood Park = Dwelling units x 0.010 acres/unit 
Community Park = Dwelling units x 0.0080 acres/unit 
B.  The City reserves the right to adjust the acreage requirement between neighborhood and community park categories as deemed necessary to meet specific needs and to determine the amount of developed park acreage required based upon recommendations by the Parks and Recreation Department/ Commission. 
1.  Within nonresidential developments (commercial, industrial, etc.) provision of park facilities is encouraged. 
2.  For the purposes of calculating the required dedication, existing dwelling units within a subdivision shall be excluded from the calculation of the park requirement. 
3.  Land proposed for park dedication shall be clearly identified on any submitted plat including the number of acres for each site and the total acreage proposed for City park dedication within the project. 
4.  The conveyance of dedicated park land to the City shall be by general warranty deed and title commitment and the title shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, including real property taxes completed to the time of conveyance. Dedicated park land shall include the necessary water rights or other available water service to provide for irrigation and drinking water. Community and neighborhood park land shall be conveyed at the time of recordation of the final plat for the area served by the community and neighborhood parks as defined in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. 
5.  The City shall assume all responsibility for development of all land dedicated for parks and trails, unless otherwise determined by the City and the developer. If the developer elects to develop the park, a park site master plan, as designed by a professional landscape architect, shall be submitted to the City for approval prior to the time of final plat submittal and will be identified in a developer's agreement. Upon approval of the park plan by the City, cost estimates and construction documents shall be submitted along with all other necessary information for construction. The park site shall be constructed in accordance with City standards and specifications and as outlined in an approved developer's agreement. In addition, the developer shall provide to the City a letter of credit until all of the improvements are completed. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
16.42.030 - Cash-in-lieu. 
    Cash-in-lieu for off-site land dedication may be used in cases in which the cash value of park land dedication and park development costs is deemed, by the City, to be more appropriate in satisfying the needs of the residents of the proposed development. Such cases include, but are not limited to, small developments not able to meet the minimum size requirement and developments which already have adjacent facilities that could be expanded to satisfy the need created by the proposed development. In those subdivisions where proposed regional trails are located, no cash-in-lieu of land will be accepted unless there is an acceptable alternate route, as determined by the City, which is compatible with the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. 
A.  The cash-in-lieu for land dedication and park development costs fee shall be determined by the following process: 
1.  The City Parks and Recreation Department shall review all cash-in-lieu for land and recommend a course of action to the Building Division prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
2.  The City shall make a final determination of the method in which the dedication requirements shall be satisfied. 
3.  When cash-in-lieu for land dedication and park development costs is requested by the City, the following formula shall be used: 
Total acreage for dedication $ Value/acre as determined Dedication as cash-in-lieu by market value $ amount required  
4.  When a combination of land and cash-in-lieu for land is requested by the City, the following formula shall be used: 
Total park dedication 
in acres required as 
calculated by formula (divided by) Land acreage accepted = Total acreage for 
dedication 
as cash-on-lieu Total acreage for 
dedication 
as cash-in-lieu (multiplied by) $ Value/acre as 
determined by 
market value = Dedication $ amount 
required  
5.  The cash-in-lieu fee shall be equivalent to the full market value of the acreage required for park land dedication. Value shall be based on the anticipated market value of the land being developed after completion of platting and construction of public improvements. The City shall determine the value for each approved cash-in-lieu project. If the fee is disputed, the applicant shall submit a proposal for the cash-in-lieu fee and supply the information necessary for the City to evaluate the adequacy of the proposal. Such submittal shall include at least one (1) appraisal of similar property within the development being reviewed, paid for the developer, by a qualified appraiser approved by the City. The Parks and Recreation Department shall recommend, to the Building Division, a final cash-in-lieu amount to be collected by the City. 
6.  The cash-in-lieu fee for single-family dwellings and duplexes will be prorated on a per unit basis at the time of final platting, final plan review or any subsequent replats, whichever indicates the greater proposed land use and final number of dwelling units to be constructed, and fees will be conveyed to the City prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
7.  The cash-in-lieu fee for multi-family housing will be prorated on a per unit basis at the time of the issuance of building permits, which indicates the final number of dwelling units to be constructed, and will be conveyed to the City at the time of issuance of each building permit within the development. 
8.  Cash-in-lieu fee collected is intended to be used to benefit the residents within the service area of the type of park for which the fees were collected (i.e., neighborhood park - one-half-mile radius; community park - two-mile radius). The City reserves the right to adjust the cash-in-lieu requirement between neighborhood and community park categories as deemed necessary to meet specific needs. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
16.42.040 - Disposal of land. 
    Disposing of park lands obtained through these dedication requirements shall be pursuant to requirements of state law and/or City Charter. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
16.42.050 - Variations. 
    Credit towards park land dedication requirements may be considered for the following and as determined by the Parks and Recreation Department, the Planning Division, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council: 
A.  Consideration may be given for meeting a portion of park land dedication requirements through the provision of specialized recreation facilities, provided that such facilities: 
1.  Are, and will remain, available to the general public; 
2.  Will meet a demonstrated public need; and 
3.  Replace or supplement facilities that would generally be provided by the City. 
B.  Consideration may be given for meeting a portion of park land dedication requirements through dedication or purchase and subsequent dedication of off-site land (land not contiguous to the development), provided that such land: 
1.  Will meet a demonstrated public need; and 
2.  Meets the selection criteria for a neighborhood park, community park or trail as provided in Section 16.42.060 below. 
C.  Consideration may be given for meeting a portion of park land dedication requirements through the provision of private open land if such land is restricted for park, recreation or open space purposes by conservation easement or restricted deed, provided that such land: 
1.  Will meet a demonstrated public need; and 
2.  Meets the selection criteria for a neighborhood park community park, trail or open land as provided in Section 16.42.060 below. 
D.  Consideration may be given for meeting a portion of park land dedication requirements through the provision of park and recreation facilities by developers, special districts and homeowners' associations provided that such amenities: 
1.  Will meet a demonstrated public need; 
2.  Are, and will remain, available to the general public; and 
3.  Meet the selection criteria for a neighborhood park, community park or trail as provided in Section 16.42.060 below. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
16.42.060 - Selection criteria. 
A.  Community parks. Recommended guidelines for sizes of community parks are listed in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. Land may be considered for acceptance for community park land dedication requirements if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Community parks shall have a two-mile service area radius and are a minimum of twenty-five (25) contiguous acres in size; 
2.  Sufficient flat terrain is available to provide for the development of active recreation areas as deemed necessary to meet the needs of the respective service area; 
3.  Land will not be considered for community park land dedication if it is an exclusive utility or other easement, public street right-of-way, pedestrian walkway required under other regulations or contains topographical or hazardous obstructions that would preclude development as a community park; 
4.  Street frontage or permanent access to the park site, at two (2) or more points, with a minimum clear distance of three hundred (300) continuous linear feet each shall be provided for both vehicles and nonmotorized users; 
5.  Only the upper one-fourth of detention areas, with maximum side slopes or berms of 6:1, adjacent to, or within, the park site may be applied toward the minimum acreage requirement; 
6.  Fifty percent (50%) of oil wellhead and tank battery setback areas may be applied toward the minimum acreage requirement with the placement of the oil structures at the edge of any dedicated property affected. In the case of tank batteries, however, an additional three (3) acres, or a minimum of a total of twenty-three (23) contiguous acres, is necessary for park land dedication; 
7.  Areas to be dedicated shall offer natural and scenic quality and, ideally, can support both active and passive recreational activities for City residents; and 
8.  Areas containing lakes, ponds or reservoirs may be considered, provided that such areas do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total dedication requirement and the area is contiguous to other land suitable for public park development. 
B.  Neighborhood parks. Recommended guidelines for sizes of neighborhood parks are listed in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. Land may be considered for acceptance for neighborhood park land dedication requirements if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Shall be a minimum of six (6) contiguous acres in size; 
2.  Neighborhood parks shall have a one-half-mile service area radius, however, the service area will not extend across arterial roadways, as determined by the proposed development and City of Evans Transportation Plan, as amended; 
3.  Sufficient flat terrain is available to provide for development of active recreation areas as deemed necessary to meet the needs of the respective service area; 
4.  Land will not be considered for local park land dedication if it is an exclusive utility or other easement, public street right-of-way, pedestrian walkway required under other regulations or contains topographical or hazardous obstructions that would preclude development as a neighborhood park; 
5.  Detention or retention areas will not be considered as suitable neighborhood park land and may not be applied to the minimum park acreage requirement, however; detention or retention facilities may be considered as adjacent and additional public lands to the dedicated park land providing that any side slopes or berms do not exceed a maximum 4:1 slope; 
6.  Fifty percent (50%) of oil wellhead and tank battery setback areas may be applied toward the minimum acreage requirement with the placement of the oil structures at the edge of any dedicated property affected; in the case of tank batteries, however, an additional three (3) acres, or a minimum of a total of seven (7) contiguous acres, is necessary for park land dedication; and 
7.  Street frontage or permanent access to the park site, at two (2) or more points, with a minimum clear distance of one hundred fifty (150) continuous linear feet each shall be provided for both vehicles and nonmotorized users. 
A neighborhood park site, when possible, should be considered for co-locating with an elementary and/or middle school site in order to benefit from shared facilities such as parking lots, access roads, play fields and other facilities, thereby reducing the overall acreage requirement by a factor equal to those shared facilities. Any such consideration must be approved by all parties involved, including the City of Evans, Weld County School District 6, Weld County and/or any others. 
C.  Mini-parks. Recommended guidelines for sizes of mini-parks are listed in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan. Land may be considered for a mini-park if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Mini-parks shall be accessible to all residents living within a one-quarter-mile radius; 
2.  Mini-parks shall only be constructed in large lot subdivisions (2.5 acres per unit or larger) and in developed areas of town that are currently underserved, where no sites meeting the six-acre minimum size for a neighborhood park are available; 
3.  Land will not be considered for a mini-park if it is an exclusive utility or other easement, public street right-of-way, pedestrian walkway required under other regulations or contains topographical or hazardous obstructions that would prelude development as a mini-park; and 
4.  Street frontage or permanent access to the park site, at two (2) or more points, with a minimum clear distance of seventy-five (75) linear feet each shall be provided for both vehicles and nonmotorized users. 
D.  Trails. Partial credit may be given for trails toward the park and dedication requirements as determined by the Parks and Recreation Department, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the City Council. Provision of trails is considered a normal element of an appropriately planned development. The following are considerations for design criteria for trails: 
1.  Alignment provides linkages for the community to local parks, schools and other activity areas; 
2.  Alignment is identified in the City's Trails Master Plan or provides linkages for the community to regional parks, trails or open lands as specified in the City of Evans Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan; 
3.  Trails shall be designed to provide for easy, safe and secure usage and allow for sufficient easement or right-of-way to accommodate multiple uses; and 
4.  Land should not be considered for trail dedication acceptance if it is an exclusive utility or other easement, public street right-of-way, pedestrian walkway required under other regulations or contains topographical or hazardous obstructions that would preclude development of a trail. 
(Ord. 370-06; Ord. 111-01; Ord. 045-00) 
TITLE 18 - Land Development Code[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Title 18 contains the text of the Land Development Code enacted by Ord. No. 654-16 ,  1, adopted March 21, 2017, and which repealed Title 18 in its entirety. Former Title 18,  18.04.010-18.04.110, 18.08.010-18.08.400, 18.12.010-18.12.090, 18.16.010-18.16.050, 18.20.010-18.20.130, 18.24.010-18.24.250, 18.25.010-18.25.070, 18.26.010-18.26.030, 18.28.010-18.28.300, 18.30.010-18.30.140, 18.31.010-18.31.110, 18.32.010-18.32.240, 18.33.010-18.33.110, 18.34.010-18.34.030, 18.36.010-18.36.050, 18.38.010-18.38.090, 18.40.010-18.40.030, 18.48.010, pertained to subdivisions, and derived from Ord. 673-87; Ord. 842-92; Ord. 1061-97; Ord. 1077-97; Ord. 1119-98; Ord. 1158-99; Ord. 1170-99; Ord. 1180-99; Ord. 044-00; Ord. 063-01; Ord. 160-02; Ord. 244-03; Ord. 247-03; Ord. 252-04; Ord. 272-04; Ord. 277-04; Ord. 320-05; Ord. 342-05; Ord. 346-05; Ord. 499-10; and Ord. 532-11. Amendments to this Land Development Code are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 18.01 - General Provisions 

18.01.010 - Title for citation. 
    This Title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Land Development Code," and may hereafter be referred to in this Title as "this Land Development Code" or "this Title." 
18.01.020 - Authority. 
    This Title is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the City as home rule authority pursuant to Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the City of Evans Home Rule Charter, and Article 23, Title 31, as amended, and to the extent that such state statutes are not inconsistent with this Title. 
18.01.030 - Purpose. 
    This Title is enacted for the following purposes: 
A.  To assist orderly, efficient and integrated development; 
B.  To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents; 
C.  To ensure conformance of land subdivision plans with the public improvement plans of the city, Weld County, the State and other public agencies; 
D.  To ensure coordination of municipal public improvement plans and programs; 
E.  To encourage well planned subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and improvements; 
F.  To improve land survey monuments and records by establishing standards for surveys and plats; 
G.  To safeguard the interests of the public, the property owner and the subdivider; 
H.  To secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards; 
I.  To prevent population congestion; 
J.  To protect natural vegetation and scenic areas; 
K.  To prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of surface and subsurface water; 
L.  To prevent flood damage to persons and properties, and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood-control projects; 
M.  To restrict building on flood lands, shorelands, areas covered by poor soils or in areas poorly suited for building or construction; 
N.  To prevent loss and injury from landslides, mudflows and other geologic hazards; 
O.  To implement the Comprehensive Plan of the City; 
P.  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
Q.  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
R.  To promote adequate light and air; 
S.  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
18.01.040 - Jurisdiction. 
A.  This Title shall apply to all properties within the legal boundaries of the City. 
B.  A copy of a map showing the boundaries of the City shall be available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. 
18.01.050 - Relationship to existing zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
    To the extent that the provisions of this Title are the same in substance as the previously adopted provisions that they replace in the City's zoning and subdivision ordinances, they shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specifically provided. In particular, a situation that did not constitute a legal, nonconforming situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve legal nonconforming status under this Title merely by the repeal of the zoning ordinance. 
18.01.060 - Fees. 
A.  Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for zoning permits, special use permits, subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments, variances and other administrative relief. The amount of the fees charged shall be established by resolution of the Council filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Fees established in accordance with Subsection (A) above shall be paid upon submission of a completed land use application or notice of appeal. All applications for which there is a fee shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Applications which are not accompanied by the appropriate fee shall be considered incomplete and shall not be processed nor shall any permit be issued unless the appropriate fee accompanies the application. 
C.  The City will bill developers for any and all costs of professional or consulting services which the City incurs as a result of a developer or his or her project. Professional or consulting services include but are not limited to: legal, engineering, financial advisor, geological hydrological, surveying, or planning services. The applicant shall pay the City the actual costs of these professional or consulting services plus fifteen percent (15%) to cover administrative costs. 
D.  The City will send the applicant a statement for the actual and administrative costs incurred by the City pursuant to Subsection (C) above. The applicant shall pay the City the amount due on the statement within fifteen (15) days of the date of the issuance of such statement. In the event the applicant fails to pay the amount due on the statement within the time period specified above, the City shall immediately stop the review process for the proposed development. The application will be deemed withdrawn if the statement is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of the issuance of the statement. If the City anticipates incurring substantial expenses in connection with an application, the City may require the applicant to provide and maintain an advance deposit with the City in an amount reasonably determined by the Community Development Director. 
E.  If the statement is not paid in full within thirty (30) days after issuance of the statement, in addition to the application being withdrawn, the City shall impose interest on the amount due and outstanding at the rate of one and one-half of one percent (1.5%) per month from the date when due. 
F.  In addition to the City's remedies to stop the review process upon nonpayment of such statement, and to impose penalty interest, the City shall additionally possess the right to initiate an enforcement action against the applicant for nonpayment of such fees. Such enforcement action may be initiated either in the Weld County Court or in the Evans Municipal Court. In the event such collection action is determined in favor of the City, the City shall be awarded its attorneys' fees and court costs in addition to the unpaid fees as part of any judgment. 
G.  The payment of fees of the costs of professional and consulting services under this Section shall be due and payable as set forth within this Section, regardless of whether the project is completed, approved and/or regardless of whether the owner/developer chooses to complete the land review process under the City's Land Development Code. 
H.  The applicant shall pay any impact fees as established by City ordinances in effect at the time the development application is approved by City Council. The impact fees shall be paid at the time specified by such ordinance. 
18.01.070 - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the expressed intent that the provisions of this Title shall be severable, in accordance with provisions set forth below. 
A.  If any provision of this Title is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the intent that: 
1.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Title that is expressly stated in the decision to be invalid; and 
2.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Title as a whole or any other part thereof, and the rest of this Title shall continue in full force and effect. 
B.  If the application of any provision of this Title to any use, lot, building, other structure or tract of land is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the intent that: 
1.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that use, lot, building, other structure or tract of land immediately involved in the controversy, action or proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered; and 
2.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Title as a whole or the application of any provision thereof, to any other use, lot, building, other structure or tract of land. 
18.01.080 - Interpretation. 
A.  On the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Title, the following shall govern: 
1.  The provisions contained in this Title shall be regarded as minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  Whenever a provision of this Title and any provision in any other law of the City covers the same subject matter, whichever is the most restrictive or imposes the higher standard or requirements shall govern. 
3.  Certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this Title. 
B.  This Title shall repeal the previous zoning ordinances and subdivision ordinances of the City and any amendments made thereto. 
C.  Such repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the violation of any ordinance repealed hereby, for any offense committed prior to repeal. 
18.01.090 - Resubmittals and expiration of approvals. 
A.  A maximum of six (6) months will be granted to applicants to resubmit incomplete application packets. Any project that is inactive for more than six (6) months from the date of determination of incompleteness must be resubmitted with new application and fees. Failure to meet this six-month time line will result in applications becoming permanently inactive and the applicants forfeiting their fees. 
B.  Any approval of an application for which a grading permit or building permit has not been issued or for which the special use has not commenced within six (6) months after approval of the site plan or special use shall be null and void. All variance approvals not exercised within six (6) months from the date of approval shall become null and void. An extension of time of up to ninety (90) days may be granted by the Community Development Director for good cause. Any denial of the extension may be appealed to the Planning Commission. If denied, the applicant may resubmit a new application and fees for the same project. 
C.  Upon denial of any land use application, the same or similar application, as determined by the Community Development Director, may not be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months commencing from the date of denial. The determination of the City Planner may be appealed to the City Council in writing within ten (10) working days of the City Planner's decision. 
D.  Responsibility for complete and proper application submittal shall be that of the applicant. Failure to do so will result in a delay or denial of the application. Furthermore, if any documentation presented to the Community Development Department is found to be intentionally misleading, intentionally inaccurate, or fraudulent, the application will be denied or approval revoked. 
18.01.100 - Vested Property Rights. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended, and to effectuate local control over creation of vested property rights to the fullest extent permitted under the Evans Home Rule Charter. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Site specific development plan means a map, plat or site plan that has been submitted to the City by a landowner or such landowner's legal representative describing the reasonable certainty, type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property. Such plan may be in the form of the following: final site plan, final subdivision plat, minor subdivision plat, planned unit development plan, conditional or special use plan or as otherwise agreed by the City Council and the owner for a specific project or development phase which occurs prior to building permit application for those developments for which the landowner wishes the creation of vested rights, and has submitted an application and receives approval by the City Council. The City shall conduct a public hearing at the request of the landowner, which hearing follows the successful approval of the development at all other required stages of the development review process. Failure of the landowner to request such hearing renders the approval not a site specific development plan, and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created. A site specific development plan shall not include a variance, sketch plan, or preliminary plan. 
    Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. A property right which becomes vested upon second reading of an ordinance shall remain vested for a period of three (3) years. This vesting period shall not be extended by any amendments to a site specific development plan unless expressly authorized by the City Council. 
C.  Notice and hearing. 
1.  No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing which is published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. Such notice may, at the City's option, be combined with the notice required for final plan approval, or any other required notice. At such hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
2.  The City Council may approve a site specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The conditional approval shall result in a vested property right, although failure to abide by such terms and conditions will result in a forfeiture of vested property rights. 
D.  Development agreements. The City Council may enter into development agreements with landowners providing property rights shall be vested for a period exceeding three (3) years where warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the size and phasing of the development, economic cycles, and market conditions. 
E.  Notice of approval. Each map, plat, or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24 C.R.S., as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the legal description of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan as approved by City Council on second reading of the ordinance, in a newspaper of general circulation. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to accomplish and pay for such publication and to provide proof of publication to the city clerk. Failure to achieve such publication and provide proof shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. 
F.  Approval - effective date - amendments. A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved when the City Council approves the vested rights ordinance upon second reading, as applicable, relating thereto, subject to the right of appeal and judicial review. In the event amendments to a site specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the City Council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
G.  Payment of costs. In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the City as result of the site specific development plan review, including but not limited to publication of notices, public hearing and review costs, which costs are hereby established by City Council by resolution. 
H.  Other provisions unaffected. Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. The establishment of a vested property right shall not preclude the application of ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulation by the City, including but not limited to building, fire, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. 
I.  Limitations. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. In the event of the repeal of said Article or a judicial determination that said Article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Chapter shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
CHAPTER 18.02 - Administration and Enforcement 

18.02.010 - Administration. 
    The Community Development Director and Community Development Department shall administer the provisions of this Title. 
18.02.020 - Violations. 
A.  No land in the City shall be used, or any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, maintained, moved or used in violation of this Title or amendments thereto. The City Council, through the City Attorney and court of appropriate jurisdiction (which includes but is not limited to the Municipal Court), may initiate legal action to prevent, abate or remove such unlawful use, maintenance, erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration, in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
B.  It is unlawful for any building, structure or land to be hereafter used, occupied, or sold, and/or any building to be hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered, except as provided in this Title. 
C.  No yard or lot existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this Title shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards and lots created after said effective date shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Title. 
18.02.030 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this Title shall be prosecuted and punished pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.16 of this Code. Each day of the documented existence of any situation held to be a violation shall be deemed an equal and separate offense. 
B.  In addition to prosecution pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.16, any person, firm or corporation who, with respect to any land located within a subdivision, transfers or agrees to sell any land by references to or exhibition of or by use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded or filed in the office of the County Clerk, shall forfeit and pay a penalty not to exceed four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed to be sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transactions from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this Title. The City Council may enjoin such transfer, sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of competent jurisdiction or may recover the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction including the Municipal Court. These remedies shall be additional and cumulative to any remedies provided by the Colorado Revised Statutes or other provisions of this Code. 
18.02.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  This Title shall be enforced by the Community Development Department and its authorized representatives on all matters involving this Title. The Community Development Department shall consult with the City Attorney and Building Department and other affected City offices concerned with, but not limited to, the unlawful erection, construction, altering, occupancy or use of any building or structure, or land in the incorporated area of the City. 
B.  The Community Development Department and its authorized representatives, after consultation with the City Attorney and authority from the court, are hereby empowered to enter and/or inspect any building, structure or tract of land in the City. When a violation is alleged, the Community Development Department shall compile or cause to be compiled relevant evidence of the alleged violation and take any action authorized by law to correct violations of federal, state or local law. 
C.  If the Community Development Department finds that any of the provisions of this Title are being violated, staff may notify in writing, by certified mail, the owner of the property on which the violation is located, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Community Development Department may order immediate discontinuance of illegal use or occupancy of any land, building or structure, or may take any other action authorized by this Zoning Code to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. The Community Development Department may grant a stay of execution of its order not to exceed six (6) months for compliance with this Title. 
D.  In the event a property owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Title, the City may perform the required action and invoice the property owner responsible, plus a ten-percent fee for inspection and other administrative costs. The City shall first give written notice to the property owner of the required action and allow at least fourteen (14) days to comply. In the event a property owner fails to pay an invoice from the City for such costs and fees within thirty (30) days of receipt, the City may file a lien on the property with the County Treasurer's office to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with an additional ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general property taxes and prior assessments. Nothing in this Section shall preclude or prevent the City from punishing violations of this Code in accordance with Section 1.16.010. 
CHAPTER 18.03 - Definitions 

18.03.010 - Definitions generally. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless otherwise clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this Chapter shall have the meaning indicated when used in this Title. Words, phrases and terms not defined in this Chapter but defined elsewhere in this Title shall be construed as defined in such Title. Words, phrases and terms neither defined herein nor elsewhere in this Title shall be given usual and customary meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The words shall and will are mandatory and not permissive; the words may and should are permissive and not mandatory. 
    Accent lighting means directional lighting to emphasize a particular object. 
    Accessory building or structure means a building or structure located upon the same lot as the principal building or structure to which it is associated, and which is incidental to and customarily found in connection with such principal building or structure and which is not to be used for human habitation, including but not limited to garages and other buildings for storage. 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use of the lot, building or structure and which does not alter the principal use. 
    Adult business means business, service or entertainment establishment subject to the licensing requirements, provisions, and restrictions of Chapter 5.10 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
    Agriculture means the production of crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain, plants, shrubs, vines or flowers; the growing of trees and shrubs for commercial landscape purposes, ranching, riding stables without arenas, and similar uses and activities. 
    Alley means a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Aquifer means a water-bearing layer of sand, gravel or porous rock. 
    Art, dance, music studio means an establishment engaged in the creation of arts or crafts but may also serve for dance rehearsals and music rehearsals. Such an establishment may participate in periodic open studios or concerts, but otherwise is subject to the applicable district's requirements for incidental sales of goods made on site. 
    Articulation means the manner in which contiguous shapes are joined or formed to clarify or emphasize certain elements of the structure. 
    Articulation, horizontal means a method of breaking up the vertical appearance of a structure through varying horizontal planes. 
    Articulation, vertical means a method of breaking up the horizontal appearance of a structure through varying vertical planes. 
    Auction yard means property on which merchandise or other property is sold by auction. 
    Awning means a roof-like cover of canvas, metal, or other material extending in front of and over a door, window or deck to provide protection from weather. 
    Belt course means a continuous row or layer of stones, tile brick, or shingles, etc. in a wall often used to separate floors of a built structure. 
    Board means the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    Board and care home shall mean a residential facility providing room and board to one (1) or two (2) individuals who are not part of the principal occupant's family as defined by the Zoning Code, and who because of impaired capacity for independent living, elect protective oversight, personal services and social care, but do not require regular twenty-four-hour medical or nursing care. A board and care home shall not be considered an assisted living unit or nursing home. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building height means the height as measured from the average surrounding grade of the footprint of a building to the midpoint of a pitched roof or highest point of a flat roof. 
    Building scale means the size and proportion of a building relative to surrounding buildings and environs, adjacent streets, and pedestrians. 
    Canopy, gas station means a structural protective cover, not enclosed on any side, for a gasoline or fuel service dispensing or similar service area. 
    Canopy, tree means the more or less continuous cover of branches and foliage formed collectively by the crown of one (1) or more trees. 
    Car wash facilities means a principal or accessory use for the purpose of washing vehicles and with the capacity to wash more than one vehicle at a time, or with the capacity to wash a commercial semi-truck. 
    Carport means a structure that is not fully enclosed and which is accessory to a residence or residences and capable of being used for storage of one (1) or more vehicles. 
    Cemetery means land used for the burial and memorializing of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbaria, mausoleums, and pet cemeteries. 
    City Council or Council means the City Council of the City of Evans, Colorado. 
    Clustered; clustered development means a development technique which concentrates buildings on a portion of a site, so that the remaining land may be used for common area or open space. 
    Colonnade means a series of regularly spaced columns, usually supporting one (1) side of a roof structure. 
    Commercial residence means establishments for the housing of transient residences such as motels, hotels and tourist homes, except for living quarters of the operators. 
    Community facilities means noncommercial establishments such as places of worship, libraries, museums, public or quasi-public buildings and other cultural and religious facilities for general public use. 
    Comprehensive Plan means a plan for guiding and controlling the physical development of land use and circulation facilities in the City, and any amendment or extension of such a plan. 
    Congregate residence means any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as required by the International Building Code, and may include facilities for eating, cooking and general care not involving special medical treatment, for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, orphanage or children's home, fraternity or sorority house but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, motels, lodging houses or similar uses. 
    Consumer means any person contacted as a potential purchaser, lessee or renter, as well as one who actually purchases, leases or rents property in the subdivision. 
    Cornice means a continuous, molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction. 
    Court means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building. 
    Coverage means land area which is covered with impervious surfaces, such as buildings, patios or decks with roofs, carports, swimming pools, tennis courts, or land area covered by any other type of structure, including parking lots. 
    Crematorium means a place for the cremation of human or animal remains. 
    Crosswalk or walkway means a right-of-way dedicated to public use, to facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision block. 
    Day care center means an establishment, other than a home or residence, which provides care for children, other than one which can be classified as a school. These facilities shall comply with the guidelines established and enforced by the Weld County Health Department. 
    Day care, home means a home occupation providing less than twenty-four-hour supervision of up to twelve (12) children, in addition to any children of the day care provider. Day care homes shall be required to meet all state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, home occupation permits, business licenses, and requirements of the building and fire codes, as adopted and amended in this Municipal Code. Day care provided to one (1) child or two (2) or more siblings, as well as occasional care (one (1) day per week or less), shall not be considered home day care and shall not require a home occupation permit or business license. 
    Dead-end parking lot means a parking lot having only one (1) outlet and no area at the closed end for vehicles to turn around. 
    Dead-end sidewalk means a sidewalk that terminates abruptly with no connection to another sidewalk or pedestrian walkway. 
    Dead-end driveways means a driveway having only one (1) outlet and no area at the closed end for vehicles to turn around. 
    Dedication means a grant by the owner of a right to use land to the public in general or to the City, involving a transfer or conveyance of property rights and an acceptance of the dedicated property by the appropriate public agency. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property including, but not limited to, grading, paving, mining, excavating, construction, substantial improvement to an existing structure, or addition of a new structure. 
    Drive-through window means an opening in the wall of a building through which sales are made to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
    Dwelling, condominium means a building, or group of buildings, in which at least three (3) dwelling units, offices, or commercial areas are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Dwelling, multifamily means a building with individual sanitary and eating facilities, occupied by two (2) or more families living independently of each other on a more or less permanent basis, but not including congregate residences and similar group accommodations. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a detached principal building, designed and intended to be occupied by not more than one (1) family with common access and use of eating and sanitary facilities. 
    Dwelling, townhouse means single-family attached dwelling of two (2) or more units but not more than six (6) dwelling units per structure, with each unit having separate eating and sanitary facilities, utility services, access, required parking for each of the units; no unit is located over another unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other with separate eating and sanitary facilities on a more or less permanent basis. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by the International Building Code, for not more than one (1) family, or a congregate residence for ten (10) or fewer persons. 
    Easement means a right to land generally established in a real estate deed, on a recorded plat or agreement to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular person for specified uses. 
    Evidence means any map, table, chart, contract or any other document or testimony prepared or certified by a qualified person to attest to a specific claim or condition, which evidence must be relevant and competent, and must support the position maintained by the subdivider. 
    Factory-built housing means a dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory and designated for long-term residential use; built in multiple sections. Factory built homes must be constructed to the standards of the State of Colorado Factory Built Construction Certification Code (8 CRR 1302-3) and bear a certification insignia in compliance with those standards. 
    Family means an individual living alone, or any number of persons living together as a single household, who are interrelated by blood, marriage, adoption or other legal custodial relationship; or not more than three (3) unrelated adults and any number of persons related to those unrelated adults by blood, adoption, guardianship or other legal custodial relationship. For the purpose of this definition, a bona fide employee of the family who resides in the dwelling unit and whose live-in status is required by the nature of their employment is a member of the family, but this exception shall allow only two (2) employees per dwelling unit. 
    Farming means the production of crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain, plants, shrubs, vines or flowers; the growing of trees and shrubs for landscape purposes. Farming shall not include the commercial raising of animals, commercial production of milk, commercial pen feeding (feed lots) or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals. 
    Fence means an artificially constructed barrier or combination of materials erected vertically to enclose or screen areas of land. 
    Fixture, lighting means a complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts. 
    Flammable and/or combustible liquids and gases, storage means the storage and handling of bulk gasoline and bulk flammable fertilizer, propane, natural gas or other flammable liquids or gases. 
    Flea market means a business operation or bazaar consisting of more than one (1) independent vendor who is allocated space and does business on the premises and is not in charge of the premises, and where goods and/or services are offered for sale or exchange at retail to the general public, either indoors or outside, or both, including but not limited to antiques, curios, new and used merchandise, equipment, appliances and other goods and wares, (excluding yard sales, auctions, pawn brokers and retail business establishments, and the like) where sales are made to the general public by the individual vendor who leases space where such sales are made. 
    Floodplain means an area which is adjacent to a stream or watercourse and which is subject to flooding as a result of the occurrence of an intermediate regional flood, and which is so adverse to past, current or foreseeable construction or land use as to constitute a significant hazard to public health and safety or to property. This term includes, but is not limited to, mainstream floodplains, debris fan floodplains and dry wash channels and floodplains. 
    Garage means a fully-enclosed structure accessory to a residence or residences and capable of being used for storage of one (1) or more vehicles, i.e., having a garage door. 
    Garage, alley-loaded means a garage that is accessed from an alley and not from a street. 
    Garage, front-facing means a garage with vehicular doors generally parallel to the front property line. 
    Garage, side-loaded means a garage with vehicular doors generally perpendicular to the front property line. 
    Group homes means a residence operated as a single dwelling, licensed by and operated in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations, housing no more than eight (8) persons provided that appropriate supervisory personnel are on the premises at all times for the purpose of providing care to the following individuals: 
A.  Developmentally disable persons, as defined by Section 31-23-303, C.R.S. 
B.  For persons sixty (60) years of age or older. Group homes for the aged shall not be located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another such group home. 
C.  Mentally ill persons, as defined by Section 27-10-102(7) C.R.S. Group homes for persons with mental illness shall not be located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another such group home. No person shall be placed in such home without being screened by an appropriate licensed mental health professional. 
    Height means the vertical measurement from the surrounding grade at the base of a structure to its highest point or, for pitched roofs, to the midpoint between the eaves and the highest point of the roof. 
    Home occupation means an occupation, profession, activity or use conducted within a residential dwelling unit that is incidental and secondary to the use of the residential dwelling unit, which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the residential neighborhood. 
    Hospital means a state or federal certified facility providing health services primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the human sick and injured, including as an integral part, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient services, urgent care facilities, rehabilitation and recovery services, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Human scale means the proportion of a building element or space relative to average human size. 
    Impervious surface means any surface made of asphalt, concrete, brick, pavers, stone, or similar material which does not readily absorb water. 
    Improvements means street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, water mains and lines, water meters, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities or other installations as designated by the City Council or its specified approving authority. 
    Industrial uses or facility means any establishment for wholesale, commercial service and storage of goods and materials, such as warehouses, commercial laundries and dry-cleaning plants, bottling works, builders' supply yards, printing and publishing plants, tire vulcanizing shops, automobile and truck body work, and establishments of a similar nature. 
    Industrial uses, heavy means any establishment for manufacturing/assembly plant, natural resource extraction and treatment, used auto parts, quarry and gravel pits, asphalt plants, large-scale industry, incinerators, and other similar operations which create nuisances and hazardous effects beyond their premises. 
    Internal circulation means a continuous network of sidewalks, pathways, and driveways within a site or within multiple sites. 
    Junk means garbage and all other waste matter or discarded or unused material such as, but not limited to, salvage materials, scrap metal, scrap materials, bottles, tin cans, paper, boxes, crates, rags, used lumber and building materials; manufactured goods, appliances, fixtures, furniture, machinery, motor vehicles or other such items which have been abandoned, demolished or dismantled, or are in such a condition as to be unusable for their original use, but may be used again in present or different form for a new use; discarded or inoperable vehicles, machinery parts and tires; and other commonly considered to be refuse, rubbish or junk. 
    Kennel means any property used for commercial purposes, on which four (4) or more pet animals, at least four (4) months of age, are kept for training, boarding or breeding, whether in special structures, runs or not. 
    Landscaping, buffer means a landscape area located along the perimeter of a lot intended to screen or separate land uses either from one another or from a public street. 
    Landscaping, front lot means the landscaping particular to the front lot line or any line that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street. If two (2) or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front. 
    Lateral sewer means a sewer which discharges into another sewer and has only building sewers tributary to it. 
    Livestock trailer washout means a property where trailers used for hauling livestock are washed. 
    Living plant material includes, but is not limited to, deciduous and coniferous trees, shrubs, vines, perennial plants, cacti, succulents, sod, and native and ornamental grasses. Also includes annual plants provided new plants are planted each year. 
    Long-term care facility means a health institution that is licensed to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or more patients including continuum care facilities, hospices, assisted living, and nursing care facilities on a more or less permanent basis. 
    Lot means the unit into which land is divided on a subdivision plat or deed, with the intention of offering such unit for sale, lease or separate use, either as an undeveloped or developed site, regardless of how it is conveyed. Lot shall also mean parcel, plat, site or any similar term. 
    Lot area means the total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting on and at the intersection of two (2) or more streets (public rights-of-way). 
    Lot depth means the average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets. 
    Lot, front means the area of a property between the principal structure and the front lot line. 
    Lot frontage means the length of front lot line measured at the street(s) right-of-way line. 
    Lot line, front means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot only one (1) street lot line, which generally has the shortest street frontage, shall be considered as a front line. 
    Lot line, rear means the property line opposite the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side means any lot lines other than front or rear lot lines. 
    Lot line, zero means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line, provided that separations or setbacks between buildings meets all applicable building and fire code provisions. 
    Lot or property pin means a marker established by certified land survey and set by a registered land surveyor registered in the State of Colorado to establish accurate location of property lines. 
    Lot, reverse-frontage means a lot which extends continuously between two (2) parallel, or approximately parallel, streets bounding a block and which is abutted along one (1) street frontage by an easement for screen planting. A block containing reverse-frontage lots is composed of one (1) tier of lots rather than the standard two (2) tiers. 
    Lot width means the distance between the side lot lines, measured congruent with the front lot line. 
    Manufactured home means any dwelling which is: 1) partially or entirely manufactured in a factory, 2) is not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length; 3) is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; 4) has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; 5) and is certified pursuant to "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. as amended. 
    Manufacturing/assembly plant means an establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembly of component parts, the creation of products, the blending of materials, and other similar uses. 
    Massing means the relationship between various masses or volumes of a building or structure. 
    Mini storage units means a building(s) containing limited size storage areas not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet per unit; designed and used for the keeping of personal property, goods and similar articles of merchandise. Hazardous materials such as flammable liquids, flammable gases and toxic chemicals shall be prohibited. 
    Mobile home means a manufactured home produced prior to June 15, 1976. No mobile homes are allowed within the City of Evans. Existing mobile homes in place prior to the adoption of the ordinance will be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
    Molding means any of various long, narrow, ornamental surfaces with uniform cross sections. 
    Mortuary or funeral home means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services, which may contain space and facilities for preparation of the dead for burial; the storage of caskets, urns and other related funeral supplies; and the storage of funeral vehicles. Funeral homes shall not include crematoriums as accessory uses. 
    Motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, or utility vehicle, sales/rental of means the display or attempting action to sell such items that are not owned or titled by the property owner upon which property they may be allowed to be parked. 
    Multi-planed means having more than one (1) plane visible from each side of a building. 
    Museum means a building in which objects of historical, scientific, artistic, or cultural interest are stored and exhibited. 
    National Cooperative Soil Survey means the soil survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in cooperation with the State Agricultural Experiment Stations and other federal and state agencies. 
    Natural resource extraction and treatment means gravel pits, quarries, gas refineries, or any other process of altering or storing a natural resource or removing natural resources from the ground. 
    Nightclub, bar, tavern means any establishment in which the primary attraction is the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption or where the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages is secondary to entertainment such as live music, recorded music, the viewing of broadcasted sporting events, or similar activities. 
    Off-street parking space means the space required to park one (1) passenger vehicle on private land. 
    Oil and gas, related uses means all uses related to the procurement, transfer, storage, and sale of crude oil and natural gas resources. These uses include but are not limited to: equipment storage yards, production sites (including oil tanks, well heads, VCU equipment, pig launchers, pig receivers, meter equipment, and separators), injection wells, compressor stations and transfer stations. 
    Office and financial use means general office-type uses where storage and sale of merchandise is not the principal use. Banks, savings and loan institutions, lending establishments, professional, administrative and business offices, medical offices and similar uses are included in this definition. 
    Open space means the land which is used for growing grass, shrubs, trees, plants, or flowers or is covered by decorative rock or stone or wood chips, or is otherwise xeriscaped/landscaped. It is not open space if it is overlaid by buildings, patios, signs, driveways, tennis courts, swimming pools, car ports, paved or graveled areas designed primarily for vehicle parking or areas covered by any other type of structure or impervious surface. Areas which contain less than one hundred (100) square feet, or have any dimension of less than five (5) feet or which fall within the projected roof area of any building shall not be considered open space. 
    Outdoor sales/display means display of goods or materials for sale, accessory to a commercial principal use, directly available to the consumer for purchase. 
    Outdoor storage means storage of materials, supplies, parts, machines, equipment, containers, operable vehicles, tractor-trailers, unoccupied mobile homes and not kept in a permitted structure having at least four (4) walls and a roof. This definition shall not apply to items for sale to the general public such as new and used cars, recreational vehicles, boats and landscape and building materials; nor to parking of vehicles regularly used in connection with the operation of an establishment or parked for less than forty-eight (48) hours for maintenance service. Outdoor storage shall not include the storage of junk as defined in this Chapter. 
    Owner means an owner includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, leasee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Parking lot, off-street means public and private parking areas for vehicles which are licensed, are not for sale, and any parking area or structure, not including the right-of-way of a dedicated roadway. Parking will be supplied on a more or less short term basis, and the long term storage of vehicles on site is not permitted. 
    Pawn broker means an establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property. 
    Pedestrian plaza means an open space, generally open to the public, usually surrounded by buildings and/or streets and improved with an impervious surface. 
    Permanent monument means any structure permanently placed on or in the ground, including those expressly placed for surveying reference. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, unincorporated organization, trust or any other legal or commercial entity, including a joint venture or affiliated ownership. The word person also means a municipality or state agency. 
    Personal service establishment means an establishment serving the personal needs of individuals and includes barbershops, beauty parlors, doctors and dentist offices, shoe repair shops, florist sales, gift and card shops, magazine outlets, jewelry stores, laundry shops, dry-cleaning outlets, and other similar uses. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means an area of land, improved as a residential development, or a combination of uses such as residential, educational, recreational, commercial and industrial, in which normal restrictions of lot sizes, setbacks, densities, land uses, and other criteria may be relaxed in return for development conformance to an approved plan for the total parcel. 
    Planning Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Evans. 
    Plan, sketch means a map of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to evaluate feasibility and design characteristics at an early state in the planning. 
    Plat, final means a map and supporting materials of certain described land, prepared in accordance with subdivision regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Preliminary plan means the map or maps of a proposed subdivision, and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. 
    Public service facilities means municipal fire, police stations, ambulance dispatch and essential public utility and service installations which are owned, operated or used by a governmental entity, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission and used in connection with the reproduction, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals, and similar uses necessary for the protection and benefit of the public; provided that repair and storage facilities are not included. 
    Real property means any property that is attached directly to land, as well as the land itself. Real property not only includes buildings and other structures, but also rights and interests. 
    Reasonably feasible means capable of being accomplished or brought about without undue burden or hardship, whether financial or otherwise. 
    Recessed window or door means a door or window which exterior plane is offset from the exterior wall by at least twelve (12) inches inward. 
    Recreational facilities, indoor means establishments primarily engaged in the operation of indoor activities such as exercise and athletic facilities, and amusement and/or recreational services, such as billiard and pool halls, skating rinks, exercise and health clubs, indoor pools, bowling alleys, and similar uses. 
    Recreational facilities, intensive means recreational facilities which are intensively used and create greater impacts, such as noise, lighting and traffic impacts. Such uses may include but are not limited to, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, amusement parks, stadiums, arenas, fairgrounds, zoo areas, go kart and bumper car tracks, slides, skateboard parks, and playing fields for soccer, baseball, softball and football. 
    Recreational facilities, outdoor extensive means establishments primarily engaged in the operation of large scale, low impact outdoor recreational facilities, such as fishing and riding clubs, golf courses, tennis courts, public playing fields for soccer, baseball, softball, football and similar recreational uses. 
    Recreational vehicle means a transportable structure that is primarily designed for seasonal recreational/vacation purposes for recreational, camping, and travel use including, but not limited to, boats, travel trailers, campers, snowmobiles, motorcycles, self-propelled motor homes, and similar vehicles/units. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) park/campground means any parcel of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicles or camp sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy or living quarters. Such parcel being commercial in nature must comply with all the state and local regulations related to licensing, site design/layout, life safety and health issues. This use does not include the storage of travel trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, motorcycles or similar vehicles/units. 
    Recreational vehicle storage means the renting of space in an unroofed area for simultaneous commercial placement/storing of two (2) or more recreational vehicles, including but not limited to, boats, travel trailers, campers, snowmobiles, motorcycles and similar vehicles/units. For the purpose of this definition, a recreational vehicle shall be a transportable structure that is primarily designed for seasonal recreational/vacation purposes for recreational, camping and travel use including, but not limited to, boats, travel trailers, campers, snowmobiles, motorcycles, self-propelled motor homes and similar vehicles/units. This use does not include the storage of these vehicle/units at private residences, provided such vehicles/units stored at residences are owned by persons residing at the residence. 
    Recycling center means a use involving the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment or re-use. Processing includes baling, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, melting, cleaning, and remanufacturing. 
    Repair shops means any building, premises, and/or land in which or upon which buildings used for the repair or servicing of major appliances, vehicles and equipment, such as plumbing shops, electrical shops, sheet metal shops, and automobile garages and similar uses. 
    Research laboratory means a building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
    Reservation means a legal obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time, not involving any transfer of property rights. 
    Resubdivision means the changing of any existing lot or lots of any subdivision plat previously recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Retail uses, extensive means business uses which require large outdoor areas for display of merchandise, service, amusement, or storage, such as farm implement sales, greenhouses/nurseries, s, drive-in movies, automotive fueling stations, feed and grain stores, mobile home sales, restaurants, other establishments with drive-through windows, and other establishments of a similar nature. 
    Retail uses, intensive means business uses for the purpose of selling or renting conveniences and hard goods in retail outlets, such as supermarkets, restaurants, liquor stores (subject to licensing requirements), drugstores, wearing apparel shops, hardware stores, variety stores, veterinary offices (without runs), furniture stores, laundry/dry cleaners, and other similar uses. 
    Retail uses, intensive, small-scale means business uses for the purpose of selling or renting conveniences and hard goods in retail outlets, such as supermarkets, restaurants, liquor stores (subject to licensing requirements), drugstores, wearing apparel shops, hardware stores, variety stores, veterinary offices (without runs), furniture stores, laundry/dry cleaners, and other similar uses. These uses shall be limited to three thousand (3,000) square feet in maximum size. 
    Roadway means that portion of the street right-of-way designed for vehicular traffic. 
    Roof, flat means a roof having a slope of less than 1:12, with one (1) being the rise and twelve (12) being the run. 
    Roof, pitched means a roof having a pitch of at least 1:12, with one (1) being the rise and twelve (12) being the run. 
    Roof plane means the portion of a roof, whether flat or pitched, by which a straight line would pass through continuously. 
    Roofline means the profile of or silhouette made by a roof or series of roofs. 
    Salvage yard means an industrial use for collecting, storing and/or selling scrap metal or discarded material or for collecting, dismantling, storing, salvaging or demolishing vehicles, machinery or other material and including the sale of such materials or parts. 
    School means and includes any one (1) or more of the following categories: a public school, community college, junior college, college or university or an independent or parochial school which satisfies the compulsory school attendance requirements of the State of Colorado, but the word school does not include dance schools, business schools, trade schools or driving schools or similar uses. 
    Security residence means a building or a portion thereof, arranged, designed and intended to be occupied by not more than one (1) family, and which is used for the housing of one (1) or more members of any such family for the purpose of providing security for the property of any business which is located on the same property. At least one (1) member of a family living in the security residence must be employed for security purposes by the business which is located on the same property on which the residence is located. 
    Setback has the same meaning as "yard" defined herein. 
    Shared driveway means a driveway that serves two (2) or more lots in order to reduce the number of access points onto a public roadway. 
    Shared parking means the development and use of parking areas on two (2) or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses or residents on those properties. 
    Staff supervised residential facilities means a state licensed facility or group of buildings used to provide twenty-four-hour supervised residential group care for children between ages three (3) to eighteen (18) years old and for those persons under twenty-one (21) years old who are placed by court order prior to their eighteenth birthday, not intended for placement of violent or repeat offenders. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way for the movement of vehicular traffic, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat, heretofore approved, pursuant to law, or approved by official action, and includes the land between street lines, whether improved or unimproved; and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the right-of-way. For the purpose of this Title, streets shall be classified as defined in Subsections A through H of this Section: 
A.  Arterial street means a street or road designed to carry high volumes of vehicular traffic over long distances in a direct manner. 
B.  Collector street means a street or road designed to collect or distribute vehicular traffic from one (1) or more residential or nonresidential areas to or from an arterial. 
1.  Major Collector shall mean those collector streets which generally carry, or are projected to carry, traffic volumes greater than seven thousand (7,000) vehicles per day when the property which the collector serves is fully developed and which permit relatively unimpeded traffic movement and are intended for use on those routes where four (4) moving lanes are required but where a larger classified street is not warranted. 
2.  Minor Collector shall mean those two-lane collector streets which generally carry traffic volumes up to seven thousand (7,000) vehicles per day and collect and distribute traffic between arterial and local streets and which serve as main connectors within communities, linking one (1) neighborhood with another. 
C.  Cul-de-sac means a short, dead-end street no longer than five hundred (500) feet, terminating in a vehicular turnaround area. 
D.  Freeway means a major regional highway, including interstate highways, designed to carry very large volumes of vehicular traffic, with full control of access and all intersections grade-separated. (An expressway is similar to a freeway, except that all intersections need not be grade-separated.) 
E.  Half-street means a street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of lesser right-of-way width than is required for streets. 
F.  Local street means a street or road designed to carry vehicular traffic from one (1) or more individual residential or nonresidential units, or from a collector street. 
G.  Service road means a street or road paralleling and abutting major streets to provide access to adjacent property, so that each adjacent lot will not have direct access to the major street. 
    Stub street means a street or road extending from within a subdivision boundary and terminating there with no permanent vehicular turnaround. Stub streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of land to be developed later with an adjacent connecting street system. 
    Storage/utility shed means a detached accessory structure not more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in extended roof area used to store tools and equipment such as, but not limited to, lawn mowers, bicycles, garden tools, and similar chattels related to the primary permitted use located on the same lot. 
    Subdivider or developer means any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation who shall participate as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division of any land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts, plats, sites or separate interests, or such other division, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or sale or transfer of ownership, or for building or other development, or for the creation of streets or other rights-of-way. Subdivision shall also mean the consolidation, aggregation, and reconfiguration of lots. Unless otherwise specified, the term subdivision does not apply to any of the following divisions of land: 
A.  Created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction in this state or by operation of law, provided that the City is given notice of and an opportunity to participate in any judicial proceedings prior to the entry of any such court order; 
B.  Created separate but undivided interests in a tract of land such as joint tenancy, tenancy in common, tenancy in entirety, trust, lien mortgage, deed of trust or other security interest, unless such separate interests apply to less than all of the tract; 
C.  Which create cemetery lots; 
D.  Which create an interest in oil, gas, minerals or water which is severed from the surface ownership or real property; or 
E.  Which create a utility easement or an easement unrelated to the use of the surface estate. 
    Substantial improvement means any change to an existing improvement that causes the size, height, or area to increase by fifty (50) percent or more, or which costs fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the improvement prior to the change. 
    Theater means a building, or part thereof, devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live or cultural performances. 
    Transportation facility means facilities for loading, unloading, and transferring passengers, baggage, and incidental freight between modes of transportation. These uses include bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit stations. 
    Treatment of humans, restrained means pre-parole facilities, jails, reformatories, mental hospitals, and similar buildings where personal liberties are restrained. 
    Use means the activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot or in any building. 
    Vocational school means a specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site training, including dance schools, driving schools, hairdressing schools, and other similar uses. This definition does not include training in an activity that is not an allowed use in the zoning district in which the property is located. Incidental instruction in conjunction with a principal use shall not be considered a vocational school. 
    Wall, parapet means an exterior wall that rises above the roof on all sides of a building, usually to screen mechanical or other equipment. 
    Wall, partial parapet means an exterior wall that rises above the roof on one (1) or more, but not all, sides of a building, usually to screen mechanical or other equipment. 
    Warehouse means any site used primarily for the storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than mini-storage units. 
    Yard means an open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in the ordinance is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward other than landscaping, except as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance. 
    Yard, front means a space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear means a space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side means the space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
    Yard, street side means the space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the building and the side lot line abutting a street and measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
CHAPTER 18.04 - Zoning 

18.04.010 - Establishment of Districts. 
A.  In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Title, the City is divided into the following zoning districts: 
AG Agricultural district 85-O U.S. 85 Office district 85-RC-A U.S. 85 Retail and Commercial - Auto 85-RC-N U.S. 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood 85-RC-R U.S. 85 Retail and Commercial - Regional Corridor C1 Commercial low intensity district C2 Commercial medium intensity district C3 Commercial high intensity district I1 Light industrial district I2 Medium industrial district I3 High industrial district PF Public Facilities PUD Planned Unit Development R1 Single-family residential district R1E Single-family estate residential district R2 Two-family residential district R3 Multifamily residential district RC Residential commercial district RMFH Manufactured housing district RMH Mobile Home community district  
B.  The use of property as a medical marijuana center, optional premises cultivation, or medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing are all uses prohibited in any zoning district. 
C.  The use of property as a retail marijuana store, retail marijuana cultivation facility, retail marijuana products manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility or marijuana club are all uses prohibited in any zoning district. 
1.  Marijuana club means a place not used for residential purposes where individuals gather to consume or grow marijuana, regardless of whether such place calls itself private or public or charges an admission or membership fee. 
18.04.020 - Zoning Map. 
A.  The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Title are shown upon the Official Zoning Map for the City of Evans. 
B.  Rules for interpreting district boundaries. 
1.  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
a.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
b.  In unsubdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of any such boundary shall be determined by legal description. 
c.  In case further uncertainties exist, the City Council, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall determine the location of such boundaries;. 
d.  Where a street or alley is officially vacated, the property formerly in that street or alley shall be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side thereof. In the event a street or alley separates two (2) or more different zoning districts, the new zoning district boundary shall be the centerline of such vacated street or alley. 
e.  When possible, zone districts shall follow alleys, rear or side property lines and not centerlines of street rights-of-way. 
18.04.030 - AG - Agricultural District. 
    The purpose of the AG zone district is to provide a district that encourages and preserves agricultural uses in the City, as well as providing a district for properties within the City which are currently being used for agricultural purposes and/or which have no other future land use proposed at this time, or may be in a transitional stage with regard to development. 
A.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the Table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Agricultural Zone District Use Standards Land Use Zone District Agricultural AG P = Permitted Uses     S= Special Uses     [blank] = Prohibited Uses Agriculture P* Dwelling, single-family P* Dwelling, manufactured home P* Dwelling, factory-built home P* School P Public service facilities P Accessory Uses P Animals confined S Cemetery S Kennel S Recreations facilities, outdoor extensive S Security residence S*  
* Maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres. 
B.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Agricultural Zone District Dimensional Standards Standard AG Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 Min. Interior Side (feet) Five (5) feet for buildings up to fifteen (15) feet in height, plus one (1) foot for each three (3) feet, or fraction thereof, of height in excess of fifteen (15) feet Min. Side Street (feet) 25 Min. Rear 20 Max. Lot Size (%) Two (2) acres maximum one (1) dwelling unit per forty (40) acres Min. Open Space (%) N/A Max. Height (feet) Thirty-five (35) feet for residential buildings, sixty (60) feet for agricultural buildings or structures  
C.  If development abuts the U.S. 85 Overlay District, all development shall be reviewed for conformity with neighboring development at the time of application. 
18.04.040 - Commercial Districts. 
A.  Low Intensity Commercial District (C-1). The purpose of this zone is to provide for appropriately located groups of retail stores and service establishments serving the daily needs of a local neighborhood having such character, scale, appearance and operation as to be compatible with the character of the surrounding residential areas. 
B.  Medium Intensity Commercial District (C-2). The purpose of this zone is to provide an area which serves as a transitional zone between nearby residential uses and high intensity commercial uses. 
C.  High Intensity Commercial District (C-3). The purpose of this zone is to provide an area for serving the daily needs of the total community. 
D.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Commercial Zone Districts Use Standards Land Use Zone District Commercial C-1 C-2 C-3 P = Permitted Use     S= Special Uses     [blank] = Prohibited UsesAccessory use P P P Adult business, subject to licensing requirements P Car wash facilities S Cemetery S Commercial residence S P Community facilities P P S Congregate residence S S Crematorium P P P Day care center P P P Hospital S S P Kennel S P P Long-term care facilities S P P Mini storage units S S S Mortuary or funeral home P P P Motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, or utility vehicle, sales/rental of S P P Multifamily residential S S S Nightclub, bar, tavern P P Office and financial uses P P P Parking lot, off-street P P P Personal service establishments P P P Public service facilities P P P Recreational facilities, indoor P P P Recreational facilities, intensive S P P Recreational facilities, outdoor extensive P P P Recreational vehicle storage S Recreational vehicle, (RV) park/campground S Repair shops S S S Research laboratory S P Retail uses, extensive S P P Retail uses, intensive P P P School P P P Security residences S S S Staff supervised residential facilities S Theater P P P Vocational school S S S  
E.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Commercial Zone Districts Dimensional Standards Standard C-1 C-2 C-3 Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 25 25 Min. Side (feet) 5 5 5 Min. Side Street (feet) 25 25 25 Min. Rear (feet) 5 5 5 Max. Lot Coverage (%) 80 80 80 Min. Open Space (%) N/A N/A N/A Max. Height (feet) 35 35 40  
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
18.04.050 - Highway 85 Districts. 
A.  Highway 85 Office District (85-0). The purpose of this zone is to provide professional employment space opportunities in close proximity to vibrant retail centers near to and in the Highway 85 Overlay District. The 85 Office District will have direct access to quality retail uses, as well as pedestrian and park amenities. This District may also allow limited retail uses. 
B.  Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood District (85-RC-N). The purpose of this zone is to create a vibrant downtown mixed-use pedestrian oriented retail experience. This area will provide retail establishments that cater to local residents, businesses in the area, and the neighborhoods surrounding the Highway 85 Overlay District. 
C.  Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Auto District (85-RC-A). The purpose of this zone is to create a vibrant commercial district that will provide services for both local residents and U.S. Highway 85 Commuters. Development will offer large-scale retail opportunities along with pedestrian-oriented experiences that accommodate the surrounding land uses with the allowance of new automobile sales. All development will be subject to U.S. Highway 85 Overlay District Design Standards. 
D.  Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Regional Corridor District (85-RC-R). The purpose of this zone is to create a strongly anchored vibrant commercial district that will provide services for both local residents and U.S. Highway 85 commuters. Development will be subject to U.S. Highway 85 Overlay District Design Standards. 
E.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Highway 85 Zone Districts Use Standards Land Use Zone District Highway 85 85-O 85-RC-N 85-RC-A 85-RC-R P = Permitted Uses     S= Special Uses     [blank] = Prohibited Uses Accessory use P P P P Adult business, subject to licensing requirements Art, dance, music studio *1 P Commercial residence P P Community facilities S P Day care center P P Dwelling, townhouse P Dwelling, condominium P Home occupation P Hospital S Kennel S Long-term care facilities S Mini storage units S Motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, or utility vehicle, sales S P S Museum S Nightclub, bar, tavern P Office and financial uses P P P P Oil and gas, related uses S S Outdoor storage S S Personal service establishments P P P Public service facilities P Recreational facilities, indoor P P P Recreational facilities, intensive S Research laboratory P Retail uses, extensive 1* S P Retail uses, intensive 1* P P Retail uses, intensive, small-scale 1* P P School S Theater P P Vocational school S  
*1 These uses are permitted with the limitation that they comprise no more than fifteen (15) percent of the Total Gross Floor Area of the structure. 
The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Highway 85 Zone Districts Dimensional StandardsStandard 85-O 85-RC-N 85-RC-A 85-RC-R Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 5 15 15 Min. Side (feet) 0/10 *4 0/5 *3 0/10 *4 0/10 *4 Min. Side Street (feet) 10 5 15 15 Min. Rear (feet) 0/10 *4 5 15 15 Max. Lot Coverage (%) 70 80 70 70 Min. Open Space (%) *1 *1 *1 *1 Max. Height (feet) 40 *2 35 *2 40 *2 40 *2  
*1 = In accordance with Section 18.04.100. 
*2 = Measurement includes additional architectural detail added to the top of each elevation. 
F.  All development shall be reviewed for conformity with neighboring development at the time of application. 
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
18.04.060 - Industrial Districts. 
A.  Light Industrial Uses (I-1). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district in which light industry and similar uses are located. These uses are to be low-impact and any environmental effects generated must be kept within the buildings where they are produced. Light industry consists of scientific research; limited manufacturing; compounding, assembly, processing or treatment of products; food and beverage processing; and similar limited industrial uses in which the environmental effects of the operation are confined within the principal buildings. 
B.  Medium Industrial District (I-2). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district in which light and medium industrial and similar uses are located. Within these districts, any environmental impacts must be confined to the property on which they are generated. Medium industry consists of any industrial or manufacturing operation subject to acceptable safeguards to control potential nuisances and hazardous effects to the premises. 
C.  Heavy Industrial District (I-3). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district in which heavy industrial uses are located. Heavy industry consists of uses such as used auto parts, quarry and gravel pits, asphalt plants, large-scale industry, incinerators and other similar operations which so create nuisances and hazardous effects beyond their premises. 
D.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the Table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Industrial Zone Districts Use Standards Land Use Zone District Industrial I-1 I-2 I-3 P = Permitted Uses     S= Special Uses     [blank] = Prohibited Uses Accessory use P P P Adult business, subject to licensing requirements P P P Animals confined S S Auction yard S Car wash facilities S S S Cemetery S S S Commercial residence P Community facilities Congregate residence Crematoriums P P P Day care center Flammable liquids storage P P P Flea market P P P Hospital Industrial uses facility P P P Junkyards S Kennel P P P Livestock trailer washout S Long-term care facilities Manufacturing/assembly plant P P P Mini storage units P P P Mortuary or funeral home P Multifamily residential Natural resource extraction and treatment P Office and financial uses P P P Parking lot, off-street P P P Personal service establishments P P P Public service facilities P P P Recreational facilities, indoor S S S Recreational facilities, intensive P P P Recreational facilities, outdoor extensive P P P Recreational vehicle storage P P P Recreational vehicle, (RV) park/campground S S S Recycling center S Repair shops P P P Research laboratory P P P Retail uses, extensive P P P Retail uses, intensive P P P School Security residences S S S Staff supervised residential facilities Theater Treatment of humans, restrained S S S Vocational school S S S Warehouse P P P  
E.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Industrial Zone Districts Dimensional Standards Standard I-1 I-2 I-3 Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 25 25 Min. Side (feet) 30 *1 30 *1 30 *1 Min. Side Street (feet) 25 25 25 Min. Rear (feet) 20 *1 20 *1 20 *1 Max. Lot Coverage (%) 80 80 80 Open Space (%) N/A N/A N/A Max. Height (feet) 40 40 60  
*1 = Setback from adjacent residentially zoned properties shall be 30 feet. 
F.  All development shall be reviewed for conformity with neighboring development at the time of application. 
18.04.070 - Public Facilities District. 
A.  The purpose of this zone is to increase public services within the City of Evans. 
B.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Public Facilities Zone District Use StandardsLand Use Zone District Public Facilities PF P = Permitted Uses     S= Special Uses     [blank] = Prohibited Uses Open space P Parking lot, off-street P Public service facilities P Transportation facilities P  
C.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Public Facilities Zone District Dimensional StandardsStandard PF Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 Min. Interior Side (feet) 0/10 *3 Min. Side Street (feet) 0/10 Min. Rear 0/10 *3 Max. Lot Size (%) 70 Min. Open Space (%) *1 Max. Height (feet) 40 *2  
*1 = In accordance with [Section] 18.04.100 of the Evans Municipal Code. 
> *2 = Forty (40) feet will include additional architectural detail added to the top of each elevation. 
> *3 = If development is not located at a zero foot setback, the setback shall be ten (10) feet. 
D.  If development abuts the U.S. 85 Overlay District, all development shall be reviewed for conformity with neighboring development at the time of application. 
18.04.080 - Residential Districts. 
A.  Single-Family Estate Residential District (R-1E). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district that preserves the rural openness that defines the identity of the area. The densities and permitted uses are established to enhance the agricultural and open residential character. The allowable nonresidential in the R-1E zone district are intended to be harmonious with agricultural uses and low density residential living and should support the local district. 
B.  Single-Family Residential District (R-1). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district that is centered on the single-family home neighborhood. The densities and uses required in this district are established to enhance the open residential character that is typical to a low density nonbusiness zone district. The allowable nonresidential uses permitted are intended to be harmonious with low density residential living and should support the local neighborhood. 
C.  Residential Manufactured Housing District (RMFH). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district that is centered on the single-family home neighborhood. The densities and uses required by this district are established to enhance the open residential character that is typical to a low density nonbusiness zone district. The allowable nonresidential uses listed in this district are intended to be harmonious with low density residential living and should support the local neighborhood. The purpose of the RMFH standards is to ensure a quality development and environment for the owners of manufactured and factory built housing. 
D.  Two-Family Residential District (R-2). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district that is centered on the duplex/town house/condominium neighborhood. The regulations required in this district are established to enhance the multi-family residential character that is typical to a medium density nonbusiness zone district. The allowable nonresidential uses listed in this district are intended to be harmonious with medium density residential living and should support the local neighborhood. 
E.  Multifamily Residential District (R-3). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district that is centered on the multifamily/apartment neighborhood. The regulations required by this Chapter are established to enhance the multifamily residential character that is typical to a high density nonbusiness zone districts. The allowable nonresidential uses listed here are intended to be harmonious with high density residential living. 
F.  Residential Manufactured Home District (RMH). The purpose of this zone is to support the Evans Comprehensive Plan and to protect health, safety, welfare, compatibility and property values within the City. 
G.  Residential Commercial District (RC). The purpose of this zone is to provide a district which combines, on a scale sufficient to permit the application of efficient master planning, the multiple uses of residences, offices, services, medical offices and facilities, pharmacies, recreation and associated uses. To the extent practicable, development should serve to de-emphasize the use of the individual motor vehicle within the district. Dwelling units shall be an important component of the residential commercial district and should be thoroughly dispersed throughout the district in diverse forms and sizes. Public spaces shall be encouraged and give strong consideration within any intensely developed commercial or office areas. 
H.  Those land uses which are permitted, those which may be permitted through special use review, or land uses which are prohibited are shown in the table below. Land uses not specifically listed on the table below shall be presumed to be prohibited. 
Residential Zone Districts Use Standards Land Use Zone District Residential R-1E R1 R2 R3 RC RMFH *2 RMH * P = Permitted Uses  S= Special Uses  [blank] = Prohibited Uses Accessory building/structure P P P P P P Accessory use P P P P P P Community facilities S S S S P S Congregate residence S S Day care center S S S S S S Dwelling, single-family residential P P P P P P Dwelling, two-family P P P Dwelling, multifamily P P Dwelling, condominium P P P Dwelling, townhouse P P P Factory-built home P Farming P P P P P P Group homes S S S P P S Long-term care facilities S S S S S S Manufactured home P Mini storage units S Office and financial uses P Personal service establishments P Public service facilities P P P P P P Recreational facilities, indoor S Recreational facilities, outdoor extensive S S S S S S Repair shops S Retail uses, extensive S Retail uses, intensive P Research laboratory S School P P P P P P Staff supervised residential facilities P Telecommunication facilities S S S Vocational schools S  
* Uses outlined in Chapter 18.04.090. 
; *2 All manufactured housing shall be installed in accordance with the ICBO Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, as adopted by the City. Ownership of the structure and ownership of the lot shall be recorded as a single deed with Weld County, Colorado. Separate title to the structure shall not be permitted. 
I.  The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations governing lot size, lot coverage and setbacks, building height, and open space requirements and to encourage building and development design which is related to and compatible with its surroundings. 
Residential Zone Districts Dimensional Standards Standard R-1E R1 R2 R3 RC-res RC-com RMFH RMH Setbacks (From Lot Line) Min. Front (feet) 25 25 25 25 25 25 20 18.04.090 Min. Side (feet) 10 *1 *3 *3 *3 *3 30 *6 *3 18.04.090 Min. Side Street (feet) 20 15 15 15 15 25 15 18.04.090 Min. Rear 30 20 20 20 20 30 *6 15 18.04.090 Max. Lot (size/coverage) 13,000 sf *4 *4 *4 *4 80% *4 18.04.090 Min. Open Space (%) N/A N/A 45 45 45 (MF) N/A N/A 18.04.090 District Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *5 18.04.090 Max. Height (feet) *2 *2 *2 *2 *2 35 *2 18.04.090  
*1 = In addition one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of building height or fraction thereof. 
*2 = Three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less. 
*3 = Five (5) feet or one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of building height or fraction thereof. 
*4 = Two (2) times total floor area but not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
*5 = Two (2) contiguous acres. 
*6 = Setback from adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
J.  If development abuts the U.S. 85 Overlay District, all development shall be reviewed for conformity with neighboring development at the time of application. 
18.04.090 - RMH-Residential Manufactured Home District. 
A.  Purpose. The regulations contained within this Section are intended to be the minimum standards. Higher or additional standards may be required to meet the intent of the zoning district. The standards contained within this zoning district are not intended to apply to manufactured home parks zoned PUD (Planned Unit Development). It is the intention of the City that if an existing unincorporated manufactured home park is annexed to the City, a specific Manufactured Home Park Plan for that park will be addressed in an annexation agreement for the property. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Abandoned or abandonment shall mean include the following: conditions indicating abandonment of a mobile or manufactured home shall include, but shall not be limited to, lack of occupancy with no forwarding information or signage indicating the home is for rent or for sale and/or windows or doors that are not secured. A mobile or manufactured home that is cited under the abatement of Dangerous Building Code with a notice and order and is not brought into compliance with the building code within thirty (30) days' notice of said violation shall be considered for the purpose of this Chapter to be abandoned. Abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall not be considered legal, nonconforming structures under this Code. 
    Existing manufactured home park shall mean one (1) of the four (4) existing manufactured home parks zoned RMH within the City at the time of repeal and re-adoption of this Chapter. Any existing manufactured home park that is redeveloped as defined herein or discontinues its manufactured home park use as defined herein for three (3) or more consecutive months shall no longer be considered an existing manufactured home park under this Chapter. 
    Redevelopment shall mean substantial changes to a manufactured home park which may include, but not be limited to, an increase in the area of the manufactured home park, decrease in open space, or increase in the number of manufactured home spaces or detached structures such as offices or clubhouse but not including sheds, carports or garages, or other changes in layout, including streets or size and shape of spaces (unless combining spaces). 
C.  Existing manufactured home parks. 
1.  Existing manufactured home parks shall not be increased in land area, number of structures, or spaces; nor shall the size or location of parks, open space or roadways be changed. 
2.  Only one (1) manufactured home shall be allowed on a manufactured home space. 
3.  It shall be a violation of the Municipal Code for any owner of any home to abandon such home within the City. Once a home has been abandoned, the manufactured park owner shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to obtain title to the home. At any time during said one hundred twenty (120) days or upon reaching the one hundred twenty (120) days, the park owner shall be required to provide proof of reasonable attempts to obtain title to the home. That proof can include, but is not limited to, a certified copy of correspondence to the County and/or State, an application filed with the County and/or State, letters from the County and/or State or other forms of written documentation. Reasonable attempts to obtain title to the home shall be a defense to any citation regarding failure to obtain title to the home. 
4.  Upon obtaining title to such home, a manufactured home park owner shall have thirty (30) days to remove or bring such home into compliance with all applicable building code requirements and the requirements of Section 18.04.090 of the Municipal Code. Failure to provide adequate proof of reasonable action to secure a transfer of title or to provide adequate proof of meeting current code requirements shall be a violation of this Section and shall subject the manufactured park owner to penalties. Every day of violation will be considered a separate violation subjecting the manufactured park owner to a separate penalty for each day such violation continues. The maximum penalty for violation will be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. The park owner shall not be liable for any penalties if, prior to the end of the thirty-day period set forth above, the park owner has contracted with a mover to remove the home from the park or contracted with a licensed contractor to repair said home to bring it into compliance with applicable building code requirements and the requirements of Section 18.04.090 of the Municipal Code. The time frame for the removal or repair of the home shall be a reasonable time frame based upon the availability of contractors and materials as well as weather conditions. 
5.  No hazardous, combustible, flammable or chemical storage shall be allowed under a manufactured home, on the roof of a manufactured home or on the roof of any accessory structure. Both the owner of the manufactured home and the owner of the manufactured home park shall be held responsible for such violation in accordance with Chapter 1.16 and 1.17 of the Municipal Code. In addition to the requirements of Section 18.04.120.1, Home Occupations, and notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no customer/client visits to a manufactured home in conjunction with a home occupation shall be permitted. Resident managers are specifically allowed. 
6.  No structural enlargement or exterior addition to any manufactured home shall be permitted. This provision shall not be construed as applying to unenclosed carports, patios, decks, porches, awnings or similar unenclosed additions required in this Chapter and for which a valid building permit was issued. 
7.  It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home owner to obtain all required building permits for detached accessory structures, including but not limited to sheds, carports, and garages, as well as any required appurtenances attached to a manufactured home, such as entryway stairs and landings. The manufactured home owner or designee shall show written evidence that the park owner has approved any and all detached accessory structures as described above prior to the city permit being issued. 
8.  No detached accessory structure, excluding fences, shall be closer than ten (10) feet from a home or accessory structure on a separate home space or any exterior property line of the property or any public right-of-way. The distance between a detached accessory structure and a home or accessory structure on the same home space shall be in accordance with the building code as adopted in the Municipal Code. 
a.  Each home space shall be limited to the following accessory structures: 
(1)  One (1) detached garage or carport not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet. 
(2)  One (1) unenclosed porch and/or covered entry, or one (1) enclosed porch and/or covered entry with less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of extended roof area, per exterior door of the manufactured home unit. 
(3)  Awnings. 
(4)  One (1) storage shed no greater than three hundred (300) square feet of extended roof area and no taller than eight (8) feet in height. 
9.  Accessory buildings not on home spaces such as offices (separate from a home), clubhouses and laundry buildings shall not be replaced with homes or home spaces. 
10.  Each home space shall have two (2) paved, off-street parking spaces measuring at least one hundred seventy-one (171) square feet each (minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet), which may be located side by side or end to end. Garage and carport spaces shall count toward this requirement. This requirement shall not apply to home spaces that have two (2) designated, striped, paved parking spaces (minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet) adjacent to the manufactured home space provided such parking spaces and the adjacent roadway conform to the following requirements. 
11.  No parking shall be permitted on any private roadways unless twenty (20) feet minimum of unobstructed traveled roadway is maintained at all times. Roadways that are thirty-two (32) or more feet wide (paved) may be designated for parking on both sides of the street with painted white lines perpendicular to the travel way. Roadways that are between twenty-six (26) and thirty-two (32) feet wide (paved) may be designated for parking on only one (1) side of the street with painted white lines perpendicular to the travel way. Roadways less than twenty-six (26) feet wide (paved) shall not have any on-street parking permitted. The park owner shall install signs stating "No Parking - Fire Lane" or "Parking This Side Only" or similar as approved by the City on each side of every roadway less than thirty-two (32) feet in width. Vehicles parked in violation of this Section may be ticketed and/or towed by the Evans Police Department in accordance with Subsection 10.04.030.M of this Code. 
12.  The park owner shall install and maintain a directory poster at or near each entrance to the manufactured home park to assist fire, police and service personnel in locating particular home spaces within the park. Such poster shall be at least five (5) feet wide by four (4) feet tall and shall depict an aerial (plan) view of the park with each space number clearly marked. 
13.  Signage advertising the park shall be in accordance with Section 18.08.080. 
14.  The park owner shall provide adequate trash service. Adequate trash service shall be defined as individual service to each home by the City or its contractor in accordance with Subsection 8.04.090.E. or provision of trash receptacles within the park meeting the following requirements: such receptacles shall be screened on three (3) sides by a six-foot privacy fence or wall and such receptacles shall be located such that no home without individual trash service is more than two hundred (200) feet from a trash receptacle. 
D.  License and license fees. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish, maintain or operate, or permit to be established, maintained or operated, any manufactured home park/community within the City without first having secured a license pursuant to Section 18.04.090. 
E.  Replacement manufactured homes. 
1.  Manufactured homes shall only be allowed in parks zoned RMH. 
2.  Manufactured homes shall be certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, U.S.C.,  5401 et seq., as amended, and shall bear an insignia indicating such and the date of manufacture. No mobile home manufactured prior to 1976 shall be allowed to be installed within the City. 
a.  Exception. A mobile home that does not meet the preceding requirement but that existed within the City prior to the adoption of this regulation may be relocated within the City provided such home is relocated to a space at least one hundred (100) feet farther from any public right-of-way than the space it previously occupied. 
3.  No manufactured home manufactured more than ten (10) years prior to the date of its installation shall be allowed to be installed within the City unless such home meets the following architectural standards: 
a.  The exterior of the home is free of any obvious deterioration or signs of lack of maintenance; for example, any missing or broken shutters or trim, damaged roofing or siding, faded or peeling paint, or similar damage or deterioration. 
b.  Minimum roof pitch of 3:12 (one (1) foot rise for each three (3) feet of horizontal run) or roof pitches that are designed to allow for "green" building measures such as water collection or growing of gardens. 
c.  Roof material of asphalt shingles or colored, nongalvanized standing seam material. 
d.  Exterior siding material of wood or vinyl siding or stucco or material equivalent in appearance, or siding that is of similar appearance and meets green building standards such as recycled concrete or metal. 
e.  Skirting material of stucco or material similar in appearance to stucco or vinyl skirting in good repair that is compatible with the home. 
f.  This Subsection shall not apply to a mobile home that is moved from one (1) mobile home space to another space within the same mobile home park as long as the space to which it is being moved is farther from any public right-of-way than the space from which it is being moved. 
g.  Two (2) or more compatible or complementary colors on exterior of home, including the colors on shutters or trim, if any. 
4.  No person shall install any manufactured home within the City without first obtaining a building permit from the City. The application for the permit shall be on a form provided by the City and shall be signed by both the owner of the home and the owner of the park, or their representatives. A permit for a manufactured home shall not be issued by the City if the park has any pending or outstanding Municipal Code violations that have not been corrected after due notice. 
5.  Any home that is removed from its space shall not be replaced by another home except in conformance with the Municipal Code. 
6.  No home shall be removed from a park without first obtaining a house-moving permit from the City. 
7.  No home shall be occupied prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy the City shall inspect the home to ensure it is located and set in accordance with this Chapter, applicable building code requirements and any other relevant provision of this Code. All homes shall be connected to public water and sewer service and gas and/or electricity service prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall require that all accessory structures on the space on which the manufactured home is located comply with the requirements of this Chapter. 
8.  Required internal and public setbacks. 
a.  No home, exclusive of trailer hitches and eaves shall be located within ten (10) feet of any other home. No decks, stairs or other appurtenances shall be located within six (6) feet of a home or the decks, stairs or other appurtenances on another home space. 
b.  No home, exclusive of trailer hitches and eaves, but including any carports, decks, awnings, or other additions, shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any public right-of-way. 
c.  No home, exclusive of trailer hitches and eaves shall be located within ten (10) feet of any perimeter property line of the park. No decks, stairs or other appurtenances shall be located within five (5) feet of any perimeter property line. 
d.  Reference Table in Section 18.04.090 for detailed information. 
9.  Trailer hitches must be removed or concealed with material similar in appearance to the siding of the home prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
10.  Manufactured homes shall be fully skirted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such skirting shall be durable, rigid weather-resistant material. 
11.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the space unit number shall be indicated on the home or on the space so that the space is clearly identifiable from the nearest street. 
12.  The maximum height of any manufactured home or garage accessory to a manufactured home shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
13.  Manufactured homes located within seventy-five (75) feet of a public right-of-way shall have the following additional requirements: 
a.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) two-inch caliper tree planted between the home and each right-of-way. Such trees shall be of a species listed on the City's approved landscape planning list. Existing trees shall be considered as meeting this requirement only if they are in good condition and of a species listed on the City's approved landscape planning list. The park owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such trees are maintained and watered and shall promptly replace any diseased, dead or dying trees. City staff shall have the discretion to allow the placement of trees required by this Subsection to be relocated to other areas of the park or adjacent land if such areas would be more suitable for such trees. Alternative plans for improvements in lieu of trees may be proposed by a park owner for review and consideration of approval by the Planning Commission. 
b.  The side of the manufactured home nearest the right-of-way shall contain at least one (1) window with a minimum area of four (4) square feet. 
F.  New and redeveloped manufactured home parks. No park shall be developed, nor shall an existing park be redeveloped or the use of a park be recommenced after having been discontinued (regardless of whether such discontinuance was voluntary or involuntary and regardless of the cause of the discontinued use), as defined herein, for three (3) or more consecutive months, without first obtaining Manufactured Home Park Plan approval by the City Council by ordinance. The Manufactured Home Park Plan shall conform to all of the requirements for planned unit developments (PUD) as provided in Section 18.04.110, planned unit developments, and shall be processed as an application for a PUD. Such plans shall, at a minimum, include regulations on the following: 
1.  Setbacks from property lines and right-of-way. 
2.  Separation distance between homes. 
3.  Foundation requirements. 
4.  Parking and driveways. 
5.  Private street materials and dimensions, street names and sidewalks, if any. 
6.  Provision of water and sewer service. 
7.  Stormwater drainage. 
8.  Accessory structures and storage. 
9.  Age of homes at the time of installation. 
10.  Density or maximum number of homes. 
11.  Minimum and maximum length, width and height of homes. 
12.  Roof pitch and material. 
13.  Minimum eave length and other aesthetic aspects. 
14.  Signage. 
15.  Fencing - perimeter and on lots. 
16.  Open space. 
17.  Amenities. 
18.  Landscaping and entryway features. 
19.  Lighting. 
20.  Maintenance. 
G.  Maintenance and nuisance. 
1.  The owner of a home shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior of the home, including but not limited to roofing, siding and skirting, in good condition and shall promptly replace or repair any damage or defects to such exterior. The owner of a home shall be responsible for maintaining the yard or open space within his or her designated home space, including but not limited to keeping such area free of weeds, trash or other violation of this Code. Any such violation shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 and/or Chapter 1.17 of this Code, as applicable. 
2.  The owner of a park shall be responsible for ensuring that every home within his or her park conforms to the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted and amended in Chapter 15.24 of this Code. Existence of violations of said code within a park shall be grounds for withholding of permits for replacement homes until such violations are corrected. Documented efforts made by the park owner will be taken into consideration when the City reviews the permit process. 
3.  The owner of a park shall be responsible for maintaining in good condition any and all of the following within his or her park and shall promptly replace or repair any damage or defects to such: 
a.  Private streets, driveways, and walkways. 
b.  Landscaping, not within an occupied, designated home space, including that which is located within adjacent right-of-way between streets or sidewalks and the park property line. 
c.  Fencing within the park or on the adjacent right-of-way. 
d.  Signage within the park or on the adjacent right-of-way. 
e.  Lighting within the park. 
f.  Private water and sewer service lines. 
g.  Stormwater detention ponds and structures. 
h.  Accessory buildings that are owned by the park owner, whether or not they are within a designated home space. 
i.  The owner of a park shall be responsible for any home space that is not occupied by a home, including keeping such spaces free of weeds, trash or other violations of this Code. Any such violation shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 and/or Chapter 1.17 of this Code, as applicable, and shall be grounds for withholding of permits for replacement homes until such violations are corrected. 
H.  Rezoning of existing or discontinued manufactured home parks. 
1.  If a park owner applies for a zoning amendment in accordance Section 18.04.170 to change the zoning of the park from RMH, residential manufactured home, to another zoning designation, the City may first require a written agreement with the park owner regarding timely removal of all homes on the property and conversion of the property to another use. 
2.  If the zoning of an existing park is changed to another designation that does not allow manufactured homes and the park owner did not apply for such zoning amendment, replacement homes may continue to be installed in accordance with Section 18.04.090. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the removal of a home that is occupied by its owner or a bona fide tenant of its owner. 
3.  This Section may be addressed and superseded by an approved Manufactured Home Park Plan or agreement between the City and the park owner, which shall apply to their heirs and assigns. 
I.  Dimensional Standards. The Table below shows setbacks for all structures from the public right-of-way and property line. Landscaping, open space, playgrounds and private roads shall be allowed within the setbacks. 
Front street Side street Street Side Rear Perimeter of property Maximum height 25' 5' 15' 20' 5' for accessory structures; 10' for homes 15'  
    The Table below shows internal setbacks for mobile homes and accessory structures: 
End to end Side to side Front to side Accessory structures* 10' 10' 10' 6'  
J.  Variances. No variances are permitted from the requirement of this Section 18.04.090. 
18.04.100 - Highway 85 Districts Design Standards. 
A.  General. The provisions of this Chapter apply to all Property within the Highway 85 Districts. If any provisions of this Chapter conflict with other provisions of the Evans Municipal Code, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. 
B.  Intent of Highway 85 Districts. The intent of the Highway 85 Districts is to implement the concepts, principles, and recommendations of the U.S. 85 Overlay District Master Plan, as amended from time to time, through establishing consistent development standards for development within the Highway 85 Districts in the City of Evans. The standards contained herein are intended to ensure that development within the Highway 85 Districts meets certain minimum criteria in order to: 
1.  Improve the appearance and coordinate land uses within the Highway 85 Districts. 
2.  Provide additional development standards for the Highway 85 Districts. 
3.  Create a positive financially sustainable economic zone. 
4.  Establish a unique identity for the City of Evans. 
5.  Improve economic vitality within the Highway 85 Districts. 
6.  Maximize long-term property values and community benefits. 
7.  Minimize the impact of nonresidential development on residential areas. 
8.  Improve safety for automobiles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
9.  Encourage the creation of sidewalks and trails within the Highway 85 Districts. 
10.  Encourage and increase development opportunities within the Highway 85 Districts. 
11.  Facilitate the opportunities for undergrounding of overhead utilities in the Highway 85 Districts. 
C.  Boundaries and affected property. The boundaries of the 85 Highway Districts are shown on the official zoning map. The map is kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. The standards of this chapter shall apply to all development within the Highway 85 Districts. 
D.  Uses not permitted, special use, and restrictions. 
1.  The uses allowed within the Highway 85 Districts are intended to be of a nature that is retail, personal service, limited residential, and office. 
2.  Oil and gas related uses may be permitted as a special use. The duration of each use will be limited to a five-year period. The oil and gas related uses permitted in the Highway 85 Districts will be limited to support services and offices. 
E.  Legal non-conformities. 
1.  Existing development in the Highway 85 Districts that was conforming prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter, but that does not meet one (1) or more standards of this Chapter, will be considered legal nonconforming in accordance with Section 18.04.140 of the Evans Municipal Code and elimination of such nonconformities shall be done in accordance with such Chapter. 
2.  Future developments shall be reviewed for compatibility within the Highway 85 Districts. Compatibility shall be with conforming uses. Alternatively, compatibility shall not be with non-conformities. 
F.  Design review process. 
1.  All development within the Highway 85 Districts will be reviewed in the same manner as development in any other zone district. 
2.  Permits required. Applicable permits shall be required for any installation or renovation of any sign, fence, wall, or structure. Written approval is required for painting. Existing fences and walls that become dilapidated and need at least twenty-five (25) percent of the structure repaired or replaced as determined by the City shall require a permit and shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
G.  Site planning and urban design. 
1.  The purpose of site planning is to consider site characteristics, such as sunlight, weather, drainage, traffic patterns, and orientation of the building to roadways and other structures, when developing a parcel of land. Urban design is the method of combining planning, architecture, engineering and landscaping to create attractive and functional urban areas. Conscientious site planning and urban design carefully integrate and organize structures and related improvements to provide a pleasant experience for the users. All development shall be reviewed within a site-specific context, as well as within the context of the entire Highway 85 Districts. 
2.  Urban design principles of integrating architectural style, overall layout of structures, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and connectivity, and functional engineering and landscaping shall be considered with all development proposed. When reasonably feasible, new structures shall be sited in a manner that will complement adjacent, conforming structures. Sites shall be developed in a coordinated manner to avoid random, confusing development. Developments shall be clustered, sited, or oriented to create or allow opportunities for pedestrian plazas, shared driveways and shared parking to lessen pedestrian-vehicle conflicts. This will promote better coordinated access and development. 
3.  Parking lots shall conform to the standards provided in Section 18.04.100. All buildings shall be arranged and grouped to complement adjacent conforming developments and allow for efficient pedestrian access. 
4.  If multiple-buildings are located on the same lot, buildings should be oriented to frame the corner of a perimeter or internal street intersection. 
5.  Specific site planning standards related to the Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood Zone District. 
a.  In order to promote the City vision for a more attractive, efficient, and livable community all developments shall have street-oriented frontages with small landscaped setbacks. 
b.  All development shall be designed to maintain a north/south parallel vehicular and pedestrian alignment to Highway 85 and shall be as continuous as possible including major entries/exits to the east/west public street system. The U.S. Highway 85 Overlay District Master Plan shall be followed when considering a traffic pattern or grid system. 
c.  Buildings shall be oriented to be parallel to lot lines, similar to that of traditional downtown building orientations. The front and entrance of the primary structures shall be oriented to the adjoining street or drive. 
d.  Development in the Highway 85 Districts shall provide a transition from the surrounding suburban fabric to one (1) that is more urban. Special attention shall be given to the size and scale of surrounding properties, including residential developments outside the Highway 85 Districts boundaries. Non-conformities shall not be considered. 
e.  The core focus of the Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood zone district will be pedestrian activity. Streets and open spaces must create attractive pedestrian environments. On-street parking will assist in providing access to shops as well as generating additional pedestrian activity. 
H.  Access, circulation and parking. 
1.  Vehicular access shall be paved (no gravel or dirt) and separated from pedestrian and bicycle access to reduce pedestrian-vehicle conflicts. Internal circulation, including pedestrian and vehicular, shall be continuous and shall avoid creating dead-end parking lots, dead-end driveways, or dead-end sidewalks. 
2.  Parking areas shall be paved (no gravel or dirt) and broken up through the use of landscaping and building layout to avoid large expanses of parking stalls. Parking lots are required to include landscaping islands, corridors, and edges according to Section 18.07.070 of the Evans Municipal Code and according to the landscaping requirements in this Section 18.04.100. 
3.  The majority of parking should be located at the interior of the site in relation to adjoining streets and development. 
4.  Adjacent development that incorporates shared driveways and parking areas shall be allowed up to a twenty (20) percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces, in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Such shared parking shall not be farther than five hundred (500) feet from any entrance of any building for which it counts as required parking. 
b.  There shall be a recorded easement for cross-access and parking on each of the lots that share parking. 
c.  Parking required for residential buildings shall not be allowed to count as shared parking. 
d.  Shared parking is encouraged in order to reduce overall parking amounts when land uses are present that have staggered peak hour demands, or with the co-location of complementary uses such as restaurants adjacent to office uses. 
5.  Bicycle parking shall be required on all properties in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The required number of bicycle parking spaces shall be five (5) percent of the required number of automobile parking spaces. Notwithstanding the foregoing, not less than one (1) or more than twenty (20) bicycle spaces shall be required. 
b.  Bicycle parking shall be located as near as practical to building entrances without obstructing safety, pedestrian or vehicular traffic or causing damage to nearby landscaping by means of having to walk through landscape areas with no path. 
c.  Bicycle parking shall be provided with a permanent structure of heavy gauge tubular steel, or similar material, with angle bars attached to concrete or asphalt pavement. Such structures shall be designed to allow the frame and both wheels of bicycles to be securely locked to the structure. The design of all bicycle parking structures shall be approved by the City with each application for development. 
6.  On-street parking will be permitted in the Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood and Public Facility zone districts due to the smaller size of lots and the preference for pedestrian activities in these areas. On-street parking will be subject to the following regulations. 
a.  On-street shall be primarily parallel parking on higher-volume arterial streets. Angled parking may be used on low-speed and low-volume collector or local streets with ground floor commercial uses. 
b.  On-street parking will be prohibited on streets with speeds greater than or equal to thirty-five (35) mph due to potential hazards associated with opening doors and maneuvering in and out of parking spaces. 
c.  Where appropriate, metered or time-restricted parking should be used to provide reasonable short-term parking for commercial uses. 
d.  Parking will be prohibited within ten (10) feet of either side of fire hydrants. 
e.  A minimum of seven (7) feet width from curb will be required for all parallel parking spots and are to be twenty-four (24) feet in length; eight (8) feet wide is preferred. Seventeen (17) feet and eight (8) inches will be the minimum depth required for angled parking spots (forty-five (45) degrees). If the minimum depth of both parallel and angled parking stalls cannot be accommodated without reducing the necessary width of the drive aisle, on-street parking will not be permitted. 
f.  No on-street parking will be permitted in an alleyway. 
g.  All development that includes on-street parking proposals shall be reviewed for appropriateness and feasibility at the time of application. 
7.  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  Internal sidewalks shall be required for all developments in the following specified locations: 
i.  Between the front doors of primary buildings. From buildings to all on-site facilities, such as parking areas, bicycle facilities, and open space. 
ii.  To provide direct access from all buildings on the site to get to existing or planned public sidewalks, as well as adjacent multi-use trails and greenways. 
iii.  Along all adjacent street frontages. 
Walkways shall be designed to create safe access for pedestrians and avoid frequent crossings by driveways or streets. Walkways should be separated from streets and parking lots by curbs or other means to create physical separation including tree plantings and bollards. 
b.  The following materials shall be used for internal sidewalks: pavers, decorative pavers, textured or colored concrete are required. Asphalt shall not be used in any form for internal sidewalks. 
c.  Required sidewalk dimensions. 
i.  Internal sidewalks must be hard surfaced, and a minimum of seven (7) feet in width. 
ii.  When adjacent to perpendicular, head-in, or diagonal parking, a pedestrian walk must be increased in width to a minimum of eight (8) feet when parking is located on one (1) side and a minimum of ten (10) feet when parking is located on both sides. 
d.  Along frontages on Highway 85, a primary trail system shall be installed in accordance with the City of Evans Open Space Trails and Master Plan with an eight-foot wide landscape strip adjacent to the street curb with a ten-foot wide sidewalk. 
e.  Secondary connections in accordance with the City of Evans Open Space Trails and Master Plan shall be provided with all developments. 
f.  Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood zone district standards. 
i.  Developments located with the Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood zone district will be required to install a minimum seven-foot pedestrian path to run parallel to the street. 
8.  Plaza space. 
a.  In order to provide enhanced pedestrian amenities on larger sites, plaza space shall be required when a development involves a gross site area greater than ten (10) acres. 
b.  A minimum five (5) percent of the property shall be dedicated to plaza space for properties above ten (10) acres in total size. 
c.  Plaza spaces shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following elements. 
i.  At least one (1) seating space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of plaza or public space area. The seating space requirement can be met through the use of benches, chairs, or seat-walls. 
ii.  A mixture of areas that provide shade, through the use of canopies, awnings, arcades, or other similar elements. 
iii.  A water feature or piece of public art. 
iv.  Outdoor dining opportunity. 
d.  For development less than ten (10) acres in total size, additional provisions for pedestrians must be provided. These provisions shall be provided to the maximum extent deemed reasonable by City staff in the exercise of their discretion. These provisions can be met through the use of the following: 
i.  Seating areas that utilize elements of the development (e.g. low masonry walls); 
ii.  Benches; 
iii.  Robust sidewalk connections; 
iv.  Shaded and/or landscape areas provided for passive recreation or relaxation. 
I.  Service and loading areas. 
1.  All service areas and loading areas shall be screened and separated from parking areas using architectural features, constructed of the same/similar materials and colors as the adjacent, conforming structure, and landscaping. Service or loading areas should not be located in the front setback or adjacent to or along Highway 85. Service areas are to be located in a side or rear yard and screened from view from public rights-of-way. 
2.  Garbage collection is to be designed to be clustered for multiple businesses. The proper location shall be determined upon review of land use applications. 
J.  Telecommunications equipment and utilities. 
1.  All telecommunications equipment shall comply with Section 18.04.150 of this Code. 
2.  All utility lines shall be installed underground. Existing overhead utility lines shall be relocated underground. 
3.  Freestanding commercial mobile radio (CMRS) towers are not allowed. CMRS facilities may be mounted on a building or structure provided that the equipment does extend higher than the roof of the building. Building mounted CMRS facilities must be appropriately colored and concealed so as to blend in with the building or structure. 
K.  Buffers and transition areas. In order to lessen the impact of nonresidential development upon residential areas, buffer and transitional areas shall be installed between residential and nonresidential areas. Transitional and buffer areas can take the form of wall dividers, height transitions, landscaping and other creative design opportunities or devices. Proper transition between uses shall be reviewed when applications for development occurs. 
L.  Fences and walls. 
1.  All fences and walls shall conform to the standards provided in Section 18.04.120 of this Title in addition to the requirements of this Title. 
Materials and colors. All new fences and walls in the Highway 85 Districts shall be constructed of durable materials that will retain their appearance over a long period of time. The materials and colors chosen should be the same as or similar to new or existing conforming structures on adjacent lots or property and must comply with the approved color palette designated in Section 18.04.10.N.5.d. 
a.  Appropriate materials include: 
i.  Brick; 
ii.  Stone; 
iii.  Stucco; 
iv.  Tinted, textured masonry block/architectural block; 
v.  Wrought iron or decorative aluminum (with architectural pillars/columns). 
b.  Inappropriate materials in any location include: 
i.  Chain link of any kind; 
ii.  Barbed wire. 
2.  Applicable permits shall be required for any installation or renovation of any sign or fence. Existing fences and walls that become dilapidated and need at least twenty-five (25) percent of the structure repaired or replaced as determined by the City shall require a permit and shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. Written approval is required for painting. 
M.  Landscape standards. 
1.  Section 18.07.070 shall be applied to development within the Highway 85 Districts. 
2.  Front lot landscaping. In general, street frontages of all developments shall include landscaped buffers in accordance with Section 18.07.070.S, in addition to required sidewalks referenced in Section 18.04.100. 
3.  Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall meet the requirements of Section 18.07.070.T, notwithstanding the plant material requirements of Section 18.04.100. 
4.  Interior lot landscaping standards. In general, all development areas of land that have not been disturbed during construction shall be preserved for non-public active and passive recreation areas and landscaping. 
5.  Re-vegetation. All areas disturbed during construction shall be re-vegetated to meet the landscaping requirements of Section 18.04.100. 
6.  Highway 85 landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping buffers shall be installed on all properties and developments that abut Highway 85. 
b.  These landscape buffers shall be positioned between the development and Highway 85. 
c.  Landscape buffers are to be installed between Highway 85 and the required primary trails. 
d.  A protective barrier must be constructed or established between Highway 85 and all proposed landscaping to prevent harm to plants from debris and road-maintenance materials. These standards shall be provided at time of application for development. 
7.  Highway 85 Neighborhood Retail and Commercial - landscaping requirements. 
a.  Development in this district will be required to provide separate landscaping along streets with on-street parking. If on-street parking is not present, previous landscaping requirements shall apply. 
b.  A four-foot amenity buffer will be required behind the back of street curb adjacent to the roadway. This area shall contain one (1) tree for every thirty-five (35) feet lineal feet. The amenity buffer will be in addition to the mandatory sidewalk to be installed parallel to the street. 
c.  Dumpsters and trash cans will only be permitted in rear setback. 
8.  Plant material requirements. 
a.  Landscaping for all development shall include a wide variety of plant materials that will provide visual interest during all seasons. Landscaping should consist of a mixture of trees, shrubs, and native grasses. Selection of plant materials shall be based on the City of Evans' list of approved plant types. 
b.  Requirement for drought tolerant or drought resistant landscaping and plant species. 
c.  At least fifty (50) percent of all annuals and trees, and one hundred (100) percent of shrubs, perennials, groundcovers, and ornamental grasses used to landscape shall be selected from the City of Evans' xeriscape list of plants. 
d.  Trees shall be located to avoid significant interference with overhead or underground utilities and with vehicular and pedestrian movement. A tree canopy may project over a right-of-way or easement, road, or sidewalk. 
e.  Plant materials shall not project over sidewalks, paths, or trails below a height of eight (8) feet. 
N.  Architectural design standards. 
1.  The following minimum architectural design standards shall apply to each elevation (front, side, and rear) of all development in the district, unless otherwise noted. These minimum standards are intended to achieve consistent and quality developments that will retain their appearance and value over time. 
2.  Building design and character. 
a.  Height, massing, building scale. The height and scale of any new building shall be compatible with surrounding, conforming structures. Individual structures shall be clustered to help create plazas and pedestrian courts. Shared driveways and/or parking shall be incorporated to lessen pedestrian-vehicle conflicts. Developments located within the U.S. 85 Neighborhood Retail and Commercial District shall be oriented toward the primary public street or private drive providing the access to the subject building. 
b.  Human scale. The design of buildings shall reflect the relationship between the size of the building and human beings. Human-scale design shall be incorporated through the use of horizontal articulation, belt courses, cornices, recessed windows or doors, awnings, roof overhangs, moldings, fixtures, colonnades, or other architectural features. In order to avoid blank walls at the ground floor levels, windows, trellises, articulation, arcades, change in materials, or other architectural features shall be utilized. These features shall be incorporated into each elevation (front/side/rear). 
c.  Complementary architecture. All accessory structures including, but not limited to, gas station canopies, warehouses, clubhouses, solar panels, and utilities, shall utilize design, colors, and materials similar or complementary to the principal structure on the property. 
3.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall be constructed to prevent mechanical and other rooftop equipment from being exposed from all reasonable visible angles. 
b.  A variety of parapet heights, ridge heights and eave heights should be used to create a varied skyline where buildings are of similar scales. Conversely, where adjoining buildings are of a dissimilar scale, variation on parapet heights, ridge heights and eave heights should be used to reduce the scale of the larger buildings and create continuity of massing between larger and smaller buildings. All designs shall be reviewed at the time of application. 
c.  New buildings shall be constructed with appropriate roofing materials that include: 
i.  Asphalt or fiberglass shingle; 
ii.  Clay or concrete tile; 
iii.  Slate; 
iv.  Metal shake or shingle (non-reflective); 
v.  Standing seam with integrated color. 
d.  Inappropriate materials include: 
i.  Reflective materials (copper may be considered); 
ii.  Tar and gravel (built-up); 
iii.  Corrugated metal. 
e.  Colors allowed: See required color palette in this Section 18.04.100.N.5.D. 
4.  Exterior materials. 
a.  New buildings shall be constructed of appropriate, durable materials that will retain their appearance over time. Combinations of materials and textures are required. 
b.  Appropriate exterior materials include: 
i.  Brick; 
ii.  Stucco; 
iii.  Stone; 
iv.  Tinted, textured masonry block/architectural block; 
v.  Glass block; 
vi.  Hardboard siding/simulated wood products. 
c.  Inappropriate materials include: 
i.  Plywood; 
ii.  Reflective metal siding; 
iii.  Vinyl siding; 
iv.  Non-textured cinder block/concrete masonry units (CMU); 
v.  Steel architectural panels; 
vi.  Tilt up concrete panels. 
5.  Elevations. 
a.  The side and rear elevations of all development shall be asymmetric to create a visually complex building form through the use of recesses, overhangs, windows, doors, or other functional alternatives. Each side and rear elevation shall contain a change of plane equal to at least ten (10) percent of the area of the wall for walls greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet in wall area and/or every thirty (30) feet. 
b.  The front elevation of all development should be designed to include clear glass windows and doors to increase pedestrian interest. These openings should be to scale and arranged so that the uses are visible from and to the street on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the horizontal length of the first floor faade. 
c.  Overhead doors shall not be placed facing any public right-of-way unless significant and appropriate screening and landscaping diffuses the door. Each window not recessed or otherwise architecturally enhanced (such as with decorative molding, sills, mullions, arches or cornices; window boxes; awnings; multi-paned windows; or bay windows) shall have at least three-inch-wide exterior trim, constructed of acceptable building material, around the window. Windows shall not be blocked by anything interior or exterior to the window such as plywood, shelving, storage, boxes. Windows are to be used for the purpose of viewing into the business from the exterior and allowing natural light to pass into the structure. 
d.  Acceptable colors include subtle warm and cool colors, earth-tone colors, and neutral colors. Reflective, neon, primary (red, blue, yellow) and secondary (purple, green, orange) colors shall not be permitted. The intent is not to discourage color variety, but to avoid colors that are primarily used only to attract attention. Colors shall be chosen from the Benjamin Moore "Historical Colors" color palette, or an approved color palette provided or made available by the City for viewing, or an equivalent color of the same hue, saturation, and brightness. Buildings shall incorporate three (3) or more of the acceptable colors. The majority of each elevation must be painted one (1) color. Accent colors may be used to highlight variations in materials, elevations, door and window frames. The use of varying colors to create patterns (e.g. polka dot, striping) is strictly prohibited. 
i.  Two (2) additional colors may be used to provide accents. 
ii.  Individual accent colors must be applied to at least ten (10) percent of each elevation. 
e.  Written approval shall be required from the City to approve proposed painting and color scheme. 
O.  Lighting. 
1.  Lighting is required for the security of on-site areas, such as parking, loading, plazas, and sidewalks in accordance with the following provisions. 
a.  All fixtures located in the district shall be either the City of Evans' Standard Ornamental Arterial Lighting Fixture or Standard Ornamental Local Lighting Fixture. Standard Ornamental Lighting Fixtures are strongly encouraged for on-site parking areas and on-site sidewalks; however, full cutoff fixtures may be used in on-site areas with prior written approval from the City. 
b.  Internal or on-site parking areas, sidewalks, trails, pathways, pedestrian courts and plazas shall have sufficient lighting to ensure adequate visibility for pedestrians. 
c.  All wall-mounted fixtures shall be shielded and directed downward and inward so as to reduce glare onto neighboring properties and rights-of-way. 
d.  The maximum height of any fixture shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
e.  Interior lighting in parking garages shall be shielded to minimize nighttime glare on adjacent properties and rights-of-ways. 
f.  Upward accent lighting for landscaping is permitted, as long as the light source is directed inward and away from adjacent sidewalks, plazas, parking lots, neighboring properties, and rights-of-way. 
g.  Where vehicle headlights would likely shine onto residentially zoned and used property, driveways and parking areas for more than two (2) vehicles shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned and used property by a solid fence, wall, solid evergreen hedge, or landscaped berm with vegetation that will mature to at least four (4) feet in height. 
h.  Glare diagrams and/or lighting plans may be required at the discretion of the City. 
2.  Canopies. For any canopies and similar structures, lighting shall not cause glare onto adjacent rights-of-way or properties. All fixtures shall be mounted underneath the canopy and fully recessed with flat lenses that are flush with the underneath surface of the canopy. Light fixtures shall not be mounted on the top or sides of any canopy. 
3.  All on-site lighting fixtures shall be maintained so as to be functioning properly at all times. 
4.  When more than twenty-five (25) percent of nonconforming light fixtures are not functioning or are dilapidated, all fixtures on the lot shall be replaced with the appropriate local standard ornamental light fixtures. 
P.  Signage. 
1.  All signs in the district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 18.08 of this Code. Additional regulations outlined below shall also apply. 
a.  Allowed signs. 
i.  Monument signs; 
ii.  Freestanding signs; 
iii.  Wall signs; 
iv.  Projecting signs; 
v.  Electronic message center (EMC) signs (allowed on monuments); 
vi.  Window signs (see Section 18.04.100). 
b.  Prohibited signs. 
i.  Animated signs; 
ii.  Pennants, streamers, lighter-than-air objects, and wind signs; 
iii.  Signs with light bulbs that have intermittent, flashing, rotating, scintillating, blinking or strobe illumination; 
iv.  Off-premises advertising; 
v.  Roof signs; 
vi.  Search lights; 
vii.  Signs on fences; 
viii.  Signs painted on fences; 
ix.  Signs painted on interior or exterior of windows; 
x.  Signs painted on walls; 
xi.  Portable signs; 
xii.  Wheeled advertising devices; 
xiii.  Any sign within a site triangle; 
xiv.  Human signs; 
xv.  Billboards - except those allowed to remain in accordance with the Federal Highway Beautification Act. 
2.  General sign regulations. 
a.  No business is allowed more than three (3) signs per street frontage, and no business is allowed more than a total of five (5) signs. The following number of each type of sign is allowed for any one (1) type provided the total number of signs does not exceed five (5). 
i.  No more than four (4) wall signs per business. 
ii.  No more than one (1) projecting sign per business. 
iii.  No more than one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage. 
iv.  No more than two (2) monument signs per street frontage. 
v.  No monument sign is allowed if a freestanding sign is proposed (subject to individual street frontage). 
vi.  For retail developments over twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet a sign plan incorporated with the landscaping plan shall be submitted as a part of the site development process that can request a staff waiver from these regulations. 
b.  Signs may be illuminated indirectly by white light only. 
c.  Monument signs. 
i.  Monument bases shall be constructed of brick, stone, wood or metal material consistent and compatible with an exterior material and color of the principal building. 
ii.  Monument signs on adjacent lots or the same lot shall be separated by a minimum one hundred (100) feet as measured by a straight line between signs. 
iii.  Monument signs may be used by a single user or multiple users on the same property. 
d.  Freestanding signs. 
i.  Freestanding signs on adjacent lots or the same lot shall be separated by a minimum one hundred (100) feet as measured by a straight line between signs. 
ii.  Freestanding signs shall be set back from the nearest principal building on the same lot or parcel at least the height of the sign. 
iii.  Freestanding signs may be used by a single user or multiple users on the same property. 
e.  Electronic message center (EMC). 
i.  The text display of the message shall not change more frequently than once per eight (8) seconds. Each message shall transition to the next message instantaneously. 
ii.  Brightness. 
(1)  The maximum brightness for daytime and nighttime hours is 0.3 foot-candles per foot-candle meter. 
(2)  EMC signs may be placed only on monument signs. 
3.  Window signs. 
a.  Open and closed signs are acceptable. Neon or electric signs cannot be larger than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches. 
b.  Window signs shall not cover up more than twenty-five (25) percent of any window area. 
c.  Window signs are limited to the first floor of a building. 
d.  Temporary window signs are not allowed. 
e.  Window signs shall only be allowed and permitted through the approval of a sign plan specific to window signs for each specific property. 
f.  Administrative approval of a sign plan for window signs shall be by the City Manager or designee. 
4.  Signs dimensions and setback requirements. 
Monument Signs Freestanding Signs Wall Signs Projecting Signs Minimum Setback from Right-of-Way 1' 25' N/A Not into right-of-way Maximum Height 10' (15' when abutting Highway 85) 25' Not to exceed the roof line of structure Not to exceed the roof line of structure Maximum Size 100 sq. ft.* 50 sq. ft. See below See below Maximum Number of Signs 2/street frontage* 1/Street frontage* 4 1 Sign Located in Landscape Area Yes Yes N/A Yes (over)  
*Monument sign maximum size applies to single or multi-tenant signs. Freestanding signs are not permitted if monument signs are proposed (subject to individual street frontage). Monument signs are not permitted if freestanding signs are proposed (subject to individual street frontage). 
a.  Total sign area. 
i.  Total sign area shall be the sum (square feet) of all signs permitted per business. 
ii.  Each business is allowed a minimum fifty (50) square feet of sign area for wall and projecting signs, regardless of lot frontage. 
iii.  For each lineal foot of building frontage on the adjacent and most prominent streets, each business is allowed an additional square foot of sign area which may be applied to all sign types. 
iv.  The maximum allowable wall and projecting sign area for each business is three hundred (300) square feet. 
Q.  Maintenance standards. All structures, related improvements, and landscaping shall be properly maintained. All property shall be kept orderly and free of junk. 
R.  Variance. 
1.  Any application for a variance shall [be] governed by Section 18.04.190.C. 
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 21, 2018, changed the title of  18.04.100 from "U.S. 85 Overlay District Design Standards" to read as herein set out. 
18.04.110 - Planned Unit Development. 
A.  Purpose of planned unit development. This Section is intended to allow for the development of land in a way which might not be permitted under traditional zoning regulations. It is anticipated that this Section will permit developments which will preserve the natural and scenic features of large open areas by arranging buildings and homes in innovative ways, thereby promoting the public interest, while at the same time providing an efficient use of land. 
B.  General requirements. 
1.  A planned unit development (PUD) is an area of land at least two (2) acres in size (except in those cases noted at Section 18.04.110.C) which is developed according to a plan devised by the landowner and approved in advance by the City. 
2.  The area may or may not be divided geographically into separately owned parcels, as the land owner determines, but in any event at least part of the area must be co-owned in undivided interests and be available for park or recreational use by persons living or working in the PUD. 
3.  The uses permitted in a planned development shall be those indicated in the development guide. 
4.  Setbacks and lot sizes required in the individual zoning categories may be modified or varied. Such modifications shall be in accord with standards and procedures established in the development guide for the proposed planned development. 
5.  Connection to public water and sewer facilities shall be required for uses in any planned development. 
6.  All utilities shall be placed underground unless they are unable to for engineering reasons and above-ground location has been consented to, in writing, by the City's Community Development Director. 
7.  Any planned development shall submit a development guide which establishes the standards, variations and requirements for the development which may be divergent from the standards of the zoning regulations of the City to the extent permitted by this Section. Those regulations established by the development guide and approved by the City Council shall be recorded and utilized for development and review of the project. 
C.  Waiver of minimum size requirement. Upon the specific request of the landowner, the two-acre requirement set forth in Section 18.04.110.B may be waived if, after considering the land use requested, Council finds that such waiver would be beneficial to the City and foster the objectives of this Title and the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Procedure. The procedure for creating a Planned Unit Development or for any modification to a development guide or development plan shall be considered a rezoning and shall follow the procedure outlined in (rezoning section) of this Chapter. 
18.04.120 - Accessory Structures and Uses. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to provide regulations governing accessory uses, structures and buildings to ensure acceptable design, installation, and use of accessory structures while maintaining the integrity of the principal use of the property. Furthermore, it is intended to provide assurances that activities that take place are compatible with the designated zoning classifications and that such activities will have no adverse effects on the surrounding properties. Accessory uses may be on the same parcel or adjacent parcel if under the same property ownership or same lease contract. 
B.  Accessory uses, structures and buildings. The following provisions shall apply to all garages, carports, accessory uses, structures and buildings: 
1.  Establishment prior to principal use prohibited. Accessory uses, structures or buildings shall not be established prior to a principal use, except in the AG zone district, nor shall an accessory use be permitted without an associated principal use on the same lot. 
2.  Maximum area. The total footprint area of all detached accessory structures and buildings on any one (1) lot shall not exceed the lesser of ten (10) percent of the total lot area or two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet. This provision shall not apply to structures used for agricultural purposes in the AG zone district, or to structures in industrial zone districts. 
3.  Maximum height. Accessory structures other than garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less. Garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building. This provision shall not apply to structures used for agricultural purposes in the AG zone district, or to structures in industrial zone districts. 
4.  Materials and colors. In all residential zone districts, accessory structures/buildings shall be constructed of materials and with colors compatible with the principal building/structure. 
5.  Maximum number. In all residential zone districts, only one (1) detached accessory structure/building, not including garages, shall be permitted per eight thousand (8,000) square feet of lot area, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum of three (3) such structures per lot. The preceding provision notwithstanding, each principal building shall be allowed at least one (1) detached accessory structure/building. For example, three (3) mobile homes on one (1) lot would each be allowed one (1) detached accessory structure/building, even if the lot were less than twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  Garages, accessory buildings and structures and storage/utility sheds shall comply with all applicable open space and minimum yard sizes (setbacks), with the following exceptions: 
a.  Detached garages, accessory buildings, and structures that are separated from the principal structure by at least ten (10) feet shall be set back from side and rear property lines at least five (5) feet, plus one (1) additional foot for every three (3) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height over fifteen (15) feet. This provision notwithstanding, alley-loaded garages shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from alleys, whether or not attached to the principal structure. 

b.  Storage/utility sheds and accessory structures and buildings shall not be located closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure with the following exceptions: accessory structures that are open on all sides, such as gazebos, and attached accessory structures that are open on three (3) sides and have a floor not more than three (3) feet above the surrounding grade, may extend to within fifteen (15) feet of a front or rear property line. 

c.  Storage/utility sheds under eight (8) feet in height that maintain a minimum of six (6) feet from all principal structures, accessory structures and storage/utility sheds, whether or not located on the same lot, may extend to side and/or rear yard property lines. 

d.  An uncovered patio or deck that is not more than three (3) feet above the surrounding grade may extend to the side, but not street side and/or rear property lines, provided it does not encroach into any utility easement. 
e.  Attached side-loaded garages may extend to within fifteen (15) feet of a front property line. 

D.  Garages and carports. 
1.  Driveways required. All garages and carports in all Residential zoning districts, except the R-1E zoning district, shall have a minimum ten-foot-wide paved driveway extending from the vehicular opening of such structure to the public right-of-way improvements, or to the right-of-way line if public improvements do not exist. Such driveway shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete or similar impervious surface. The Public Works Director has the authority to grant a temporary or permanent waiver to the requirement for the paving of such driveway based upon existing public improvements and other factors in the vicinity of the proposed accessory structure. The absence of public improvements in the vicinity shall not automatically guarantee such a waiver. 
2.  Garages and carports accessory to single-family dwellings. 
a.  The front plane of an attached front-facing garage shall be no more than five (5) feet closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure, unless a) the garage is located no less than thirty (30) feet from the front property line, and b) the house includes a front porch. In no event shall the front plane of a front-facing garage be more than ten (10) feet closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure and in no event shall a front-facing garage encroach into a required front yard. 

b.  Detached garages and carports shall be no closer to the front property line than ten (10) feet behind the front faade of the principal residential structure. 

c.  A three-stall garage shall only be permitted if one (1) of the garage doors is recessed a minimum of two (2) feet behind the other garage doors (i.e., two (2) feet farther from the property line parallel to the garage doors). 

d.  A garage with more than three (3) stalls shall only be permitted if a) the lot is greater than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet in area, b) two (2) of the garage doors are recessed a minimum of two (2) feet behind the other garage doors, and c) the garage is located no less than thirty-five (35) feet from the property line to which the garage is oriented (that is, the front property line for front-facing garages or the side property line for side-loaded garages). 
e.  Side-loaded garages shall have at least one (1) window or similar feature on the elevation oriented to the front property line. 
f.  Garages and carports shall have similar exterior finish, including roofing material, as the principal structure of the lot. 
g.  Carports shall not be located closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure. 
h.  Carports shall be limited to eight (8) feet in height, as measured to the top of the vehicle entrance, and five hundred (500) square feet in area. 
3.  Garages and carports accessory to two-family dwellings. 
a.  Attached garages with more than two (2) stalls for each unit shall not be permitted. 
b.  Two (2) abutting attached two-stall garages shall only be permitted if a) one (1) of the garage doors is recessed a minimum of three (3) feet behind the other garage door and b) the garages are located no less than thirty (30) feet from the front property line. 

c.  The front plane of an attached garage shall be no more than five (5) feet closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure, unless a) the garage is located no less than thirty (30) feet from the front property line, and b) the house includes a front porch. In no event shall the front plane of a front-facing garage be more than ten (10) feet closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure and in no event shall a front-facing garage encroach into the required front yard. 

d.  Side-loaded garages shall have at least one (1) window or similar feature on the elevation oriented to the front property line. 
e.  Detached garages and carports shall be no closer to the front property line than ten (10) feet behind the front faade of the principal residential structure. 

f.  Garages and carports shall have similar exterior finish, including roofing material, as the principal structure of the lot. 
g.  Carports shall not be located closer to the front property line than the front faade of the principal structure. 
h.  Carports shall be limited to eight (8) feet in height, as measured to the top of the vehicle entrance, and five hundred (500) square feet in area. 
4.  Garages and carports accessory to multifamily dwellings. 
a.  Attached garages shall contain no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the elevation of which they are a part. 

Elevation area: 27  165 = 4,455 
Garage faade area 13  24  3 = 936 
Percentage garage/faade: 936/4455 = 21% 
b.  Detached garages shall be designed to be compatible with the related residential structures and shall be designed and oriented to minimize the visual effect of the scale and massing of the garages and create visual interest on all sides of the garage that are visible from the public right-of-way, through the use of landscaping, berming, architectural features or styles, building materials and/or orientation of the site. 
c.  Detached garages and carports shall be compatible with the principal building architecture, and shall incorporate similar and compatible forms, scale, materials, colors and details. 
d.  On any multifamily building elevation there shall be no more than six (6) two-stall or twelve (12) single-stall garage doors, and the plane of each garage door shall be offset at least two (2) feet from the plane of at least one (1) garage door adjacent to it. 

e.  Carports shall be limited to six (6) spaces per parking structure and each carport structure shall be located not closer than twenty (20) feet to any other carport structure. 
f.  Carports shall include lighting to deter theft and vandalism. At least every other parking space shall have lighting of a minimum of one hundred (100) watts and a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) watts. 
g.  Carports shall be situated or landscaped so that headlights of parked vehicles will not shine into windows or onto public streets. 
h.  Detached garages and carports shall have pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 4:12. 
i.  To the maximum extent feasible, garage entries, carports, and parking garages shall not be located between a principal multifamily building and a street frontage, but shall instead be internalized in building groups so that they are not visible from adjacent public streets. 
E.  Accessory structures for mobile homes. 
1.  Each mobile home site shall be limited to the following accessory structures: 
a.  One (1) detached garage or carport not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet. 
b.  One (1) unenclosed porch and/or covered entry, or one (1) enclosed porch and/or covered entry with less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of extended roof area, per exterior door of the mobile home unit. 
c.  Awnings. 
d.  One (1) storage shed located at least five (5) feet from any mobile home and, if located on a corner lot, at least three (3) feet from perimeter fencing, common areas or streets. 
a.  Accessory structures, including but not limited to storage bins, shall be secured and provided with tie-down anchors. 
b.  Structures legally existing as accessory to a mobile home prior to August 19, 1997, and not in compliance with the requirements of this Section may remain in place only until the mobile home to which such a structure is accessory is itself removed or replaced. 
F.  Fences, walls and hedges. 
1.  Fences, walls and hedges may be placed in appropriate locations in order to provide screening and enclosures. Fences and walls shall be constructed of materials which are visually pleasing and compatible with the surrounding improvements. Height changes, offset angles and the use of complementary materials may be used to create variety in fences and walls. 
2.  Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in the various zoning districts as accessory structures in accordance with the following limitations: 
a.  Fences/walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height as measured vertically from the surrounding grade, on all sides of the fence/wall, to the highest point of the fence/wall and shall comply with all applicable sight distance provisions. Fences/walls installed by a government agency for the purpose of a traffic sound barrier shall be allowed to be up to twelve (12) feet in height, provided a building permit is obtained. 
b.  Fences and walls which are located in required front yard setbacks shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height above adjoining grade, except in industrial zoning districts. 

c.  Fences, walls and hedges shall not be located on any public right-of-way without the written consent of the Public Works Director. The City may require such improvements to be removed or relocated by the adjacent property owner at no cost to the City. 
d.  Fences, walls and hedges shall maintain a minimum clearance from fire hydrants as provided for in the latest edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted. 
e.  No barbed wire fence may be permitted within the City, unless approved by the Community Development Director or designee. An application for the installation of barbed wire fencing shall be accompanied by a written submittal explaining the purpose for such fencing and a design which allows for the installation of the fence which would ensure that the barbed wire fence shall not be constructed in a hazardous manner. Barbed wire fencing in industrial areas may be allowed provided that no more than three (3) strands of barbed-wire are added to the height of a fence and provided the lowest strand of barbed-wire is maintained at least six and one-half (61/2) feet above the adjoining grade. Barbed wire required by Title 16 shall be exempt from this provision. 
f.  Fences with pickets and adjacent to public right-of-way shall have the posts erected on the interior side of the fence so that the pickets are between the posts and the right-of-way. 
3.  Materials and maintenance. 
a.  No fence shall be constructed, in whole or in part, of concertina, razor wire, tin or wood scraps. 
b.  Electrically charged and/or swimming pool fences shall be erected and maintained in accordance with Title 15 of this Code. 
c.  All fencing shall be constructed of brick, wood pickets, vinyl, wrought iron, decorative concrete block, chain link or other material normally used for fencing and shall be constructed to conceal or integrate all structural members of the fence into the architectural design of the fence. All other materials and construction methods shall be subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
4.  Where there is an established or uniform character of fencing (type of material, height, etc.) along and generally parallel to a section of an arterial or collector roadway, all fences along rear and street side property lines abutting and generally parallel to that section of the road shall be constructed consistent with the existing character of fencing. 
G.  Household pets, horses and other animals. Areas in which animals are maintained shall not create odors, dust, noise or drainage which constitutes a hazard or nuisance to adjoining properties or uses. The housing and/or existence of animals shall be in accordance with Title 6 of this Code. 
H.  Outdoor storage. Except by approval of a special use, granted in accordance with Section 18.04.160, outdoor storage shall only be allowed as an accessory use in the zoning districts identified and only in accordance with the following limitations: 
1.  No more than ten (10) percent of the area of any lot or parcel in the I-1 light industrial and C1 Low Intensity Commercial, 85-O Highway 85 Office District zoning districts may be used for outdoor storage. 
2.  No more than twenty (20) percent of the area of any lot or parcel in the I-2 medium industrial, C2 Medium Intensity Commercial, and 85 RC-N Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Neighborhood District zoning districts may be used for outdoor storage. 
3.  No more than thirty (30) percent of the area of any lot or parcel in the I-3 Heavy Industrial, C3 High Intensity Commercial, and 85-RC-R Highway 85 Retail and Commercial - Regional Corridor zoning districts may be used for outdoor storage. 
I.  Outdoor Sales/Display. Outdoor Sales/Display shall only be allowed as an accessory use only in compliance with the following limitations: 
1.  Shall be located within the front of commercial business selling/renting product, not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of linear frontage; 
2.  Shall not block entrances nor exits, safety equipment or doors; 
3.  Shall not block the minimum sidewalk depth for commercial space, nor block driveway or use of parking spaces. 
4.  The maximum amount of product display/sales under a gas station canopy or within gas station service area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
J.  Home occupations. 
1.  Intent. The purpose of this Section is to provide for limited business uses within dwellings when such uses will clearly not alter the character or appearance of the residential neighborhood. 
2.  Application. 
a.  Prior to the establishment of any home occupation, an application for such home occupation shall be made to the Community Development Department on a form provided by the City. If the Community Development Department determines the use does not comply with all requirements for a home occupation, then the home occupation permit shall not be issued. If such use has been previously established, the use shall either be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, or the use shall be abandoned and all operations ceased. 
b.  Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use to any dwelling in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
c.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a home occupation requires the approval of the Community Development Department. who may establish conditions to further the intent of this Section. 
d.  Home occupations shall not be transferable to alternate locations or persons. 
3.  A home occupation shall be allowed as a permitted accessory use, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The exterior appearance of the dwelling and lot shall not be altered, nor shall the occupation within the dwelling be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting or signage or by the emission of sounds, noises, dust, odors, fumes, smoke, heat, glare or vibrations detectable outside the dwelling. 
b.  The home occupation shall be confined within the primary dwelling, which shall be the principal use and building on the lot, and shall not include use of any accessory structure, whether attached or detached. All persons involved, directly or indirectly in carrying on the home occupation shall be legal and regular inhabitants of the dwelling unit. 
c.  The dwelling unit shall continue to be used primarily for residential purposes and the occupational activities shall be harmonious with the residential use. Such occupational activities must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling purposes. 
d.  No more than twenty (20) percent of the living space shall be used for the home occupation and any related storage of materials and supplies, except where the home occupation is a licensed board and care home or a day care home that meets applicable state requirements. In no event shall an accessory structure be counted toward the total living space area. 
e.  Only one (1) home occupation shall be permitted per residence unless more than one (1) home occupation can be operated using no more than twenty (20) percent of the living space. 
f.  On-site retail/wholesale transactions cannot be the primary activity of the home occupation. All such sales must remain incidental and secondary to the home occupation. There shall be no window display of merchandise. 
g.  Personal and professional customer-service based businesses shall operate on an appointment-only basis. 
h.  Vehicular traffic associated with the home occupation shall not adversely affect traffic flow and parking in the area. No more than one (1) customer or client vehicle associated with the home occupation shall be at the home at any one (1) time, and no more than twenty (20) customer/client visits to the home per week shall be permitted, with the exception of child/day care homes. In addition to the customer trips, no more than two (2) trips per week shall be related to the delivery of products and/or materials. 
i.  In addition to the required off-street parking, home occupations, including studios or rooms for instruction, shall provide additional paved off-street parking adequate to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation subject to approval of the Public Works Director or designee. 
j.  Only one (1) vehicle, not to exceed one-ton capacity, and one (1) trailer, not to exceed fifteen (15) feet, may be related to and used in conjunction with the home occupation and may be parked on-site, except as provided in Section 18.04.120.I. Such parking shall also conform with Section 18.07.080, off-street parking. 
k.  There shall be no exterior advertising or use of any signs related to a home occupation on the premises including areas such as, but not limited to walls, fences, mailboxes and yards, except that one (1) window sign not to exceed three (3) square feet shall be permitted. 
l.  There shall be no exterior storage on the property of material and/or equipment used as part of the home occupation. In addition, there shall be no use or storage of mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of a normal household or hobby use. 
m.  The use of utilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of the property for residential purposes. Electrical or mechanical equipment that creates audible interference in radio receivers or visual or audible interference in television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited. 
n.  Home occupations having customer/client visits shall only conduct business hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
o.  Activities conducted and buildings, equipment and material used or stored in coordination with the home occupation shall comply with all building and fire codes, as adopted by the City. 
p.  Upon request by the City, applicant shall provide City with access to all books, records and information relating to the business activity being conducted thereof. Said information shall remain confidential, and shall be used to ascertain compliance with the home occupation criteria. 
q.  Home occupations shall be conducted by the resident of the parcel, and if the applicant/resident requesting the home occupation permit is not the property owner, then they must obtain written approval from the property owner. 
4.  Prohibited home occupations. Certain home business uses have demonstrated a tendency to cause impacts to a neighborhood that are detrimental to the character and value of residential properties, and have associated impacts upon the public health, safety and general welfare in residential areas. The following uses, regardless of whether they meet the performance standards, are not permitted. These businesses shall include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals or kennels; 
b.  Equipment rental; 
c.  Funeral chapels, mortuaries or funeral homes; 
d.  Wedding chapels; 
e.  Medical or dental clinics; 
f.  Repair/servicing or painting of automobiles, motorcycles, trailers, boats and other vehicles; 
g.  Repair/servicing of large appliances including stoves, refrigerators, washers and dryers; 
h.  Repair/servicing of power equipment including lawn mowers, snow blowers, chain saws, string trimmers and similar equipment; 
i.  Restaurants; 
j.  Welding, metal and wood fabrication shops; 
k.  Dispatching of vehicles to and from residential premises. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to taxi services, towing services and the like; 
l.  The sale of firearms and gunsmithing; 
m.  Taxidermy; and 
n.  Storage of construction equipment. 
5.  The production and sale of agricultural produce at a rural home occupation, at which all produce for sale has been grown at the site, shall be permitted within the dwelling and/or from accessory buildings located within five hundred (500) feet of the dwelling occupied by those conducting the rural home occupation. Equipment used in the production of agricultural produce shall be that customarily associated with farming or agricultural purposes and shall not be limited in size or number. 
6.  Permitted home occupations that would otherwise violate Section 18.04.120.I, regarding customer/client visits and hours of operation shall require special use approval pursuant to Section 18.04.160. 
7.  Complaints and revocation. 
a.  Persons may file a written complaint with the Community Development Department regarding a home occupation. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the City shall investigate the home occupation to determine if any provisions of this Chapter or conditions of approval are being violated by the home occupation. 
(1)  A home occupation permit may be revoked or modified by the City if any of the following circumstances are found to be true: 
i.  The use has become detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or constitutes a nuisance; 
ii. The  permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
iii. The  use for which the home occupation permit was granted has changed, and a different home occupation is occurring; 
iv.  The condition of the premises has deteriorated because of the home occupation; or 
v.  The use is in violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(2)  Whenever an apparent violation of this section is observed, a written notice shall be served certified mail from the City notifying the applicant of the intent to revoke the home occupation permit. Such notice may include: 
i.  Findings in support of revocation; 
ii.  A statement of the action required to bring the home occupation into compliance; 
iii.  A statement advising that if any required actions are not brought into compliance within the time specified, the home occupation permit will be revoked; 
iv.  A statement advising that any person having legal interest in the home occupation involved may file a written request for a hearing before the City Council within ten (10) days after receipt of notice. Should a request for a hearing not be made within ten (10) days, then the home occupation shall cease operations without further action by the City. 
K.  Auxiliary business uses. Newsstands, refreshment stands, restaurants and other auxiliary business uses shall be permitted in connection with hospitals, schools and other public buildings if such auxiliary business uses are incidental thereto, and are for the convenience of occupants thereof; provided, the floor area used for such auxiliary business uses does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the ground-floor area of the principal building, and that no sign is exhibited on the outside of any such principal building in connection with such auxiliary businesses as are permitted by this Section. 
L.  Variance. Variances to accessory structure regulations may be requested in accordance with Section 18.04.190. No variance may be requested or approved related to an accessory use. 
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
18.04.130 - Temporary Structures and Uses. 
A.  Intent. To provide for the regulation of temporary and seasonal uses and structures and address the impact of these structures and uses on surrounding properties, including aesthetics and economic development. 
B.  Temporary structures. The only type of temporary structure that is permitted is a structure that is used to temporarily replace an existing structure being demolished while a new permanent replacement structure is being constructed on the same site. Temporary structures may be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The temporary structure is used for the same principal use as the structure that is being demolished. 
2.  The temporary structure shall have no greater floor area than the structure it is temporarily replacing. 
3.  The temporary structure shall not be placed on site until a building permit has been issued for the new replacement structure. 
4.  The applicant installing the temporary structure shall provide a letter of credit or cash security in a form and amount acceptable to the City ensuring the complete removal of the temporary structure, site restoration and site revegetation, once the permit for the temporary structure has expired. In addition, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City, authorizing the City to take possession of the structure and dispose of it upon failure of the applicant to remove the structure in a reasonable period of time. 
5.  No temporary housing shall be allowed in the City except where expressly permitted by the applicable zoning regulations. Temporary housing is any dwelling unit that does not have a permanent roof or foundation. Trailers, RVs, tents and similar shelters are temporary in nature and shall not be permitted on residential lots except as permitted by this Code. 
C.  Temporary structures for construction/ sales offices. A temporary structure may be used for the storage of construction materials, as a construction office or a sales office for managing a construction project, and is subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The temporary structure is to be used only during normal business hours for construction activities. 
2.  The temporary structure shall be located on the same property as the project under construction, as indicated by a recorded plat or final site plan. The temporary structure's location, size and general design shall be described on the construction staging plan, as required by Development Standards of this Chapter. 
3.  The temporary structure can be used with or without utilities or services. 
4.  Temporary structures shall not be more than one (1) story in height or more than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet in area and shall be located with exterior walls ten (10) feet or more from adjacent property lines and twenty (20) feet or more from any other structure. 
5.  These structures are subject to permits issued by the building department. Temporary structures shall not be placed on site prior to the issuance of any site development grading or building permit and shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy or substantial completion of the work associated with the applicable permit, whichever occurs first. 
6.  The temporary structure shall not be utilized as living quarters. 
D.  Temporary uses. The intended purpose of a temporary use is for selling a product or to provide a temporary service which is for a short duration or seasonal in nature. 
1.  Temporary uses shall be limited to the following uses: 
a.  Christmas tree lots. 
b.  Agricultural product. 
c.  Fireworks stands. 
d.  Carnivals, circuses and festivals. 
e.  Flea markets. 
f.  Farmers' markets. 
g.  Promotional events on the same site as the principal use and shall be no greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area. 
2.  Temporary uses are subject to a temporary use permit. The proposed temporary use shall only be in operation for the duration described in this Section below during any calendar year. All temporary use permits expire December 31 of the year in which a temporary use permit is issued. The applicant will be allowed seven (7) days to set up before the effective date of the permit and to remove seven (7) days after the expiration of the permit. 
3.  The property where the proposed temporary use is to be located and/or the property owner of record shall not have any outstanding land use violations or obligations to the City. 
4.  The proposed temporary use may not be operated on the same lot that contains attached or detached single-family dwellings and shall be separated by at least fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential zone district. There shall also be a twenty-five-foot separation between temporary uses. 
5.  The proposed temporary use must be compatible with surrounding uses and have a positive impact on the community, which includes, but is not limited to, aesthetics, site design, architectural compatibility, lighting, noise and the absence of negative traffic and access impacts. 
6.  If the temporary use is proposed to be located on private property, written permission must be obtained from the property owners. If the use is proposed to be located on City rights-of-way or City-owned property, a community event permit and license agreement must be approved by the City. 
7.  Temporary structures, such as tents, sheds and trailers, may be utilized with a temporary use, so long as such temporary structures comply with the regulations and permitting requirements of the City and other referral agencies, including all electrical and generator connections and the requirements of this Section. Operable vehicles, such as RVs or semi-trucks, may also be used with a temporary use, subject to the requirements of this Section. At the termination of the temporary use, the temporary structures and vehicles must be removed within the seven-day removal time. 
8.  All required parking for the temporary use shall be on the same site as the lot where the temporary use is located, and the number of required parking spaces described in Section 18.07.080 shall be provided for the temporary use, which required parking spaces shall be in addition to the parking spaces required for the principal use of such property. 
9.  The temporary use shall be operated in compliance with Title 8 of this Code, including but not limited to noise, litter, trash and debris from such use. 
E.  Submittal requirements. Requests for temporary structures or uses shall require the issuance of a permit. Application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  A temporary use permit application. 
2.  A plot plan for the site which shall include: 
a.  All required setbacks for the zone district in which the temporary use is located. 
b.  Access to the temporary use and/or structure from a public right-of-way. 
c.  Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, uses, display areas, vehicles and signs. 
d.  Location of required off-street parking and loading areas. All temporary structures or uses permitted anywhere in the City that generate a need for parking shall provide parking on the same lot where the temporary structure or use is located. The number of parking spaces shall be determined in the manner provided by Section 18.07.080 of this Title. 
3.  An authorization letter from the legal property owner with an original signature giving the applicant permission to apply for a temporary use permit. 
4.  Permits from the Building Department as may be required by the City. 
5.  A vicinity map and narrative that demonstrates compatibility of the proposed temporary structure or use with the surrounding uses and the positive impact it will have on the community. The map and narrative shall include, but not be limited to, aesthetics, site design, architectural compatibility, lighting, noise and absence or mitigation of negative traffic or access impacts. 
6.  Copies of all pertinent certificates or permits required by any of the referral or regulatory agencies as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director to operate the proposed temporary use or to occupy the proposed temporary structure, as it relates to the public health, safety and welfare. This may include, but is not limited to, health certificates, tent permits, electrical permits, sign permits and nursery licenses. 
7.  Copy of a current City sales tax license for the temporary use, if applicable. 
F.  Signs. Signs shall conform with Chapter 18.08. 
G.  Temporary school structures. In any zone district in which permanent educational facilities are expressly permitted, the Community Development Director may, by permit, allow the use of temporary structures on vacant land immediately adjacent to property to be used by any school district or charter school, as defined in Title 22, C.R.S., for newly constructed permanent educational facilities, for a period of time not to exceed three (3) years. The temporary structures shall be used for school classroom purposes only. To take advantage of this Subsection, the school district/charter school shall file a written application, on a form prescribed by the Community Development Director, for a temporary school structure permit. The application shall include proof of ownership or consent of the property owner; proof of adequate insurance; and information necessary for the siting, design, development, location and permitting of structures as provided in this Title and as determined by the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director may, in his or her sole discretion, grant the permit or deny the application. 
Temporary Uses 
Temporary Use Duration Extension Christmas tree lots 30 days 15 days Agricultural products 90 days No Fireworks stands 30 days No Carnivals, circuses and festivals 10 days No Farmers' markets 120 days 30 days Flea markets 60 days No Promotional events 30 days 15 days  
18.04.140 - Nonconforming Situations. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Section is to address uses, structures, lots, signs and other characteristics of property that were lawfully established but do not conform to one (1) or more provisions of this Title. This Chapter is intended to provide for the health and safety of the public and to reasonably safeguard the investment of property owners. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Legal nonconforming collectively refers to any and all legal nonconforming lots, legal nonconforming signs, legal nonconforming structures and other characteristics of a property that were legally established and that no longer conform to one (1) or more standards of this Title. Examples of other characteristics of a property which may be considered legal nonconforming at the discretion of the City based on current codes include buffer yards, landscaping and required off-street parking. 
    Legal nonconforming lot means a lot of record that has been legally established but no longer meets one (1) or more dimensional standards of this Title. 
    Legal nonconforming sign means a sign that was legal at the time and place it was installed and that no longer meets one (1) or more requirements of Chapter 18.08. 
    Legal nonconforming structure means a building, fence, wall and other structure, that was legal at the time and place they were established but that no longer meets one (1) or more standards of this Title, except those structures deemed to be unsafe or a nuisance as determined by the Building Official based on any applicable codes. 
    Legal nonconforming use means a use that was legally established but would no longer be permitted under current regulations (or that now requires special use approval) in the zone district in which it is located, but may continue provided such use is not discontinued for a period of three (3) or more consecutive months in accordance with Section 18.04.140. 
C.  Burden of proof. The burden of proof regarding whether a use, structure, lot, sign or other characteristic of property is legally established as nonconforming shall be the responsibility of the owner, not the City. The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall make the determination as to whether the evidence is sufficient to consider the property legal nonconforming. Such determination may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the property owner within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice from the Community Development Director by the property owner filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. 
D.  Continuation of nonconforming use, lot sign or structure. Legal nonconforming uses, signs, lots and structures shall be allowed to continue in accordance with the following limitations: 
1.  Expansion of a legal nonconforming use is prohibited. 
2.  A legal nonconforming use, sign, lot or structure which ceases operations or ceases to be occupied for a period of three (3) or more consecutive months shall no longer be considered legal nonconforming and shall be therefore prohibited. 
3.  The use of a property as legal nonconforming use may only be changed to a use permitted by this Title or upon approval of a special use. 
4.  A legal nonconforming use may only be moved to a property in a zoning district in which the use is permitted by this Title or upon approval of a special use. 
5.  Mobile home parks that were lawfully established shall be considered legal nonconforming with the following limitations: 
a.  Such parks shall have in place directory poster and space identification in accordance with Section 18.04.090. 
b.  Mobile homes that are removed from such parks shall only be replaced with mobile homes that comply with all requirements of Section 18.04.090 to the extent practical, as determined by the City, in addition to the requirements of Title 15 of this Code. 
6.  Any enlargement, alteration, or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure that increases the degree of nonconformity shall be prohibited. 
7.  In the event that a legal nonconforming structure is damaged, destroyed or removed, by any means, to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its structural replacement value, such structure shall not be restored or replaced except in conformance with the applicable regulations of this Code. Such value shall be determined by the City based on Weld County Assessor records. The owner may appeal such determination by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk and by submitting an independent, certified real estate appraiser's written opinion of valuation. 
8.  Maintenance, restoration or remodeling projects of legal nonconforming structure that cost twenty-five (25) percent or less of the current fair market value of the structure shall not require any correction to existing nonconforming parking, landscaping or screening/buffering other than what may be required by fire and building codes. The cost of the maintenance, restoration or remodeling shall be as shown on the approved building permit application and the current fair market value of the existing structure shall be based on improvement value as determined by the records of the Weld County Assessor or an appraisal performed by a certified general appraiser licensed to do business in the State of Colorado utilizing the "cost" approach. This appraisal shall be performed at the applicant's expense. The Weld County Assessor's appraisal may be used if not more than twelve (12) months old. 
9.  Maintenance, restoration or remodeling projects that cost more than twenty-five (25) percent, but less than seventy-five (75) percent, of the current fair market value of the structure shall require a corresponding percentage increase in compliance with all design standard requirements of this Code including but not limited to parking, landscaping, paint and signage until the site achieves one hundred (100) percent compliance. For example, if a site has only twenty (20) percent compliance with the codes and the cost of the remodeling is thirty (30) percent of the value of the building, then an additional thirty (30) percent compliance is required for a total of fifty (50) percent. 
10.  Maintenance, restoration or remodeling projects that cost seventy-six (76) percent or greater of the current fair market value of the structure shall require one hundred (100) percent compliance with the design standard requirements of this Code. 
11.  Legal nonconforming signs. Legal nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  A legal nonconforming sign may be altered in a way that does not increase its height or size or change its perimeter shape or location, without bringing the entire sign into conformance, provided that the cost of such alteration is less than fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the sign. A sign or portion of a sign may be altered to change its copy or to decrease its nonconformity. 
b.  In the event that a legal nonconforming sign is damaged, destroyed or removed, by any means, to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its structural replacement value, such sign shall not be restored or replaced except in conformance with the applicable regulations of this Code. Such value shall be determined by the City based on building permit records and/or testimony of sign contractors. 
c.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be moved to a different property in the City unless it is situated on the new property in conformance with the applicable regulations of this Code. 
18.04.150 - Telecommunications. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of the City by establishing telecommunication standards to ensure the quality appearance for the placement, construction and modification of commercial and/or personal wireless service facilities that would ensure the quality and appearance of new or improved developments coinciding with the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Plan required. A site plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and contain the following information: 
1.  A site plan that shows the relative shape, size and location of all existing and proposed transmission structures, guy wires anchors, warning signs, fencing and access restrictions. 
2.  A report by a licensed professional engineer demonstrating compliance with applicable structural standards and the general structural capacity of the proposed facility. 
3.  The number, type and size of antenna that can be accommodated. 
4.  A report that includes the following, if applicable: 
a.  A description of any proposed telecommunications facility including height above grade, materials and color. 
b.  A landscaping and/or visual mitigation plan (to scale) acceptable to the Director of Planning, detailing how screening from the public view will be accomplished, including cross sectional views, as appropriate. 
c.  An erosion control and revegetation plan. 
d.  Each permit application shall be accompanied at the time of filing by a fee as established by City Council by resolution. 
C.  Any decision to deny an application requesting to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
D.  Definitions. 
    Accessory equipment for low-power telecommunications facility means equipment including buildings and cabinets, used to protect and enable radio switching equipment, backup power and other devices, but not including antennas that is necessary for the operation of a low-power telecommunications facility. 
    Antenna means device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals. 
    Antenna tower means a structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including without limitation private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This includes guyed mast, lattice towers, monopole antennas, alternative antenna tower structures and towers taller than ten (10) feet constructed on top of another building, along with any separate building on the lot used to house any supporting electronic equipment. 
    Base station means a structure or equipment, other than a tower, at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes any equipment associated with wireless communications services, including radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems and small-cell networks). The term includes any structure, other than a tower, to which any of the equipment described above is attached. 
    Building roof or wall mounted telecommunications facility means a low-power telecommunication facility where antennae are mounted either on the roof or face of a legally existing building other than a building or structure accessory to a telecommunications facility. Facilities within this category may include micro-cell or repeater facilities. 
    Co-location means locating wireless communications equipment from more than one (1) provider on a single site. 
    Commercial Mobile Radio Service (CMRS) facility , also known as, low-power telecommunication facility, means an unstaffed facility consisting of antennae, equipment and equipment storage shelters used for the reception, switching and/or transmission of wireless telecommunications including, but not limited to, paging, enhanced specialized mobile radio, personal communications services, cellular telephone and similar technologies. These facilities operate at one thousand (1,000) watts or less of effective radiated power and within frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for such purposes. 
    Eligible telecommunications facility request means any request for a land use approval for the modification of an existing tower or base station that involves the collocation of new transmission equipment, the removal of transmission equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment. 
    Equipment storage shelter means structure used for freestanding CMRS facilities or, where necessary, roof or building-mounted facilities to house CMRS equipment. These shelters are not intended for human habitation and typically range between four hundred (400) and nine hundred (900) square feet. 
    Federal Communications Commission (FCC) means the federal agency responsible for licensing and regulating communication providers. The FCC has primary regulatory control over communications providers through its powers to control interstate commerce and to provide a comprehensive national system in accordance with the Federal Communications Act. 
    Freestanding telecommunication facility means a CMRS facility that consists of a stand-alone support structure, antennae, and any associated equipment storage shelter. 
    Lattice tower means a guyed or self-supporting three- or four-sided, open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
    Micro-cell facility means a low-power telecommunications facility used to provide increased capacity in areas of high service demand or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage. 
    Monopole means a structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications equipment. 
    Panel antenna means an antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. 
    Radio tower means a structure for sending and/or receiving an analog or digital communication signal over the air, excepting the standard "satellite dish" under thirty-six-inch diameter. 
    Repeater telecommunications facility means a low-power facility (CMRS) that extends coverage to areas not covered by the originating primary facility. 
    Telecommunications infrastructure means the cables, switches, radio towers and other facilities and equipment that are required to make telecommunications work. 
    Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including without limitation private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
    Whip antenna means an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty (360) degrees, and are typically cylindrical in shape. 
    Wireless communications site means an installation containing the transmitters, receivers and control equipment necessary to connect the mobile telephone system and the conventional wireline telephone network. 
E.  Standards for all low-power telecommunications facilities. 
1.  Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, the standards in Section 18.04.150 apply to all applications of low-power telecommunication facilities. The applicant shall demonstrate to the City, in writing, it meets all applicable standards and provisions of the Code. 
2.  The City encourages co-location of low-power telecommunication facilities to minimize the number of telecommunication sites, however, does not encourage the co-location of a large amount of co-located towers in the same area. 
a.  No low-power telecommunications facility owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a telecommunication competitor from using the same facility or location. Upon request by the City, the owner or operator shall provide evidence why co-location is not possible. 
b.  If a telecommunication competitor attempts to co-locate a facility on an existing or approved telecommunication facility or location, and the parties cannot reach agreement, the City may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both parties to determine the feasibility of co-location. 
3.  Low-power telecommunication facility owners or operators shall verify that the low-power telecommunication facility complies at all times with the current Federal Communications Commission standards for cumulative field measurements of radio frequency power densities, electromagnetic fields and regulations prohibiting localized interference with reception of television and radio broadcasts. 
4.  If the low-power telecommunications facility ceases operating for six (6) consecutive months, the facility owner or operator shall remove it within ninety (90) days. If the facility is not removed in that time, the City will notify the owner, by certified mail, to remove the facility or the City will remove it at the owners expense. 
5.  Any modifications to approved facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Department at least thirty (30) days prior to any modification to increase the wind or weight loading capacity, height or footprint of a tower, and may request copies of plans depicting such modification and other evidence necessary to demonstrate that such modifications are in compliance. 
6.  Low-power mobile radio service telecommunication facilities will comply with the following zone district use standard: 
Zone district Roof and/or building mount Freestanding facility Micro-cell or repeater R-1E SU SU SU R-1 NP NP NP RMH NP NP NP RMFH NP NP NP R-2 NP NP NP R-3 SU NP SU RC SU NP SU C-1 P NP P C-2 P NP P C-3 P P P PUD SU SU P All industrial districts P P P  
P   PERMITTED (use by right). 
NP  NOT PERMITTED. 
SU  SPECIAL USE REVIEW. 
F.  Standards for freestanding telecommunication facilities. 
1.  Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, A freestanding telecommunication facility shall meet the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines: 
a.  The setback for a principal building within the applicable zoning district; 
b.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the facility height, including antennas; or 
c.  The facility height, including antennas, if the facility is in or adjacent to any residentially zoned areas. The City shall consider a facility separated by a street or public right-of-way from a zoning district as adjacent to that zoning district. 
2.  Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, a freestanding telecommunication facility shall meet the following standards to minimize impacts: 
a.  Use existing land forms, vegetation and structures to aid in screening the facility from view or blending in with the surrounding built and natural environment. 
b.  Comply with all applicable landscape regulations. 
c.  Accommodate co-location of facilities unless the City approves an alternative design. 
d.  Design materials, colors of antennas, and their support structures, shall be compatible with the surrounding environments, and monopole support structures shall be thirty (30) inches at the base and tapered to the top, except in the industrial zone districts. Maximum lattice tower width shall be thirty-six (36) inches except in the industrial zone districts. Maximum cross bar length shall be fifteen (15) feet, except in the industrial zone districts. 
e.  No freestanding telecommunication facility over forty (40) feet in height shall be permitted unless approved as a special use in accordance with Section 18.04.106. 
3.  Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, accessory equipment for a freestanding telecommunication facility shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The buildings, shelters, cabinets and other components shall be grouped as closely as technically possible. 
b.  The total footprint coverage area of the applicant's accessory equipment shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
c.  No accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
d.  Design, materials and colors of all structures shall be compatible with structures and vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels, and shall not reduce the parking requirement and landscaped area for other principal uses on the parcel. 
G.  Standard for micro-cell and repeater facilities. Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, micro-cell and repeater facilities must comply with all the standards for free-standing telecommunications facilities, including: 
1.  A micro-cell telecommunications facility or repeater telecommunication facility in a City street, right-of-way or electrical utility easement shall be exempt from the minimum setback requirements. 
2.  The maximum number of antenna per micro-cell telecommunication facility or repeater telecommunication facility shall be four (4) whip and panel antennas and one (1) microwave antenna. 
3.  No whip antenna shall exceed twelve (12) feet in length. 
4.  Panel antennas shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet per micro-cell telecommunication facility or repeater telecommunication facility. 
5.  The maximum diameter of a microwave dish antenna shall not exceed two (2) feet. 
6.  A residential zoned parcel may only have one (1) micro-cell telecommunications facility or repeater telecommunication facility. A building with residential units on a nonresidential zoned parcel may have two (2) micro-cell telecommunication facilities or repeater telecommunication facilities. 
H.  Standards for building wall or roof mounted telecommunication facilities. Except as provided for Section I in this Chapter, building wall or roof mounted telecommunications facilities must comply with the following: 
1.  A building wall mounted telecommunication facility may encroach into a setback a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) feet, but shall not extend over a property line. 
2.  A building roof mounted telecommunication facility, including antennas, shall not exceed the maximum structure height within the applicable zoning district, with the following exceptions for facilities on existing buildings exceeding or within five (5) feet of the height limit. 
a.  Whip antennas shall extend no more than ten (10) feet above the parapet of any roof or the structure to which they are mounted. 
b.  Panel antennas shall extend no more than five (5) feet above the parapet of the roof to which they are mounted. 
c.  Accessory equipment structures shall extend no more than five (5) feet above any parapet of the roof to which they are mounted. 
3.  A building wall mounted telecommunication facility shall adhere to the following design standards to minimize impacts: 
a.  Design materials, colors and location of the facility shall be compatible with the building and wall it is mounted on, and minimize adverse visual impacts. 
b.  Mounting of antennas shall be as flush to the building wall as technically possible and shall not extend above the roof line of the building. 
c.  Maximum area of panel antennas per building face shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per facility or an aggregate total of sixty (60) square feet for all facilities. 
4.  A building roof mounted telecommunication facility shall adhere to the following design standards to minimize impacts: 
a.  Design, materials, colors and location of the facility shall be compatible with the building it is mounted on, and minimize adverse visual impacts. 
b.  Antennas, support structures, accessory equipment and all other roof-mounted appurtenances shall not exceed an aggregate total of twenty-five (25) percent of the building roof area. 
c.  Only one (1) roof-mounted telecommunication facility support structure may extend more than ten (10) feet above the existing building or structure. 
5.  The low-power telecommunication facility shall be mounted on a building wall if feasible, otherwise it may be mounted on the roof. 
6.  A residential zoned parcel or building with residential units may only have one (1) building wall or roof-mounted telecommunication facility. 
7.  Accessory equipment for a building wall or roof-mounted telecommunication facility shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The buildings, shelters, cabinets, and other components shall be grouped as closely as technically possible. 
b.  Total footprint coverage area of the applicant's accessory equipment shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
c.  No structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
d.  Design, materials and colors shall be compatible with structures and vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels, and shall not reduce the parking requirements and landscaped area for other principal uses on the parcel. 
I.  Eligible telecommunications facility requests. 
1.  Applicability. This Subsection applies to all eligible telecommunications facility requests for land use approvals. 
2.  Expedited review. 
a.  An eligible telecommunications facility request shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days of the date of the request. This time period may be tolled only by mutual agreement or where an application is incomplete. 
b.  If the City fails to approve or deny an eligible telecommunications facility request within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted; provided that this automatic approval shall become effective only upon the City's receipt of written notification from the applicant after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) indicating that the application has been deemed granted. 
3.  Application materials. 
a.  An applicant for an eligible telecommunications facility request shall be required to submit only such documentation and information as is reasonably necessary to determine whether a proposed modification would substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible tower or base station. 
b.  The City shall prepare, and from time to time revise, and make available an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the City to consider whether an application would substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible telecommunications facility request. Such information may include, without limitation, whether the project: (1) would result in a substantial change; and (2) violates a generally applicable law, regulation, or other rule reasonably related to public health and safety. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification or collocation. 
4.  Incomplete applications. 
a.  When an application is incomplete, the City shall provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days, clearly and specifically identifying all missing documents or information. 
b.  If an application remains incomplete after a supplemental submission, the City has ten (10) days to once again notify the applicant. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not require the production of documents or information that was not requested in the original notice of incompleteness. 
5.  Review. 
a.  Denial. A decision to deny an eligible telecommunications facility request shall be in writing and shall provide a description of reasons for the denial. 
b.  Approval. 
i.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the City shall approve any eligible telecommunications facility request that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of a tower or base station. 
ii.  The City may approve an eligible telecommunications facility request that substantially changes the physical dimensions of such tower or base station if it complies with the remainder of this Section. 
iii.  The City may condition the approval of any eligible telecommunications facility request on compliance with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety. 
6.  Substantial Change. 
a.  A substantial change in the height of an existing tower or base station occurs as follows: 
i.  For a tower outside of a public right-of-way, when the height of the tower is increased by more than ten (10) percent, or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater. 
ii.  For a tower located in a public right-of-way or for a base station, when the height of the structure increases by more than ten (10) percent or by more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater. 
b.  Changes in height are measured as follows: 
i.  When deployments are separated horizontally, changes in height shall be measured from the original support structure, not from the height of any existing telecommunications equipment. 
ii.  When deployments are separated vertically, changes in height shall be measured from the height of the tower or base station, including any appurtenances, as the tower or base station existed on February 22, 2012. 
c.  A substantial change in the width of an existing tower or base station occurs as follows: 
i.  For a tower outside of public rights-of-way, when the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the tower protrudes from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater. 
ii.  For a tower in public right-of-way or a base station, when the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the structure would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet. 
d.  A substantial change also occurs for an existing tower in a public right-of-way or an existing base station as follows: 
i.  When the change involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if no ground cabinets presently exist; or 
ii.  When the change involves the installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any existing ground cabinets. 
e.  A substantial change also occurs for an existing tower or base station when any of the following exist: 
i.  When the change involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, or more than four (4) new cabinets, whichever is less. 
ii.  When the change entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site. 
iii.  When the change would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure. 
iv.  When the change does not comply with conditions associated with the original siting approval of the construction or modification of the tower, base station or base station equipment. This limitation does not apply if the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in Subsections (6)(a) through (6)(e)(ii) hereof. 
J.  Nonconforming uses and buildings. 
1.  All property within existing developments on the effective date of this Chapter which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered legal nonconforming. 
2.  A micro-cell telecommunication facility or repeater telecommunication facility cannot be constructed on structures or buildings established as legal nonconforming. 
18.04.160 - Special Uses. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to provide for the evaluation of special land uses in order to determine if the use has the potential to adversely affect other land uses, transportation systems, public facilities, or the like, in the surrounding neighborhood thereby ensuring that special uses will not harm the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents. The City Council may disapprove any such request, or may impose such conditions and safeguards as may be required to maintain the intent of this Zoning Code. 
B.  Procedure for special use permits. The following procedure shall be followed by the applicant for a special use permit: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
a.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
b.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
c.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the special use process. 
d.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
e.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
2.  After the preapplication conference, applicants shall submit one (1) copy of a special use application to the Community Development Department. 
3.  City Staff shall review the application for completeness within ten (10) working days of submission. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. If application is substantially different than the proposed application discussed at the preapplication conference, City staff may require an additional preapplication conference to discuss application. 
4.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the application required to be submitted for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. Community Development staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
5.  All special use applications may be submitted to the following departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application: 
(Insert list of referral agencies) 
6.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the special use application as required by staff. 
7.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of the agency receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns. 
8.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the application as needed. The revised application must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of the agency receiving the revised application. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
9.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff shall notify the applicant of the scheduled date for the public hearing and time and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
10.  Public notice prior to the Planning Commission and City Council hearings shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 18.09. 
11.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, referral comments, staff report and public testimony, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, denial, or continue the hearing for additional information or further study. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (C) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria for special use described in Subsection (C) below. 
12.  After the Planning Commission makes a recommendation on the application, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and consider the application at a regular or special meeting within thirty (30) days. The City Council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. Any action on the application shall be made by resolution. Approvals shall be recorded at the office of the Weld County Clerk and Recorder. Approval and any conditions of approval shall "run with the land," and shall apply to subsequent owners of the property, and shall not be transferable to any other property. 
C.  Criteria for special uses. 
1.  All special uses are listed within each zoning district. If a use is proposed that is not defined within this Code and does not reasonably fall within the definition of any defined use in the this Code, the property owner may apply for a special use approval in accordance with this Chapter. 
2.  Criteria. The following criteria shall be used to evaluate special use applications: 
a.  The proposed use is found to be unlikely to harm the health, safety or welfare of the City or its residents. 
b.  The proposed use would benefit the City in terms of employment, tax revenue or other similar effects, as compared to the absence of the proposed use. 
c.  The proposed use shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and shall be compatible with the surrounding area. 
d.  The location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed use shall be compatible with the existing and proposed future land uses within the general area in which the proposed use is to be located and will not create significant noise, traffic or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable or detrimental to other permitted uses in the vicinity. Reasonable conditions may be placed on uses by special review to protect the public health, safety and welfare by mitigating impacts. 
e.  The site shall be physically suitable for the type and intensity of the proposed land use. 
f.  The proposed land use shall not adversely affect traffic flow and parking in the neighborhood. 
g.  The location of other approved special uses in the neighborhood shall be determined, in order to avoid an over-concentration of such uses. 
h.  Mini-storage units shall also comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Setbacks of buildings from all streets shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  A ten-foot-wide buffer area of natural growth, including trees and shrubs approved by the City, shall be installed and maintained along the entire length of any boundary of the development that is adjacent to a residentially zoned district, whether or not such boundary is separated by a street, alley or easement or other right-of-way. Such buffer may, if required by the City, include a six-foot-high screen composed of natural or manmade materials. 
(3)  Landscaping plans must be presented with the application and must be approved by City. Such plans must show the proposed types and locations of all natural plantings, ground coverings, and screening, including the size and number of trees. 
(4)  Architectural design plans and elevations must be presented with the application and must be approved by City. Architectural plans and elevations must indicate the size and locations of all structures including the proposed exterior design and wall and roof coverings of the buildings. Architectural plans will be examined to ensure that the proposed development's features such as height, length, facade, color, etc., are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(5)  No changes shall be made to any approved plans which would alter the character of the building(s) or use of the property without prior approval of the City Council. 
(6)  Exceptions to the mini-storage requirements may be granted provided all of the following criteria are met: 
i.  Such use is found to be compatible with the surrounding area; 
ii.  Such use shall not adversely affect the surrounding area; 
iii.  Such use shall not adversely affect the future development of the area; 
iv.  Due to the proposed geographical location of such use or other physical situation of the land or building, practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship which has not been self-imposed would deprive the owner/tenant of the property of the reasonable use of the site or portion of the site in question; and 
v.  The purpose and intent of this Code is maintained. 
(7)  Miscellaneous conditions within the "C" and "RC" zone districts: 
i.  Within the mini-storage facility premises, uses such as distribution centers, assembly or manufacturing, retail sales or any use other than storage is prohibited, with the exception of the sale or rental of accessory items typically used for moving, including but not limited to boxes, hand-trucks and moving vans. 
ii.  Fully screened, outdoor storage for recreational vehicles, boats, vacant trailers (excluding mobile homes) and similar items that are well maintained and in good condition may be approved as part of the mini-storage unit facility. Plans for such screening must have the approval of the City. The maximum area of such outdoor storage use shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total site. 
i.  Car wash facilities shall also comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Character of the area of the site, including proximity of residential property to the site and proximity of existing car wash facilities; 
(2)  Hours of operation; 
(3)  Presence or absence of a system for reclaiming and reusing water; 
(4)  Building height, including whether the facility would have the capability to service commercial vehicles and/or recreational vehicles (RVs); 
(5)  Site design, including orientation and distance of the wash bays to the nearest street; 
(6)  Any other factors which could serve to mitigate or aggravate the undesirable aspects of car wash facilities. 
j.  Oil and gas facilities. Oil and gas facilities shall only be installed, erected and/or constructed in accordance with Chapter 16.28, Oil and Gas Exploration and Development. Landscaping plans must be presented with the application and must be approved by City. Such plans must show the proposed types and locations of all natural plantings, ground coverings and screening, including the size and number of trees. 
k.  Outdoor Storage shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Reviewed through special use review process. 
(2)  Maximum outdoor storage as a primary use shall be limited to three (3) acres. If parcel is larger than three (3) acres, up to a maximum of three (3) acres may be used for outdoor storage use. The total of all tenant's outdoor storage shall not exceed three (3) acres. 
(3)  Special Use approval shall be for terms no longer than five (5) years; any extension beyond five (5) years shall require a new special use review application and review process. 
(4)  Design standards may be increased as a condition of approval, including but not limited to enhanced screening, landscaping, and limitations on height of material storage. 
(5)  Special Use Review approval may be transferred due to sale or lease of property, subject to storage of same material does not change. 
D.  Business and industrial uses - oil and gas well locations. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Zoning Code, the City Council shall have the power to direct the location and regulate the use and construction of the following: 
a.  Breweries. 
b.  Distilleries. 
c.  Livery stables. 
d.  Blacksmith shops. 
e.  Foundries. 
f.  Slaughterhouses and byproducts plants. 
g.  Packing houses. 
h.  Renderies. 
i.  Tallow candleries. 
j.  Bone factories. 
k.  Soap factories. 
l.  Tanneries. 
m.  Dehydrating plants. 
n.  Dairies. 
o.  Any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment. 
2.  Any business or establishment listed above shall first obtain specific permission from the City Council through the special use process before a building permit may be issued. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for any building not in compliance with setbacks from any oil or gas well or ancillary equipment, as established in Chapters 15.48 and 16.28 of this Code. 
4.  No building permit shall be issued for any building not in compliance with setbacks from any abandoned oil or gas wells as established in Chapters 15.48 and 16.28 of this Code, until and unless the applicant, by clear and convincing evidence, can demonstrate to the City Council that the well has been abandoned and plugged in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations and that the issuance of such permit will not endanger any person or property. The Council may require such independent tests and reports as it deems necessary prior to final consideration of such permit. If a permit is approved, the Council may impose such conditions as it deems necessary or advisable for the protection of persons and property. 
E.  Expiration and Revocation. 
1.  Unless otherwise stated in the approving resolution, all special permits shall be subject to the provisions of Section 18.01.090.B. 
2.  Approval of any special use that is discontinued for three (3) or more consecutive months shall become null and void and such use shall not be allowed to recommence without again obtaining special use approval, unless otherwise stated in the approving resolution. 
3.  If, at any time, the owner or tenant of a property that has received a special use permit fails to comply with any condition of approval, or the application or testimony of an applicant is found to have been false or misleading, or the use differs from that which was approved, or the use causes legitimate complaints from others in the area of the use, the City Council may review the special use approval and may revoke such approval by resolution, after conducting a public hearing on the revocation. Notice of the public hearing shall be the same as is required in this Section for the public hearing on the initial application. 
( Ord. 682-18 ,  1(Exh. A), 2018) 
18.04.170 - Zoning Amendments. 
A.  Initiation. Amendments to the official zoning map may be initiated by: 
1.  Planning Commission; 
2.  City Council; 
3.  City Manager; or 
4.  Any owners of land in the City who wish to have the zoning of land they own changed. 
B.  Application. 
1.  A landowner wishing to have the zoning designation of his or her land changed shall file an application for amendment to the official zoning map with the Community Development Department on such forms provided by the City. 
2.  If the requested zoning includes planned unit development (PUD) zoning, the application shall include a development and plan guide meeting the following requirements: 
a.  The legal description of the area; 
b.  A survey plat showing the outer boundaries of the area and showing elevation contours at two-foot intervals; 
c.  A site plan showing the location of all buildings, signs, streets, lanes, parking areas, parks, open areas, recreational facilities and all other improvements; the site plan shall show the dimensions of all structures, streets, parking areas and recreational facilities, and shall show the distances between structures and boundary lines; 
d.  Preliminary drawings of all buildings, with elevations; 
e.  A landscape plan showing the location of landscaped areas and containing a narrative statement describing how the area will be landscaped; 
f.  A preliminary engineering plan for streets, sidewalks, lanes, utility lines and drainage facilities, including any access points to the PUD; 
g.  An indication of the location, height and size of proposed signs, lighting and advertising devices; 
h.  A narrative statement of how each building and structure will be used, the volume of business expected to be conducted at any commercial or industrial establishment, the hours of business of those establishments, the number of employees expected to work in any commercial or industrial establishment, the number of dwellings units in each building, and all other information calculated to disclose, to the extent possible, the uses to which the area will be put and the impact of those uses on the area and on land adjoining the area; 
i.  A statement of how the co-owned area will be managed, used and maintained, and including a projected budget for a reasonable period of time for the operation and maintenance of such areas; 
j.  A preliminary development schedule. 
C.  Procedures for Zoning Amendments. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
a.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
b.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
c.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the zoning amendment process. 
d.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
e.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
2.  After the preapplication conference, applicants shall submit one (1) copy of zoning amendment application to the Community Development Department. 
3.  City staff shall review the application for completeness within ten (10) working days of submission. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. If application is substantially different than the proposed application discussed at the preapplication conference. City staff may require an additional preapplication conference to discuss application. 
4.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the application required to be submitted for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. Community Development staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
5.  The Community Development Department shall maintain and may amend from time to time a list of referral agencies. All zoning amendment applications may be submitted to the departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application. 
6.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the application as required by staff. 
7.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of the agency receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns. 
8.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the application as needed. The revised application must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of the agency receiving the revised application. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
9.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff shall notify the applicant of the scheduled date for the public hearing and time and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
10.  Public notice shall be provided prior to the Planning Commission and City Council hearings in compliance with Chapter 18.09. 
11.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, referral comments, staff report and public testimony, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, deny, or continue the hearing for additional information or further study. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria described in Subsection (D) below. 
12.  After the Planning Commission makes a recommendation on the application, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and consider the application at a regular or special meeting within thirty (30) days. Applying the criteria in Subsection (D) below, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the zoning amendment application. Action on the application shall be made by resolution. 
13.  If the Council decides to rezone the property, Council shall adopt an ordinance rezoning the property. To this Chapter will be attached the development plan and guide, if planned development zoning is proposed. 
D.  Criteria. The Planning Commission and City Council, in review of zoning amendment application, shall consider the following factors: 
1.  A need exists for the proposal; 
2.  The particular parcel of ground is indeed the correct site for the proposed development; 
3.  There has been an error in the original zoning; or 
4.  There have been significant changes in the area to warrant a zone change; 
5.  Adequate circulation exists and traffic movement would not be impeded by development; 
6.  Additional municipal service costs will not be incurred which the City is not prepared to meet; 
7.  There are minimal environmental impacts or impacts can be mitigated; 
8.  The proposal is consistent with the Evans Comprehensive Plan maps, goals and policies; and 
9.  There is adequate waste and sewage disposal, water, schools, parks and recreation, and other services to the proportional degree necessary due to the impacts created by the proposed land uses. 
18.04.180 - Concurrent zoning and annexation. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure to process annexation and zoning requests concurrently. In all proceedings for the annexation of territory to the City, the Council shall require concurrent zoning of the same, and no territory shall be annexed unless the zoning is established immediately thereafter. No new annexations of territory that will require concurrent zoning which includes any residential use will be made to the City unless two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the entire Council approves the annexation ordinance. 
B.  Filing of petitions. Petitions for annexation and for annexation elections shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall refer the petitions to the City Council as a communication. 
C.  Review of petitions. 
1.  Upon receipt of the petitions, the City Council, without undue delay, may (1) determine that the petitions do not substantially comply with the requirements of Subsection 31-12-107(l)(a), C.R.S., which will require that no further action be required; (2) determine that the petitions do substantially comply with the requirements of Subsection 31-12-107(l)(a), C.R.S., which will require that the City Council establish by resolution the date, time and place that the City Council will hold a public hearing not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the resolution setting the hearing, unless otherwise required by state law; or (3) table any action on the annexation petitions for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall not accept for review any zoning proposal or applications for real property proposal or applications for real property located outside of the City boundaries until the City Council has determined that annexation petitions describing the property substantially comply with the requirements of Subsection 31-12-107(l)(a), C.R.S., or the City Council has tabled any action on the annexation petitions for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
18.04.190 - Variances. 
A.  Intent. Variances are deviations from the dimensional requirements, design or numerical requirements or limitations and other provisions of this Title, not related to use of the property, that would not be contrary to public interest when, owing to special circumstances or conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions of this Title would result in undue and unnecessary hardship. Variances shall only be granted in accordance with the terms of this Section. 
B.  Limitations on variances. 
1.  Applications for variances from certain dimensional requirements of this Title. Authorized variances shall be limited to: 
a.  Minimum area of lot; 
b.  Minimum width of lot; 
c.  Maximum height of structures and fences; 
d.  Minimum front yard setback; 
e.  Minimum side yard setback; 
f.  Minimum rear yard setback; 
g.  Minimum off-street parking requirements; 
h.  Sign setbacks, height or placement on a lot or building. 
2.  City shall not consider any variance request for a use not permitted within a zone district. 
C.  Procedure for variance requests. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
a.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
b.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
c.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the zoning amendment process. 
d.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
e.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
2.  Applicants shall submit one (1) copy of the application to the Community Development Department. 
3.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. If application is substantially different than the proposed application discussed at the preapplication conference, City staff may require an additional preapplication conference to discuss application. 
4.  The staff will review the application and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the staff and revise the application as needed. 
5.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff shall notify the applicant of the scheduled hearing date and time and prepare a staff report for the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
6.  Public notice shall be provided prior to the Board hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.09. 
7.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall evaluate the application, staff report and public testimony, and continue the hearing for additional information or further study, recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Board of Zoning Appeals' recommendation shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria for variances described in Subsection (D) below. 
8.  After the Board of Zoning Appeals makes a recommendation on the application, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and consider the application at a regular or special meeting within thirty (30) days. Applying the criteria in Subsection (D) below, City Council shall grant the requested variance, grant a variance differing from the request or deny the variance. The City Council may place conditions on such approval. All actions on the application shall be made by written resolution. 
D.  Criteria for a variance. 
1.  All of the following circumstances must be determined to be true in order to to approve a variance: 
a.  Approval of the variance would not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of any person; 
b.  The grant of variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the parcel, building or structure; 
c.  Literal interpretation and enforcement of the terms and provisions of this Title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other parcels in the same zoning district and would cause the applicant unnecessary hardship, as distinguished from mere inconvenience. In determining whether an applicant's rights would be deprived, the Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Council shall consider whether either of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  There are special conditions and circumstances that are unique to the parcel, building or structure, that are not applicable to other parcels, structures or buildings in the same zone district and that do not result from the actions of the applicant; or 
(2)  Granting the variance will not confer upon the Applicant any special privilege denied by the Evan Comprehensive Plan and the terms of this Title to other parcels, buildings or structures, in the same zone district. 
d.  Such practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship have not been unreasonably self-imposed by the applicant. 
E.  Duration, Expiration and Revocation. 
1.  Unless otherwise stated in the approving resolution, all variance approvals not exercised within six (6) months from the date of the approving resolution shall become null and void. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided by the City Council, all variances shall be valid for the duration of the use or activity and such variances run with the land, not the owner. When the activity or use terminates, or is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be violating the allowances permitted by the City Council, the variance shall terminate. 
3.  If, at any time, the owner or tenant of a property that has received a variance fails to comply with any condition of approval, or the application or testimony of an applicant is found to have been false or misleading, or the Applicant's actions differ from that which was approved, the City Council may review the variance approval and may revoke such approval by resolution, after conducting a public hearing on the revocation. Notice of the public hearing shall be the same as is required in this Section for the public hearing on the initial application. 
CHAPTER 18.05 - Site Plan and Plot Plan Regulations 

18.05.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this Chapter to promote orderly and sound development standards as they apply to the City. Site development standards are intended to enhance and protect the community's natural as well as manmade environments. Site plan approval is needed for a building permit for all multi-family, commercial and industrial developments as well as parks, open space and trails. 
18.05.020 - Site plan process. 
    The requirements as set forth in this Section may be waived or modified as determined by the City Manager or his or her designee based on the size of the proposed land area to be developed and the intensity of development proposed by the applicant. 
A.  Preapplication Conference. 
1.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
2.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
3.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is then to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the site plan process. 
4.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
5.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
B.  Sketch Plan. 
1.  If the property to be developed is larger than three (3) acres or the proposed building will be greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the applicant will need to bring a sketch plan to the pre-application conference. The sketch plan shall be at least eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches in size and include: 
a.  Lot dimensions. 
b.  Building location and dimensions. 
c.  Parking information including number of proposed spaces and location. 
d.  Access points to adjacent streets. 
e.  Location of both existing and proposed utilities and connections. 
f.  Proposed landscaping location and description. 
g.  A visual representation and written description of the proposed architectural details, including signs and lighting. 
h.  A written description of the proposed development. 
C.  Application requirements. After a pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department one (1) copy of the site plan application and all supporting documentation in paper and one (1) electronic copy of all submitted documents, either via email, CD or flash drive. Included in the submission shall be a narrative that will enable the City staff to evaluate the impacts of the development on the City and include the following information: 
1.  Soils description and limitations. 
2.  A statement of any known hazards and other important environmental conditions present on the property. 
3.  Floodplain information. 
4.  A description of all structures to be built on the site, including size, quantity, use and the number of units per structure. 
5.  A statement explaining the phasing of the development. 
6.  Complete listing of landscape material costs and installation costs. 
7.  Evidence of current ownership, acceptable to the City Attorney, such as a copy of an updated title policy or commitment, current within thirty (30) days. 
8.  A list of all landowners and addresses within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property. 
9.  If the use is nonresidential, the number of employees and the type of activity shall be specified. If the use is residential, the type of units and the number of each unit to be built shall be specified. 
10.  For all commercial, industrial and multifamily applications, an economic impact report describing the impacts of the development on City services and tax base must be submitted. If the application is part of a previously approved PUD and as part of the PUD approval process there was an economic impact report submitted then no report is necessary. If there was not an economic impact report submitted as part of a PUD approval process then an economic impact report is required. 
11.  If there are any easements or public utilities on the property the applicant shall be responsible for submitting all plans for review and comment to the appropriate entity. The applicant shall submit all comments from easement holders and public utilities to the staff. 
12.  If a neighborhood meeting is conducted, the information from the neighborhood meeting shall be submitted. 
D.  City Staff shall review the application for completeness within ten (10) working days of submission. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. If application is substantially different than the proposed application discussed at the preapplication conference, City staff may require an additional preapplication conference to discuss application. 
E.  Review and referral process. 
1.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the sketch plan required to be submitted for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all plan exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. Community Development staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
2.  The Community Development Department shall maintain and may amend from time to time a list of referral agencies. All sketch plan applications may be submitted to such departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application: 
3.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) working days of the agency receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) working days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns. 
4.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the plan as needed. The revised plan must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) working days of the agency receiving the revised plan. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
F.  After the application is deemed complete and the process described in this section has been completed, the Community Development Department shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
G.  Post approval actions. 
1.  Denial of a site plan by City staff may be appealed to the City Council. Written notice of an appeal must be received by the City within ten (10) days of the date of staff's decision. 
2.  Upon final approval by the City, the applicant shall submit two (2) original Mylars of the approved site plan to the City to be signed, then to the Weld County Clerk and Recorder's office for recording. 
18.05.030 - Site plan map standards. 
    The site plan map, required for all application under this Chapter, shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall provide the following information: 
A.  Title of project. 
B.  North arrow, scale (no greater than 1" = 50') and date of preparation. 
C.  Vicinity map showing aerial photos. 
D.  Address of project. 
E.  Legal description of property. 
F.  Name, address, email and phone number of property owner. 
G.  Name, address, email and phone number of person or firm responsible for plan (applicant). 
H.  Lot size (square footage). 
I.  Bearings and distances of all lot lines. 
J.  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
K.  Parking plan showing all spaces, landscaping and dimensions including required accessible parking. 
L.  Existing and proposed paved areas and sidewalks on the site and in the adjacent rights-of-way, all dimensioned, showing how pedestrians will have access to the site and buildings. 
M.  Gathering areas for people. 
N.  Existing and proposed curb cuts on the site and in the adjacent rights-of-way (on both sides of perimeter streets), all dimensioned. 
O.  Existing and proposed two-foot contours. 
P.  Existing waterways on or adjacent to the site. 
Q.  Footprint (including roof overhangs and eaves, decks, balconies, outside stairs and landings) of all proposed structures and their use with their dimensions and locations noted with respect to the property lines. 
R.  Existing structures and their use. 
S.  Square footage of the proposed building and the footprint of the proposed building. 
T.  Proposed structure height. 
U.  For commercial and industrial uses, the type of activity and number of employees. 
V.  For multi-family residential, the number of residential units and bedrooms per unit. 
W.  Location of proposed signs and lights. 
X.  A completed sign permit, including specifications for the signs and lights, including type, height and general conformance to the Code. For commercial and industrial uses, a photometric plan prepared by a qualified electrical or lighting engineer shall be submitted that depicts all lighting fixtures and the light spread (in foot-candles) of these fixtures across the site to all property boundaries. 
Y.  Proposed traffic controls and striping for parking areas (all lanes, driveways and parking spaces must be dimensioned). 
Z.  Trash disposal areas and enclosures including specifications for enclosures. 
AA.  Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer service connections and tap sizes (including those for irrigation systems). 
BB.  Location and size of water and sewer lines to which the service connections will be or are made. 
CC.  Location and size of water meters. 
DD.  Location and size of backflow-prevention devices. 
EE.  Indication of how and where perimeter drain will drain (if one exists). 
FF.  Location of existing electrical lines and poles on or adjacent to the site. 
GG.  Location of proposed electrical service connection and meter location. 
HH.  Location of electric transformer. 
II.  Location of all fire hydrants. If none exist on site, note distance and direction of the closest hydrant adjacent to the site within three hundred (300) feet. 
JJ.  Location of detention/retention areas and storm sewer infrastructure with the required drainage easements. 
KK.  The distance from the proposed building or structure to adjacent lot lines, easements and adjacent structures. 
LL.  Certificate blocks for signatures of owner, engineer, surveyor and City approval, as applicable on all maps. 
18.05.040 - Review criteria. 
    The following criteria shall be used to determine acceptance and possible approval of a site plan: 
A.  All of the information required on a site plan is shown. 
B.  The lot size and lot dimensions are consistent with what is shown on the approved final plat, if applicable. 
C.  No buildings or structures infringe on any easements. 
D.  The proposed site grading is consistent with the requirements of the current City of Evans Master Drainage Plan. 
E.  The use, density and dimensions shown conform to the requirements as set forth in the appropriate zoning or to the approved PUD requirements. 
F.  The applicable design principles and development standards have been adequately addressed and the proposed improvements are in conformance. 
G.  All economic concerns regarding impact to City services have been addressed appropriately. 
18.05.050 - Site plans within approved planned unit developments. 
A.  Site plan approval for properties and projects within and approved PUD are required unless a development agreement states otherwise to ensure that the approved design standards within the PUD are met. 
B.  The review process for site plans within an approved PUD shall follow Section 18.25.020 with the addition below. 
1.  In addition to a written and graphic form how the proposed structure is consistent with all applicable City plans, regulations and standards, the applicant shall include information on how the development meets the PUD standards. 
18.05.060 - Amendments to approved site plans. 
A.  Minor variations in the location of structures, improvements, or open space areas caused by engineering or other unforeseen difficulties may be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director. Such changes shall not exceed ten (10) percent of any measurable standard or modify the use, character or density of an approved site plan. All plans so modified shall be revised to show the authorized changes and shall become a part of the permanent records of the City. 
B.  Changes to approved site plans that exceed the ten (10) percent threshold, or other major modifications (such as changes in building size or footprint, relocation of access points, changes to required parking, etc.), shall be considered as a new site plan application. A complete site plan application shall be prepared and submitted in compliance with the requirements set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  For remodels and amendments to existing structures and properties without an approved site plan, those properties must also adhere to Section 18.04.140.D. regarding maintenance, restoration and remodeling of legal nonconforming structures. 
18.05.070 - Plot plans for new single-family dwellings and duplexes. 
A.  A plot plan is needed in order to apply for a building permit for all new single-family dwellings and duplexes, whether or not the property is located within an approved subdivision or PUD. The plot plan shows where the proposed building or structure will be located on the lot as well as the architectural design of the structure so that the City can make sure that the proposed location will be in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
B.  Plot plan application. 
1.  Applicants shall submit the land use application form along with a plot plan map which shall provide the following information: 
a.  Title of project. 
b.  North arrow, scale (1" = 20' or as approved by the City) and date of preparation. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
d.  Lot number, block number and name of subdivision. 
e.  Lot size (square footage). 
f.  Bearings and distances of all lot lines. 
g.  Existing easements on the lot. 
h.  Footprint of the proposed building or structure, dimensioned. 
i.  Square footage of the proposed building and the footprint of the proposed building. 
j.  Distance from the proposed building or structure to all lot lines. 
k.  All existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
l.  Driveway. 
m.  Existing and/or proposed water and sewer service lines on the lot. 
n.  Elevations of: 
(1)  The finished floor for the house and garage. 
(2)  The ground ten (10) feet away from the house and garage. 
o.  Height of all proposed buildings. 
p.  The lot corners. 
q.  Street trees (right-of-way landscaping). 
r.  Demonstrate in written and/or graphic form how the proposed structure is consistent with the applicable design standards of both the City and a PUD if applicable. 
s.  Drainage information. Provide the City with information regarding how the lot will drain. 
C.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. Staff will review the application for compliance with all applicable plans, standards and regulations and the criteria in Subsection D below. Staff shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
D.  The plot plan must meet the following review criteria: 
1.  All of the information needed on a plot plan is shown. 
2.  The lot size and lot dimensions are consistent with what is shown on the approved final plat. 
3.  No buildings or structures infringe on any easements. 
4.  The proposed site grading is consistent with FHA standards (if insured by FHA) otherwise it shall meet City's approval. 
5.  The density and dimensions shown conform with the City's density and dimensional standards or the approved PUD requirements. 
6.  The applicable design standards and regulations have been met for both the City and the PUD if applicable, including but not limited to architecture, size and landscaping. 
CHAPTER 18.06 - Subdivisions 

18.06.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the regulations set out in this Chapter include: 
A.  To assist orderly, efficient and integrated development; 
B.  To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents; 
C.  To ensure conformance of land subdivision plans with the public improvement plans of the city, Weld County, the State and other public agencies; 
D.  To ensure coordination of municipal public improvement plans and programs; 
E.  To encourage well planned subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and improvements; 
F.  To improve land survey monuments and records by establishing standards for surveys and plats; 
G.  To safeguard the interests of the public, the property owner and the subdivider; 
H.  To secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards; 
I.  To prevent population congestion; 
J.  To protect natural vegetation and scenic areas; 
K.  To prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of surface and subsurface water; 
L.  To prevent flood damage to persons and properties, and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood-control projects; 
M.  To restrict building on flood lands, shorelands, areas covered by poor soils or in areas poorly suited for building or construction; 
N.  To prevent loss and injury from landslides, mudflows and other geologic hazards; 
O.  To implement the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
18.06.020 - Compliance with provisions required. 
    Whoever divides or participates in the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other division of land for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, whether residential, industrial, commercial, business or other use, shall make the transaction subject to the provisions of this Title, and a plat therefore must be submitted to and accepted by the City according to the terms as set forth in this Title. The terms hereof shall also include and refer to any division of land previously subdivided or platted. 
18.06.030 - Acceptance of dedicated lands. 
    Approval of a subdivision by the City Council shall not constitute an acceptance by the City of the roads, streets, alleys or other public lands for maintenance, as indicated for dedication on the plat. The dedication of any of these lands for public use of any nature within the City shall be accepted by the City only by specific action of the Council. 
18.06.040 - Filing or recording of plats prior to approval. 
    It is unlawful to file or record a plat of a subdivision of land with the City Clerk and the Weld County Clerk and Recorder until the plat is approved the City Council and signed by duly authorized representative of the Planning Commission and Council. 
18.06.050 - General Provisions. 
A.  Description of the subdivision process. 
1.  The three (3) steps required to obtain approval of a subdivision are: (1) sketch plan-a review of the feasibility of the project including conceptual design, legal ability to obtain water and sanitation, location of geologic hazards, identification of environmentally sensitive areas and wildlife habitat areas, locations of parks, schools and open space, source of required services, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and conformance with the Evans Comprehensive Plan and zoning requirements; (2) preliminary plan-a review of preliminary technical engineering; and (3) final plat-a review of all final engineering and construction plans, execution of subdivision agreements, provision of a letter of credit or cash to secure the construction of the public improvements described in the subdivision agreement, and other legal requirements. 
2.  Each step is a distinct process involving the submittal of an application, an application fee, required plans and reports, referrals of the proposal to other agencies and public hearings/meetings. At each step of the process, the level of design and engineering increases in order to relieve the applicant from major and potentially unnecessary expenses in situations that may require a redesign and therefore, a revision of expensive engineering or planning reports. Approval at any step in the process does not ensure approval at the next step. 
3.  The sketch plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission at a public hearing prior to submittal of the preliminary plan. The sketch plan and preliminary plan processes may be combined upon the prior approval of the Community Development Director based upon, but not limited, to the following factors: design, size, public concern, public facilities, services, access and transportation network. The preliminary plan and final plat shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council. 
4.  Denial of a sketch plan by the Planning Commission may be appealed to City Council. Written notice of an appeal must be received by the City within ten (10) days of the date of Planning Commission's decision. 
B.  The applicant or representative is responsible for understanding the requirements and procedures contained in this Title, the Evans Comprehensive Plan, applicable zoning regulations and for attending all Planning Commission and City Council hearings/meetings at which the application is considered. Failure to attend the hearings/meetings may result in the request being denied or tabled and a new hearing/meeting date scheduled. The applicant is responsible for submitting the information requested by staff, for the review of the proposal, and for posting or publishing all public notices as required. 
C.  The applicant may withdraw an application at any phase of the process upon submittal of a written request to the Community Development Department. Application fees will be refunded only when the withdrawal request is submitted prior to the mailing of the referral packets. 
D.  Any application for subdivision that becomes inactive, whereby the applicant is required to submit additional information or request a hearing date and has failed to do so, for a period of more than six (6) months, shall become void, and the resubmittal of a new application and fees shall be required to pursue the subdivision request. The Community Development Director may grant no more than two (2) extensions of time, of no more than three (3) months each, upon a written request by the applicant. After five (5) months, the staff planner shall notify the applicant in writing that the application will become void within thirty (30) days. After thirty (30) days, provided the applicant has not submitted the required additional information or requested a hearing date, the staff planner shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is void. This provision shall apply to all applications on file with the City upon the effective date of adoption and any application thereafter. 
E.  Inactive subdivisions. Any subdivision which has received approval by the City Council for a period of time in excess of three (3) years prior and for which no public improvements have been constructed or secured within the boundaries of the subdivision, shall be required to submit an amended plat which complies with the requirements of this Title in effect at the time of the amendment, with Section (Plat amendment) of this Chapter, and with the required subdivision agreement. No building permits shall be issued until the plat amendment and new subdivision agreement have been approved by the City Council. 
18.06.060 - Preapplication Conference. 
A.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
B.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
C.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the subdivision process. 
D.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
E.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
18.06.070 - Sketch plan. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  The intent of the sketch plan is to examine the feasibility of a project including review of conceptual design, legal ability to obtain water and sanitation, location of geologic hazards, identification of environmentally sensitive areas and wildlife habitat areas, and conformance with the Evans Comprehensive Plan, zoning requirements and requirements of this Title. A sketch plan shall not create parcels that do not meet zoning standards. 
2.  The intent of the sketch plan is to provide a conceptual layout of the subdivision. Applicants are encouraged to include as large an area as practicable in a sketch plan submittal in order to plan road connections, open space connections, adequate park facilities and utility extensions for a larger area rather than limiting review of these items to only the area that may be final platted. 
B.  Prerequisites. Prior to submitting a sketch plan application, the applicant must meet the requirement of Section 18.06.060 (preapplication conference) and is encouraged to meet with other referral agencies or homeowners' associations to identify potential issues and ways to address these issues. The preapplication conference may be waived by the Community Development Director. If not waived, an application for a sketch plan will not be considered complete until the preapplication conference has occurred. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  Subdividers shall submit one (1) copy of a sketch plan application to the Community Development Department. 
2.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. 
3.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the sketch plan required to be submitted for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all plan exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. Community Development staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
4.  All sketch plan applications may be submitted to referral departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application. 
5.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the sketch plan application as required by staff. 
6.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns. 
7.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the plan as needed. The revised plan must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of receiving the revised plan. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
8.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff shall notify the applicant of the scheduled date and time for the public hearing and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
9.  The applicant is responsible for providing public notice prior to the Planning Commission hearing in compliance with the public notice requirements in Chapter 18.09. 
10.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, referral comments, staff report and public testimony, and approve, approve with conditions, continue for additional information or further study or deny the sketch plan. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria for sketch plan described in Subsection (D) below. 
D.  Criteria for a sketch plan. The sketch plan shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the goals and policies of the City of Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed subdivision complies with this Chapter and all other applicable engineering and design regulations and standards. 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that all public notice requirements have been met. 
E.  General Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Complete land use application. 
2.  A copy of the recorded warranty deed and title commitment or updated title commitment current within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
3.  A notarized letter of authorization from the landowner permitting a representative to process the application. 
4.  Existing site conditions and description of proposed development. 
    This narrative shall describe conditions of the site, and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the drawings required in Sections 18.06.070.E.6 and 18.06.070.E.5, and shall include information on existing covenants and land characteristics such as, but not limited to, floodplains, hazard areas, economically recoverable minerals, soils and existing vegetation, and information describing the development proposal, such as number of residential lots or dwelling units, typical lot width and depth, price ranges and proposed utilities and street improvements. 
5.  Drawing and layout for sketch plan. 
a.  The sketch plan may be a freehand drawing at suitable scale (not less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet) in a legible medium, and shall clearly show the following: 
(1)  Topographic contours (from U.S.G.S. maps); 
(2)  The proposed layout of streets and lots in relation to topographic conditions and natural landscape features on the site; 
(3)  The proposed location and extent of major open spaces and public sites; 
(4)  General locations of present and proposed utility easements and installations; 
(5)  Proposed land uses; and 
(6)  Indication of building types, with approximate location of major buildings exclusive of single-family residential dwellings. 
b.  Variations from the scale requirement of the sketch plan (one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet) will be acceptable in the case of large subdivisions, provided the plans and design are clearly legible. The plan generally shall include north point, name of the subdivision, U.S.G.S. township, range, section, and quarter section. In the case of large subdivisions requiring more than two (2) sheets at such a scale, a total area plan showing the total area on a single sheet at an appropriate scale shall also be submitted. 
6.  Location map. 
a.  The location map may be prepared on a zoning map, and shall indicate clearly the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subdivision's boundaries. The map shall show: 
(1)  Existing development, including major streets, existing public sewers, public water supply and storm drainage systems; 
(2)  Community facilities, such as schools and parks; 
(3)  Zoning on and adjacent to the tract. 
b.  The location map shall include a title, scale (not less than one (1) inch to six hundred (600) feet), total acreage of the tract, north arrow, and date. 
7.  The proposal for assignment of water rights or payment of cash in lieu of water rights is required as specified in Chapter 13.08 of this Code. 
F.  Action on sketch plan. 
1.  All actions on a sketch plan application shall be by resolution and contain the specific reasons for the action. 
2.  Denial by the Planning Commission of a sketch plan may be appealed to the City Council. Written notice of an appeal must be received by the City within ten (10) days of the date of Planning Commission's decision. 
G.  Expiration of approval. 
1.  The sketch plan shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, unless stated otherwise in such approval or unless a preliminary plan has been approved for a portion of the area covered by the sketch plan. In such event the sketch plan approval for the remainder of the area shall be effective for one (1) year following preliminary plan approval. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time, of no more than one (1) year, upon a written request by the applicant prior to the expiration of the one-year period. 
2.  An extension request shall include a fee and a narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines, listing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, any changes to the Evans Comprehensive Plan or this Title that have occurred since approval of the plan as these changes affect the plan and the anticipated time schedule for completing the platting process. Additional review of the plan may occur resulting in additional conditions as applicable. 
18.06.080 - Preliminary plan. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  The purpose of the preliminary plan is to review the technical requirements, design standards and improvement requirements of the City ensuring that the standards imposed on the proposed subdivision can be met. Additionally, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall review the proposal for site planning characteristics and compatibility with adjoining land uses. The detailed review at this stage will help determine if the plan complies with zoning requirements, circulation patterns, desired open space and other applicable plans, standards and regulations. 
2.  Applicants are encouraged to include as large an area as practicable in a preliminary plan submittal in order to plan road connections, open space connections, adequate park facilities and utility extensions for a larger area. 
B.  Prerequisite. The preliminary plan shall be in substantial compliance with the approved sketch plan, as determined by the Community Development Director. If not, the applicant shall resubmit the sketch plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of a preliminary plan application to the Community Development Department. 
2.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal or preliminary plan that is inconsistent with the approved sketch plan shall not be processed. 
3.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the preliminary plan required for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all plan exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. The planning staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
4.  The services and facilities provided by the referral agencies below shall be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as a factor in approval of the preliminary plan. The criteria for evaluating sufficiency of the services that must be satisfied for the approval of the plan shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the City Council as a part of any referral response. All preliminary plan applications may be submitted to referral departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application. 
5.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the preliminary plan as required by staff. 
6.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. Referring agencies will provide the Planning Commission and City Council with a summary of any capacity evaluation study. The summary will include an explanation of the agency's assumptions regarding available capacity. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns prior to the end of the referral period. 
7.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the plan as needed. The revised plan must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of receiving the revised plan. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
8.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff planner shall notify the applicant of the scheduled hearing date and time and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
9.  The applicant is responsible for providing public notice prior to the Planning Commission hearing in compliance with the public notice requirements in Chapter 18.09. 
10.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, referral comments, staff report and public testimony, and make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with conditions, deny the preliminary plan or continue for additional information or for further study. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented, and compliance with the criteria for a preliminary plan described in Subsection (D) below. 
11.  Following the recommendation by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and consider the application at a regular or special meeting within thirty (30) days. 
12.  The applicant shall be responsible for providing public notice prior to the City Council hearing in compliance with the public notice requirements in Chapter 18.09. 
13.  The City Council shall evaluate the preliminary plan, staff report, referral agency comments, the Planning Commission recommendation and public testimony, and shall approve, conditionally approve, continue for additional information or for further study, remand to the Planning Commission or deny the preliminary plan. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The City Council's action shall be based on the evidence presented, and compliance with the criteria for a preliminary plan described in Subsection (D) below. 
14.  The Planning Commission and the City Council shall consider the recommendations received from the agencies named in this Section. The Planning Commission and the City Council are authorized to deny a preliminary plan if such plan is deemed to not be in conformity with the standards or intent of these regulations, the zoning ordinance and the Evans Comprehensive Plan; or is deemed to create significant adverse impacts to the public served by the agencies named in this Section; or if inadequate capacity exists and cannot be reasonably provided or anticipated in facilities provided by the agencies named in this Section to serve the proposed development. The Planning Commission and City Council should also consider the impact of any denial on special improvement districts and metro districts. 
D.  Criteria for Preliminary Plan. 
1.  The preliminary plan shall comply with all of the following standards: 
a.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the goals and policies of the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  The proposed subdivision complies with this Title and all other applicable engineering and design regulations and standards. 
c.  The applicant has demonstrated that all public notice requirements have been met. 
d.  Will be served by a public water system and will not create an unreasonable burden in the existing water supply; 
e.  Will be served by a public sanitation system that will not result in water pollution. In making this latter determination, the Planning Commission and Council shall consider the applicable health and water resources department regulations; 
f.  Will not cause the following: 
(1)  Soil erosion or a reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result; 
(2)  Air pollution. In making this determination, they shall consider the elevation of the land above sea level, land topography, prevailing winds or the absence thereof, local and regional air sheds, increase in sources or quantity of emission as well as quality of such, and such other items as are deemed pertinent; 
(3)  Cause unreasonable street or highway congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the streets or highways, existing or proposed; 
(4)  Cause unreasonable burden on the ability of a school district to provide educational services; 
(5)  Place an unreasonable burden on the ability of the City to provide water, sewage, fire, police, hospital, solid waste disposal and other services; 
(6)  Have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas; 
(7)  Have an undue adverse effect on wildlife and their habitat, and open space. 
E.  General Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Completed land use application. 
2.  A narrative outlining the proposal. 
3.  A copy of the recorded warranty deed and title commitment or updated title commitment current within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
4.  A notarized letter of authorization from the landowner permitting a representative to process the application. 
5.  Drawing requirements - data to be submitted. 
a.  The preliminary plan may consist of one (1) or more sheets, depending on the size of the subdivision. It shall meet the minimum design standards set forth in Section 18.07.020. 
b.  A workmanlike execution of the plan shall be made in every detail. A poorly drawn or illegible plan is sufficient cause for its rejection. 
c.  The following data shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan submission. Note: Any deviation from required scale and format of plans and maps shall be allowed only upon permission or requirement of the Planning Commission in the sketch plan review. 
(1)  A vicinity map for the proposed subdivisions, and for a one-half-mile perimeter area of the proposed subdivision at one (1) inch equals six hundred (600) feet (1" = 600') scale, showing: 
i.  Location of the subdivision as a part of some larger subdivision or tract of land, and by reference to permanent survey monuments, with a tie to a section corner or a quarter-section corner; 
ii.  Existing streets, highways, roads and railroads; 
iii.  Existing land uses: subdivisions; utilities (lines, buildings, easements); buildings and structures, etc.; 
iv.  Existing zoning; 
v.  School district; 
vi.  Water district; 
vii.  Fire district; 
viii.  Sanitation district; 
ix.  Additional information as specified by the Planning Commission in the sketch plan review; 
x.  Date of preparation, map scale, and north sign; and 
(2)  Development plan maps. 
i.  An existing features map (twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch, black-on-white or blue-on-white prints at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100'): 
1.  Outer boundary. 
a.  Existing topographic contours at two-foot intervals for predominant ground slopes within the tract between level and five-percent grade, and five-foot contours for predominant ground slopes within the tract over five (5) percent grade. Elevations shall be based on National Geodetic Survey sea level data. 
b.  Location, by survey, of streams, washes, canals, irrigation laterals, private ditches, culverts, lakes or other water features, including direction of flow, water level elevations and typical depths, location and extent of areas subject to flooding by a one-hundred-year storm. 
c.  A traverse map of the monumented perimeter of the proposed subdivision, along with all survey notes of subdivision perimeter, and copies of all monument records. The traverse shall have an error of closure of not greater than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). A survey tie to the state coordinate system or other permanent marker established by the city surveyor is required, if practical. 
d.  Underground water tables (include profile showing annual high water level). 
e.  Wooded areas. 
f.  Existing buildings, easements, telephone lines, gas lines, power lines and other features located on the subdivision and within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries. 
g.  Other, as specified by the Planning Commission in the sketch plan review. 
h.  North arrow, date. 
i.  Names and addresses of the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision, and the engineer and surveyor, both of whom shall be licensed by the State of Colorado Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
ii.  A proposed development map, twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100') scale. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  Name of subdivision; 
b.  North arrow, date and scale; 
c.  Name and address of subdivider and owner; 
d.  Name and address of engineer or designer responsible; 
e.  Legal description and basis of bearings; and 
f.  Total acreage. 
g.  Lot and street layout, including proposed future street layout, in dashed lines, for any portion or parcel of adjacent land within two hundred (200) feet, not being subdivided now: 
(1)  Expected impact on local streets. 
(2)  Existing street names and names of proposed streets. 
(3)  Dimensions of all lots to nearest foot, which may be scaled values. 
(4)  Lots and blocks numbered consecutively. 
h.  Location of sites to be reserved or dedicated for public facilities or parks except streets and utility easements. The Planning Commission, upon consideration of city circulation and facilities and the future requirements of the subdivision, shall recommend to City Council the dedication of areas or sites of a character, extent and location suitable for public use for schools and parks. 
i.  Proposed sites and acreage, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, community facilities, industry or other uses, exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
j.  Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common open space not otherwise reserved or dedicated for public use. 
k.  Ownership of any property reserved, excluded from the subdivision, or any outlots within the subdivision. 
(3)  A proposed utility system. 
i.  Location, size and use of all existing and proposed public and private easements. All utilities must be constructed within approved easements. 
ii.  Existing and proposed water mains, fire hydrants, sewers, utility mains (electric, gas, telephone) or other underground structures within the subdivision and at least one hundred (100) feet immediately adjacent to boundary streets. 
(4)  A proposed drainage system. Location of culverts and other proposed drainage structures to show the method of moving storm runoff water through the subdivision; also show runoff concentrations in acres of drainage areas on each street entering each intersection. Flow arrows should clearly show the complete runoff flow pattern at each intersection. For storm drainage facilities not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, size and invert elevation or nearest extensions of such utilities. 
(5)  Preliminary street profiles. Preliminary profiles based upon the contours and the sketched alignments should be provided showing graphic grades, proposed lengths of vertical curves, limits of horizontal curves and locations of bridges and major culverts. Where streets are to be temporarily stubbed at site or plat boundaries, the profiles should extend sufficiently beyond the boundary to assure the feasibility of a future extension that can conform to standards. 
6.  Supporting Documents Required. Each of the following documents shall accompany the preliminary plan and be considered a part of the submission: 
a.  A letter from each special district or utility company involved, stating that specific services and/or utilities are available, and they have reviewed the plan and are setting forth their comments concerning the extent of services and the design of utility easements; 
b.  A list prepared by a licensed title or abstract company of all owners of record of property adjacent to the area of the proposed subdivision, including their addresses. This information will be utilized for notification of meeting time and date; 
c.  The substance of all other covenants, grants of easements, or restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and structures; 
d.  Geologic maps and investigation report regarding area suitability for the proposed development. This report shall include a list of economically recoverable minerals in the land within the subdivision boundary; 
e.  Such additional information as may be required by the City in order to determine that the subdivision can be constructed without an adverse effect on the surrounding area and, by reason of its location or design, will not cause an undue burden on public utilities and community facilities; 
f.  Application for rezoning, if required for the development of the subdivision; 
g.  Any possible adverse environmental impact of the development; (Note: see Title 16 of this Code for regulations regarding development in a floodplain.) 
h.  Summary statement of application: 
(1)  Total development area; 
(2)  Total number of proposed dwelling units; 
(3)  Total number of square feet of nonresidential floor space; 
(4)  Total number of off-street parking spaces, excluding those associated with a single-family residential development; 
(5)  Estimated total number of gallons per day of water system requirements; 
(6)  Estimated total number of gallons per day of sewage to be treated, and the estimated composition of the sewage in terms of average pounds of BOD per day that will require treatment. Peak flow and other known characteristics of the effluent shall be included in the report; 
(7)  A list of all special districts involved. 
F.  Action on Preliminary Plan. 
1.  All actions on a preliminary plan application shall contain in writing the specific reasons for the action. 
2.  If denied, a subdivider may, within six (6) months, resubmit the plan application, which shall include an affidavit that the deficiencies in the previous application have been corrected, without paying an application fee. Any re-application submission of the application after six (6) months will require a new application fee. 
G.  Expiration of approval. 
1.  The preliminary plan shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, unless stated otherwise in such approval. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time, of no more than one (1) year, upon a written request by the applicant prior to the expiration of the one-year period. However, when a part of the preliminary plan is final platted, approval of the remaining area of the preliminary plan shall be effective for the one-year period or as otherwise extended by the City Council. 
2.  An extension request shall include a fee and a narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines, listing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, any changes to the Evans Comprehensive Plan or this Title that have occurred since approval of the plan as these changes affect the plan and the anticipated time schedule for completing the platting process. Additional review of the plan may occur resulting in additional conditions as applicable. 
18.06.090 - Final Plat. 
A.  Intent. To provide for the review of the final engineering plans, the subdivision improvement agreement, public dedication of property and/ water and other legal agreements. 
B.  Prerequisite. 
1.  The final plat shall be in substantial compliance with the City Council approved preliminary plan, as determined by the Community Development Director. If Community Development Director determines that the final plat is not in substantial compliance, the applicant shall submit an amended preliminary plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission and the City Council or revise the final plat. 
2.  No final plat shall be approved, where the applicant has previously obtained approval of another final plat in the City, except upon a showing as to such previous final plat that all of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The applicant has paid all fees and charges incurred by the City and invoiced to the applicant as to such previous final plat; 
b.  The applicant has made all water rights dedications required during the approval of the previous final plat; 
c.  The applicant has either constructed all public improvements required by the previous final plat or has posted security for such completion in an amount and in a form acceptable to the City; and 
d.  The applicant has complied with all requirements of the subdivision agreement as to such previous final plat. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of a complete application to the Planning Department. 
2.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal or final plat that is inconsistent with the approved preliminary plan shall not be processed. 
3.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the final plat required for distribution to the City Engineer, City Public Works Department and other referral agencies as determined by the Community Development Department. Referral packets, with all exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. Planning staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
4.  After approval of all documents by the appropriate entity and after all requirements of this Section have been met, the Community Development Department shall schedule the final plat for review by the Community Development Director and Public Works Director. 
5.  The Community Development Director and Public Works Director shall evaluate the final plat. If all conditions of the preliminary plan approval are met and all standards of the City are met, the Community Development Director and Public Works Director forward the final plat to the City Council for consideration at a public meeting. 
6.  The Council shall hold a hearing on the final plat. The Council shall also consider the modifications recommended by the staff. 
D.  Criteria for Final Plat. The only basis for rejection of a final plat shall be its nonconformance to adopted rules, regulations and ordinances currently in force and affecting the land and its development in the City, its lack of conformance with the approved preliminary plan, and changes required in the public interest. 
E.  General Submittal Requirements. 
1.  The final plat submission shall conform in all major respects to the preliminary plan as previously reviewed and approved by the City Council, and shall incorporate all modifications required in its review. The City Council, however, may approve a final plat which has been modified to reflect improvements in design or changes which have occurred in its natural surroundings and environment since the time of the preliminary plan review and approval. 
2.  A final plat may be submitted in sections covering representative and reasonable portions, as defined by staff, of the subdivision tract. In such cases, submission shall include a map indicating the sections designated for the entire tract, and each sheet numbered accordingly, and include title, legend, match lines and other appropriate information. 
3.  No subdivision shall be approved until such data, surveys, analyses, studies, plans and designs have been submitted and reviewed by designated City staff and found to meet all sound planning and engineering requirements of the City and the conditions contained in these subdivision regulations, and all other required for final plat review are as follows: 
a.  Street construction plans and profiles (see City of Evans Construction Standards); 
b.  Final drainage plans and reports (see City of Evans Construction Standards); 
c.  Final utility plans and profiles (see City of Evans Construction Standards). 
4.  Drawing requirements. The final plat drawing shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The plat shall be prepared and certification made as to its accuracy by a registered land surveyor licensed to do such work according to the State. A workmanlike execution of the plat shall be made in every detail. A poorly drawn or illegible plat is sufficient cause for its rejection. 
b.  The plat shall be delineated in drawing ink on waterproof tracing cloth or Mylar at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100') in the following size: twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide. 
c.  The bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions. When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or a body of water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse should be given, and a notation made that the plat includes all land of the water's edge or otherwise. 
d.  If a plat is revised, a copy of the old plat shall be provided for comparison purposes. 
e.  All blocks, and all lots within each block, shall be consecutively numbered. Where access will be limited from certain lots to major roadways, a statement on the plat listing the lot and block numbers, and which roadway accesses will not be granted. 
f.  On curved boundaries and all curves on the plat, sufficient data shall be given to enable the reestablishment of the curves on the ground. This curve data shall include the following for the circular curves: 
(1)  Radius of curve; 
(2)  Central angle; 
(3)  Tangent; 
(4)  Are length; 
(5)  Notation of nontangent curves. 
g.  Excepted parcels shall be marked "Not included in this subdivision," and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances. 
h.  All streets, walkways and alleys shall be designated as such, and streets shall be named; bearings and dimensions must be given. 
i.  All easements shall be designated as such and bearings and dimensions given. 
j.  All lands within the boundaries of the plat shall be accounted for either as lots, walkways, streets, alleys, public areas (such as school sites, parks or common areas) or excepted parcels. 
k.  All dimensions of irregularly shaped lots shall be indicated in each lot. 
l.  Bearings and lengths shall be given for all lot lines; except that bearings and lengths need not be given for interior lot lines where the bearings and lengths are the same as those of both end lot lines. 
m.  Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one (1) plat, nor shall more than one (1) plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be embraced in one (1) plat, provided that all owners join in the dedication and acknowledgment. 
n.  Lengths shall be shown to hundredths of a foot, and angles and bearings shall be shown to second of arc. 
o.  The information on the plat shall include: 
(1)  Name of subdivision, astronomic north arrow and basis thereof, and date; 
(2)  Name and address of owner or owners of record; 
(3)  Total acreage of the subdivision and total number of lots; 
(4)  Township, range, section (and quarter section if portion of a section), principal meridian, block and lot numbers; and 
(5)  The area of each lot shall be shown in square feet. 
5.  Monuments and bench marks. 
a.  Permanent reference monuments shall be set on the external boundary of the subdivision. 
b.  Block and lot monuments shall be set. 
c.  At least one (1) second-order bench mark (Geodetic Survey Datum) shall be set, where practical to tie in, within every subdivision or subsequent filing prior to submission of the final plat for approval. 
d.  A monument record for required bench marks, and closure sheets for the entire tract included in the plat and for each block in the tract shall be submitted. 
6.  Drawing for utilities, grading, erosion control and other work. 
a.  Drawings showing layout, profile, computations and detail design of the following prepared in compliance with the design standards specified in Section 18.07.020, shall be submitted: 
(1)  All utilities and necessary easements, such as water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, etc., as applicable. 
(2)  Plan, profile and typical cross-section drawings of streets, bridges, culverts and other drainage structures. 
(3)  Grading and drainage plan, indicated by solid-line contours superimposed on dashed-line contours of existing topography for the area of the final plat. Such contours shall be at two-foot intervals for predominant ground slopes within the tract between level and five (5) percent grade, and five-foot contours for predominant ground slopes within the tract over five (5) percent grade. 
(4)  Erosion control plan, both during construction and after structures have been built, to be submitted as a result of preliminary plan review. The erosion control plan may be incorporated into the landscape plan or drainage plan. 
(5)  Two (2) sets each of the pavement design computations, and drainage design computations. 
b.  These drawings and computations shall be prepared by either a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor, as required by the laws of the State, and shall be in conformance with the engineering criteria as provided by the City in this Title and other applicable ordinances. 
7.  Certificate of title. A copy of a certificate of title issued by a title insurance company, or an attorney's opinion of the title, shall be submitted which shall set forth the names of all owners of property included in the final plat, and shall include a list of all mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record which affect the property covered by such plats. If the opinion of title discloses any of the above, then, the holders or owners of such mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts or agreements shall be required to join in and approve the application before the plat shall be acted upon by the Council. 
8.  Dedications - existing easements. Where a portion of an existing easement is contiguous to a proposed easement or right-of-way of a new subdivision, proof of the dedication of the existing easement or right-of-way acceptable to the City must be submitted. 
9.  State highway permit. When a new street will intersect with a state highway, a copy of the state highway permit shall be submitted. 
10.  Utility service statements. Statements from gas, electric, telephone and other necessary utilities that service will be provided to the subdivision. 
11.  Homeowner's Association required to maintain improvements. 
a.  Should a Homeowners Association be created by a property owner or developer with the responsibility of maintaining certain improvements, then in that event, such responsibility for maintaining improvements by the Homeowners Association shall be mandatory under this Code. In the event that the Homeowners Association fails to properly maintain such public improvements, including but not limited to landscaped streets, sidewalks, fences, irrigation systems, walkways, bike trails and open space, then in that event, after serving the Homeowners Association with a demand letter for compliance at least ten (10) days prior to taking action, the City may then provide the appropriate maintenance to such improvement, and charge back the Homeowners Association for its costs, including a five-percent fee for inspection and other administrative costs. 
b.  The City Clerk, after the work has been performed by the City, shall forward a statement to the Homeowners Association, to include all costs of the City, including the five-percent fee, with a demand that such statement be paid within thirty (30) days of mailing by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
c.  Failure to pay such assessment within such period of thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against the property of the particular subdivision, with the defaulting Homeowner's Association, and shall have priority over all other liens except general property taxes and prior assessments, and the same may be certified at any time after such failure to pay the statement within said thirty (30) days by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. 
12.  Irrigation ditch company agreements. Wherever applicable, a copy of agreements signed by agricultural irrigation ditch companies specifying the agreed upon treatment of the ditch, including fencing as provided in Section 18.07.020 shall be submitted. 
13.  Summary statement on total development. A summary statement of the proposal with the following information shall be submitted: 
a.  Total development area; 
b.  Total number of proposed dwelling units; 
c.  Total number of square feet of nonresidential floor space; 
d.  Total number of off-street parking spaces, excluding those associated with single-family residential development; 
e.  Estimated total number of gallons per day of water system requirements, and other relative characteristics of water usage such as irrigated land area, daily and weekly peak flows, etc.; and 
f.  Estimated total number of gallons per day and estimated pounds per day of BOD content of sewage to be treated. Peak flows or unusual characteristics such as industrial waste requiring pretreatment shall be reported when applicable. 
14.  Deed restrictions. Copies of deed restrictions to govern the future use of each lot and any common land shall be submitted. 
15.  Certification forms. The final plat shall contain the following certificates: 
a.  Certificate of Dedication and Ownership: 
Know all men by these presents that ___________, being the owner(s), mortgage or lienholder of certain land in ___________, Colorado, described as follows: 
Beginning ___________ Containing ___________ acres more or less: have by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots and blocks, as shown on this plat, under the name and style of, and do hereby dedicate to the public all ways and other public rights-of-way and easements for purposes shown hereon. 
Executed this _______ day of _______ , A.D. _______ . 
Owner(s), Mortgages or Lienholder 
___________ 
The foregoing dedication was acknowledged before me this _______ day of _______, A.D., _______. 
My commission expires ___________ . 
Witness My Hand and Seal 
___________ 
Notary Public 
b.  Surveying Certificate: 
I, ___________ , a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that the survey represented by this plat was made under my supervision and the monuments shown herein actually exist and this plat accurately represents said survey. 
By: ___________ 
Registered Land Surveyor 
c.  Planning Commission Certificate: 
This plat reviewed by the City of Evans Planning Commission this _______ day of _______, A.D. _______ . 
___________ 
Chairman 
d.  Certificate of Approval by the City Council: 
Approved by the City Council of ___________ , Colorado, this _______ day of _______ , A.D. _______. 
  
_____
Mayor Attest: _____
City Clerk  
e.  Recorder's Certificate: 
This plat was filed for record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Weld County at _____.M. on the _______ day of _______, A.D. _______. in Book _______, Page _____, Map _____, Reception _______. 
  
_____
County Clerk and Recorder By: _____
Deputy  
f.  Dedication statement. 
The undersigned, being all the owners, mortgagees, beneficiaries of deeds of trust and holders of other interests of the lands described herein, have laid out, subdivided and platted said lands into lots, tracts, blocks, streets and easements as shown hereon under the name and subdivision of ___________. The utility easements as shown hereon are hereby dedicated for public utilities and cable communication systems and other purposes as shown hereon. The entities are responsible for providing the utility services for which the easements are established are hereby granted the perpetual right of ingress and egress from and to adjacent properties for installation, maintenance and replacement of utility lines and related facilities. The owners of the lands described herein are responsible for the maintenance and operation of drainage easements shown hereon and related facilities. The undersigned grants the City of Evans a perpetual right of ingress and egress from and to adjacent property to maintain, operate and reconstruct the drainage easements and related facilities and to maintain, operate and reconstruct the drainage easements and related facilities when the owner(s) fail to adequately maintain such drainage easements and related facilities, which maintenance, operation and reconstruction shall be at the cost of the owner(s). All public streets and rights-of-way shown hereon are dedicated and conveyed to the City of Evans, Colorado, in fee simple absolute, for public uses and purposes. Drainage and detention easements as shown hereon are hereby dedicated to the City. The City is hereby granted the perpetual right of ingress and egress from and to the adjacent properties for construction, repair, maintenance, operation and replacement of storm sewers and drainage facilities. The undersigned grants to the City a sight easement(s) as shown hereon within the subdivision to maintain adequate sight distance at all roadway intersections as provided by the City of Evans regulations and standards, as amended. The City is hereby granted the perpetual right of ingress and egress across all lots and tracts within the subdivision to remove any obstruction to the proper site distance, including, but not limited to, any structure, fence, utility box, raised median and landscaping, at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the lot and/or tract upon which such obstruction is situated. The owners or adjacent property owners of the lands are responsible for the maintenance and operation of sight easements shown hereon. When the owner(s) or adjacent owners fail to adequately maintain such sight easements, the maintenance, operation and reconstruction shall be at the cost of the owner(s). 
(Owners/Mortgagee) 
By: ___________ 
Title: ___________ 
ATTEST: 
  
___________ 
Secretary 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of ___________, 20___, by* (name printed). 
WITNESS my hand and official seal. 
  
_______ 
Notary Public 
My commission expires: _______. 
* Signatures of officers signing for a Corporation shall be acknowledged as follows: "(Print name as President/Vice-President and (print name) as Secretary/ Treasurer, of (name of corporation), a (State) corporation." 
NOTE: Include signature lines and notary lines for all owners/mortgagees. 
F.  Action on Final Plat. 
1.  All actions on final plat shall be by resolution containing the specific reasons for the action. 
2.  The applicant shall amend the final plat document in accordance with the City Council and/or, where applicable, the Community Development Director and Public Works Director approval, if necessary. 
3.  Within ninety (90) days of approval of the final plat, unless stated otherwise in such approval, the applicant shall submit: amended final plat documents, if necessary, ready for recordation, all required documentation not previously submitted and all mapping and recordation fees to the Community Development Department. 
4.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of all required documents, including required security as described in the subdivision improvements agreement, the staff planner shall obtain City signatures, as required, and record the final plat and all related documents. 
5.  Failure by the applicant to submit all required documentation, including required security, within ninety (90) days shall render approval of the final plat null and void and result in the necessity for the resubmittal of the application. 
6.  The Community Development Director may grant no more than one (1) extension of time, of no more than thirty (30) days, upon a written request by the applicant or staff for good cause being shown. 
7.  An extension request, received prior to the expiration of the ninety-day submittal period, shall include a fee and a narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines, listing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, any changes in the Evans Comprehensive Plan or this Title that have occurred since approval of the plat as these changes affect the plat and the anticipated time schedule for completing the platting process. Additional review of the plat may occur resulting in additional conditions as applicable. 
8.  The Community Development Department shall furnish the subdivider with a receipt for the final plat upon filing of the final plat. 
18.06.100 - Minor development-Single-family residential. 
A.  Intent. To provide a one-step process for the creation of four (4) or fewer lots, parcels or tracts of land with one (1) principal use on each lot and adjoining a public street. The Community Development Director may determine whether additional lots may be created through this process, based on design, size, available public facilities, services, access and transportation network, not to exceed ten (10) lots. 
B.  Prerequisites. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
a.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
b.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
c.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the minor subdivision process. 
d.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
e.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
f.  If it is determined that the applicant is using the minor development process to circumvent the subdivision process such as the submittal of adjoining multiple minor developments, the applicant shall be required to comply with the sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plat processes. A minor development shall not be permitted if the subdivision creates a nonconforming lot, or in the case of an existing nonconforming lot, a minor development shall not increase the nonconformity. 
C.  Review process. 
1.  The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of a minor subdivision application to the Community Development Department. 
2.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. 
3.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the preliminary plan required for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all plan exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. The planning staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
4.  The services and facilities provided by the referral agencies below shall be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as a factor in approval of the preliminary plan. The criteria for evaluating sufficiency of the services that must be satisfied for the approval of the plan shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the City Council as a part of any referral response. All preliminary plan applications may be submitted to referral departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application. 
5.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the application as required by staff. 
6.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. Referring agencies will provide the Planning Commission and City Council with a summary of any capacity evaluation study. The summary will include an explanation of the agency's assumptions regarding available capacity. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns prior to the end of the referral period. 
7.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the plan as needed. The revised plan must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of receiving the revised plan. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
8.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff planner shall notify the applicant of the scheduled hearing date and time and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
9.  The applicant is responsible for providing public notice prior to the Planning Commission and City Council hearings in compliance with the public notice requirements in Chapter 18.09. 
10.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, staff report, referral comments, public testimony and make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with conditions, continue for additional information or for further study or deny the minor development plat. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria for a minor development plat described in Subsection (D) below. 
11.  Following the recommendation by the Planning Commission, the staff planner will schedule the minor development plat for a public hearing with the City Council and notify the applicant of the public hearing date and time. When required, a subdivision improvements agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and signed by the applicant prior to minor development plat approval by the City Council. Construction plans and cost estimates for public improvements, if any, shall be approved prior to scheduling before City Council. 
12.  The City Council shall evaluate the minor development plat, staff report, referral agency comments, Planning Commission recommendations and public testimony and shall either approve, conditionally approve, continue for additional information or for further study, remand to the Planning Commission or deny the minor development plat. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The City Council's action shall be based on the evidence presented, and compliance with the criteria for a minor development plat described in Subsection (D) below. 
D.  Criteria for a minor development plat. The subdivision shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the goals and policies of the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed subdivision complies with this Section and all other provisions of this Title and other applicable standards adopted by the City. 
3.  The proposed subdivision complies with all of the provisions of the applicable Zone District or Planned Development Guide. 
4.  The applicant has demonstrated that all public notice requirements have been met. 
5.  A subdivision agreement and/or other agreements have been executed by the applicant as required by the City Council. 
6.  Public dedications. All applicable public dedication requirements have been satisfied. 
E.  General submittal requirements. 
1.  Completed land use application. 
2.  A copy of the recorded warranty deed and title commitment or updated title commitment current within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
3.  A notarized letter of authorization from the landowner permitting a representative to process the application. 
4.  Minor development plat exhibit (described in Subsection (f) below). 
5.  A narrative outlining the proposal. 
6.  Development reports and plans (described in Subsection (g) below). 
F.  Minor development plat exhibit. The minor development plat shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional land surveyor licensed with the State for recording in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. It should meet all the requirements for a final plat as outlined in Section 18.06.090.E. 
G.  Public notice requirements. All public notice requirements shall be completed in accordance with Chapter 18.09. 
H.  Action on and Recording Minor Development Plat. 
1.  All actions on minor development plat shall be by resolution containing the specific reasons for the action. 
2.  The applicant shall amend the minor development plat document in accordance with the City Council and/or, where applicable, the Community Development Director and Public Works Director approval, if necessary. 
3.  Within ninety (90) days of approval of the minor development plat, unless stated otherwise in such approval, the applicant shall submit: amended minor development plat documents, if necessary, ready for recordation, all required documentation not previously submitted and all mapping and recordation fees to the Community Development Department. 
4.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of all required documents, including required security as described in the subdivision improvements agreement, the staff planner shall obtain City signatures, as required, and record the minor development plat and all related documents. 
5.  Failure by the applicant to submit all required documentation, including required security, within ninety (90) days shall render approval of the minor development plat null and void and result in the necessity for the resubmittal of the application. 
6.  The Community Development Director may grant no more than one (1) extension of time, of no more than thirty (30) days, upon a written request by the applicant or staff for good cause being shown. 
7.  An extension request, received prior to the expiration of the ninety-day submittal period, shall include a fee and a narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines, listing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, any changes in the Evans Comprehensive Plan or this Title that have occurred since approval of the plat as these changes affect the plat and the anticipated time schedule for completing the platting process. Additional review of the plat may occur resulting in additional conditions as applicable. 
8.  The Community Development Department shall furnish the subdivider with a receipt for the minor development plat upon filing of the minor development plat. 
18.06.110 - Minor development-Nonresidential and multiple-family. 
A.  Intent. To provide a one-step review process for nonresidential and multiple-family subdivisions. The Community Development Director shall determine whether adequate public notice and input on the request can be attained through the minor development process and that this process will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this Title. 
The applicant may be required to submit a site plan application in accordance with Chapter 18.05, Site Plan Standards and Procedures, with the minor development application, based on design, size, impact to public facilities, services, roads and overall impacts, as determined by the Community Development Director. If the applicant is unable to submit a site plan, when such is required by the Community Development Director, the application shall be processed in accordance with the sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plat requirements of this Title. 
B.  Prerequisite. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
a.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
b.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
c.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and the minor subdivision process. 
d.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
e.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
f.  If it is determined that the applicant is using the minor development process to circumvent the subdivision process such as the submittal of adjoining multiple minor developments, the applicant shall be required to comply with the sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plat processes. A minor development shall not be permitted if the subdivision creates a nonconforming lot, or in the case of an existing nonconforming lot, a minor development shall not increase the nonconformity. 
C.  Review process. 
1.  The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of a minor subdivision application to the Community Development Department. 
2.  The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. An incomplete submittal shall not be processed. 
3.  Once the submittal is determined complete, staff will notify the applicant of the number of copies of the preliminary plan required for distribution to referral agencies. Referral packets, with all plan exhibits folded to nine (9) inches by twelve (12) inches, shall be provided by the applicant to the Community Development Department. The planning staff shall distribute the referral packets. The applicant shall distribute any revised plans, as required by staff. 
4.  The services and facilities provided by the referral agencies below shall be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as a factor in approval of the preliminary plan. The criteria for evaluating sufficiency of the services that must be satisfied for the approval of the plan shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the City Council as a part of any referral response. All preliminary plan applications may be submitted to referral departments and agencies for review and comment, if in the opinion of the Community Development Department, the agency may be affected by the application or if comments by the agency will ensure a thorough analysis of the application: 
5.  The applicant shall notify and meet with adjacent landowners and homeowners' associations concerning the application as required by staff. 
6.  Referral agencies shall comment in writing within twenty-five (25) days of receiving a complete submittal. The Community Development Department shall forward referral comments to the applicant in a timely manner. The failure of any agency to respond within twenty-five (25) days shall for the purpose of the hearings be considered no comment on the plan by that agency. Referring agencies will provide the Planning Commission and City Council with a summary of any capacity evaluation study. The summary will include an explanation of the agency's assumptions regarding available capacity. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the planning staff, referral agencies and other interested parties to address any concerns prior to the end of the referral period. 
7.  The staff will review the referral comments and discuss the concerns with the applicant. The applicant shall address each issue identified by the referral agencies and revise the plan as needed. The revised plan must comply with all technical and/or regulatory requirements of the referral agencies and shall include a narrative that addresses each revision. Referral agencies shall comment in writing within fifteen (15) days of receiving the revised plan. Should subsequent revisions be required, each revision shall follow the process described herein. 
8.  Once all issues have been satisfactorily addressed, the staff planner shall notify the applicant of the scheduled hearing date and time and prepare a staff report for the Planning Commission. 
9.  The applicant is responsible for providing public notice prior to the Planning Commission and City Council hearings in compliance with the public notice requirements in Chapter ** of this Title. 
10.  The Planning Commission shall evaluate the application, staff report, referral comments, public testimony and make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with conditions, continue for additional information or for further study or deny the minor development plat. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The Planning Commission's decision shall be based on the evidence presented and compliance with the criteria for a minor development plat described in Subsection (D) below. 
11.  Following the recommendation by the Planning Commission, the staff planner will schedule the minor development plat for a public hearing with the City Council and notify the applicant of the public hearing date and time. When required, a subdivision improvements agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and signed by the applicant prior to minor development plat approval by the City Council. Construction plans and cost estimates for public improvements, if any, shall be approved prior to scheduling before City Council. 
12.  The City Council shall evaluate the minor development plat, staff report, referral agency comments, Planning Commission recommendations and public testimony and shall either approve, conditionally approve, continue for additional information or for further study, remand to the Planning Commission or deny the minor development plat. The burden shall be on the applicant to present sufficient evidence that the criteria contained in Subsection (D) below have been satisfied. The City Council's action shall be based on the evidence presented, and compliance with the criteria for a minor development plat described in Subsection (D) below. 
D.  Criteria for a minor development plat. The subdivision shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the goals and policies of the Evans Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed subdivision complies with this Section and all other provisions of this Title, and all engineering and design regulations and standards adopted by the City. 
3.  The proposed subdivision complies with all of the provisions of the applicable Zone District or Planned Development Guide. 
4.  The applicant has demonstrated that all public notice requirements have been met. 
5.  A subdivision agreement and/or other agreements have been executed by the applicant as required by the City Council. 
6.  Public dedications. All applicable public dedication requirements have been satisfied. 
E.  General submittal requirements. 
1.  Completed land use application. 
2.  A copy of the recorded warranty deed and title commitment or updated title commitment current within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
3.  A notarized letter of authorization from the landowner permitting a representative to process the application. 
4.  A narrative outlining the proposal. 
5.  Minor development plat exhibit (described in Subsection (F) below). 
6.  Site plan application, if required (described in Chapter 18.05). 
7.  Development reports and plans (described in Subsection (G) below). 
F.  Minor development plat exhibit. The minor development plat shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional land surveyor licensed with the State for recording in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. It should meet all the requirements for a final plat as outlined in Section 18.06.090. 
G.  Public notice requirements. All public notice requirements shall be completed in accordance with Chapter 18.09. 
H.  Action on and Recording Minor Development Plat. 
1.  All actions on minor development plat shall be by resolution containing the specific reasons for the action. 
2.  The applicant shall amend the minor development plat document in accordance with the City Council and/or, where applicable, the Community Development Director and Public Works Director approval, if necessary. 
3.  Within ninety (90) days of approval of the minor development plat, unless stated otherwise in such approval, the applicant shall submit: amended minor development plat documents, if necessary, ready for recordation, all required documentation not previously submitted and all mapping and recordation fees to the Community Development Department. 
4.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of all required documents, including required security as described in the subdivision improvements agreement, the staff planner shall obtain City signatures, as required, and record the minor development plat and all related documents. 
5.  Failure by the applicant to submit all required documentation, including required security, within ninety (90) days shall render approval of the minor development plat null and void and result in the necessity for the resubmittal of the application. 
6.  The Community Development Director may grant no more than one (1) extension of time, of no more than thirty (30) days, upon a written request by the applicant or staff for good cause being shown. 
7.  An extension request, received prior to the expiration of the ninety-day submittal period, shall include a fee and a narrative stating the reasons for the applicant's inability to comply with the specified deadlines, listing any changes in the character of the neighborhood, any changes in the Evans Comprehensive Plan or this Title that have occurred since approval of the plat as these changes affect the plat and the anticipated time schedule for completing the platting process. Additional review of the plat may occur resulting in additional conditions as applicable. 
8.  The Community Development Department shall furnish the subdivider with a receipt for the minor development plat upon filing of the minor development plat. 
18.06.120 - Plat Modifications, Minor Replats and Lot Line Adjustments. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide a process for reviewing a change to a recorded plat that ensures that the change is consistent with the zone district requirements, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Corrections to a recorded plat; 
2.  Adjustment or vacation of a lot line, vacation of a plat without rights-of-way or easements; 
3.  Vacation of right-of-way, easement or portion thereof; or 
4.  Replats of previously platted lots not involving the creation of more than five (5) lots. 
B.  Preapplication conference. 
1.  This stage of review is designed to provide the applicant with a means of understanding regulations, policies and procedures prior to any formal submission of a proposal being made and to learn who they have to contact and work within the process. 
2.  The applicant should make an appointment with the Community Development Department to discuss the proposal being considered. The Community Development Department should be provided with brief narrative to determine whether or not other agencies or departments need to be involved in the initial discussion. 
3.  The Community Development Department shall arrange for an informal meeting with a staff planner. The goal is to have constructive dialogue occur and for the applicant to receive some guidance on the request and this amendment process. 
4.  Should the applicant decide to proceed further, formal submission of a complete application, based upon the recommendation of the Community Development Department, City regulations and the applicant's desires should then occur. 
5.  Submittal of a formal application must occur within six (6) months of the preapplication conference. If a formal application is not submitted within that timeframe, then the applicant must attend a new preapplication conference. 
6.  The submittal process may vary according to the nature of the proposed amendment based on, but not limited to the following: degree of change, design, size, impact to public facilities, services, roads and overall impacts. 
C.  Plat Correction. 
1.  Minor correction. 
a.  Corrections to approved and/or recorded plans shall be considered as minor if the modifications or adjustments requested in writing by the applicant: 
(1)  Do not impact more than fifteen (15) percent of any element or portion within a proposed planned development including land use area boundaries, roadways, alignments, open space tracts, park sites and similar elements (this does not apply to the number of units). 
(2)  Do not require the movement or shifting of any structure, building, roadway or other improvement to the site, by more than fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Is a minor change needed in the location, siting, or character of buildings, structures, alignment of streets, or setbacks. 
(4)  Are required due to unanticipated reasons which were not known at the time of final approval by the Planning Commission or Council. 
(5)  Does not violate the strict application of this Title. 
b.  The minor change, upon adequate evidence and information provided by the applicant, and in such a manner prescribed by the City, shall be reviewed by the Community Development Department within ten (10) days of submittal of complete information. The Community Development Director may request recommendation from other agencies prior to acting on the request. The Director may then approve or deny the request. 
c.  Should the request be denied, the applicant has the option to either: 
(1)  Withdraw the request fully; 
(2)  Modify the request and resubmit for review; or 
(3)  Appeal the administrative decision by written request to the Planning Commission. 
2.  Major plan correction. 
a.  The Community Development Director may not authorize a change other than those designated as minor. The request, if not meeting the above criteria, must be brought to the attention of the Planning Commission and City Council for their action on the request. Major changes shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A significant change in the use or character of the development or elements contained therein; 
(2)  An increase in overall coverage of structures; 
(3)  An increase in the intensity of the uses; 
(4)  A modification in overall traffic circulation; 
(5)  A modification in the method of providing adequate water and sewer service; 
(6)  A reduction in the approved percentage of required open space or landscaping; and 
(7)  A change to approved building elevations or other design elements of a structure. 
b.  Review process. A major plan modification shall be subject to the same review process as that for a preliminary plan. 
3.  A Plat Correction Certificate shall be prepared by the Applicant, which identifies the error or omission, the specific plat to be corrected and the reception number of the plat, and the necessary corrective action in accordance with the form provided by the Community Development Department, approved by the City Attorney. 
4.  The Plat Correction Certificate shall be presented to the Community Development Director for review in accordance with the Section. 
D.  Replats, Lot Line Adjustments and vacations. 
1.  A replat of a lot or tract, an adjustment or vacation of a lot line, a vacation of a plat (without rights-of-way or easements) or a minor reconfiguration of an easement shall be processed as follows: 
a.  When determined by the Community Development Director to be insubstantial, the replat, vacation, or reconfiguration shall be processed in accordance with the final plat process. A replat of a lot or tract shall be insubstantial if it does not result in a total of more than five (5) lots. 
b.  When determined by the Community Development Director to be substantial, the replat shall be processed in accordance with the sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plat processes. These processes may be combined upon the approval of the Community Development Director based upon, but not limited to the following factors: design size, public concern, public facilities, services, access and transportation network. 
2.  A replat of a lot or tract, an adjustment or vacation of a lot line, a vacation of a plat (without rights-of-way or easements) or a minor reconfiguration of an easement may be approved except that any approval may not: 
a.  Cause any lot or structure on a lot to be out of conformance with any Municipal Code requirement; for example, lot sizes and setbacks. 
b.  Change any drainage easements or rights-of-way reserved for drainage, unless supported by complete engineering data acceptable to the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Change any street locations and street rights-of-way. 
E.  Vacation of an easement or right-of-way. 
1.  A vacation of a platted easement or right-of-way shall be processed in accordance with the final plat process. In addition: 
a.  For a vacation of a public right-of-way that is NOT constructed, the vacation request shall be heard by the City Council. 
b.  For a vacation of a public right-of-way that was constructed, a public hearing is required by the Planning Commission and the City Council. Public notice shall be required for both the Planning Commission and the City Council hearing in accordance with (Public Notice Section) of this Title. (NOTE: An access easement, i.e., trail, shall be considered a right-of-way.) An ordinance shall be prepared that includes the legal description of the public right-of-way to be vacated. 
c.  For a vacation of a platted easement, the applicant shall send a notice of hearing to known easement holders notifying them of the proposed vacation by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
2.  A vacation of an unplatted City easement shall be processed as follows: 
a.  An ordinance shall be prepared that includes the legal description of the easement to be vacated and the book and page numbers, and reception number, as applicable. 
b.  The vacation request shall be heard by the City Council during the second reading of the ordinance described in Subparagraph 2.a. above. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder upon obtaining the signature of the Mayor after the effective date of the ordinance. 
3.  An amendment to a plat which includes a redesign of streets, blocks, lots and easements shall be processed according to the sketch, preliminary plan and final plat process of this Chapter. 
F.  Submittal requirements. 
1.  A drawing shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Subdivision name, in a format similar to the following: "[subdivision name], replat [A], being a replat of lot [lot number], Block [block number], [prior subdivision name], City of Evans, County of Weld, State of Colorado."; 
b.  Total area of the lot line adjustment and area of each lot, tract, and outlot; 
c.  Certification forms in the format of Section 18.05.030; 
d.  Dimensions (i.e., length, curve) of all property lines; 
e.  Existing and proposed easements and their purpose; 
f.  Lot and block numbers, and tract and outlot letters; 
g.  Scale (graphic and written), and north arrow; 
h.  "Amendment History" section outlining previous approval dates of final plats and the changes being proposed; and 
i.  Other information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
2.  Additional submittal requirements. The lot line adjustment drawing shall be submitted with the following: 
a.  Application form provided by the City staff; 
b.  Application fee established by the City Council; 
c.  An Ownership and Encumbrance Report from a title company showing all holders of legal interest in the affected property; 
d.  The submittal may include letters of comment from any referral agencies, departments, and/or Homeowners Associations, where appropriate; and 
e.  Other information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
3.  Review and recordation. If the Community Development Director determines that the proposed lot line adjustment complies with the appropriate requirements of these regulations, two (2) signed original Mylars of the plat shall be submitted to the City staff for recordation with the Weld County Clerk and Recorder. 
18.06.130 - Manufactured Home Park Plan. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Section is to support the Evans Comprehensive Plan by providing for health and safety in the development and continued maintenance of manufactured home parks/communities by allowing for the development of land in a way which might not be permitted under traditional zoning regulations. These regulations do not apply to existing manufactured housing parks zoned residential manufacture home (RMH) which is addressed in Section 18.04.090. It is anticipated that this Section will permit developments which will preserve the natural and scenic features of large open areas by arranging homes in innovative ways, thereby promoting the public interest, while at the same time providing an efficient use of land. The purpose of manufactured home parks complying with planned unit development regulations is not to modify or in any way vary or reduce the requirements set forth in this Section. 
B.  Process submittal - plan approval. The process of all submittals will comply with the requirements of Section 18.04.110, Planned Unit Developments. Copies of all the required material shall be officially submitted to the Planning Department office by the developer, or authorized representative a minimum of three (3) weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting. No planned unit development (PUD) plan will be considered by the Planning Commission until the developer has complied with the requirements and submitted the supporting documents, as approved herein. 
C.  Definitions. 
    Dependent Manufactured Home means a manufactured home which does not have a flush toilet and bath or shower. Homes that have self-contained toilets and baths or showers (campers, trailers etc.) are considered dependent. 
    Manufactured home space means the area designed for accommodation of one (1) mobile home, including its parking and accessory structures. 
    Manufactured home park/community means defined as any tract of land designed, used or intended to provide a location or accommodation for homes and within which individual sites for homes are leased. Homes parked or located in such parks are not attached permanently to foundations. The term excludes sales and storage lots on which homes are parked only for inspection and sale. 
D.  License and license fees. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish, maintain or operate or permit to be established, maintained or operated, any manufactured home park/community within the City without first having secured a license therefore. Each license provided for shall be issued for a calendar-year period. Every person required to be licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application to the City Clerk in writing. Such application shall state the name of the person and in case the applicant is a firm or corporation, the applicant shall state the names of the persons composing the firm or officers of the corporation, the location of the manufactured home park and the number of units located in the manufactured home park. Only one (1) license shall be issued for any mobile manufactured home park/community, regardless of the number of owners of the real estate composing it. 
2.  The annual license and transfer fee for each manufactured home park shall be in accordance with the fees as established by City Council by resolution. 
3.  Renewal of license. Upon payment of the annual fee an existing licensee shall be issued a renewal license; the Building Official or designee shall inspect the manufactured home park to insure that the requirements of this Chapter are implemented. After this inspection, the Building Official or designee shall, based on the results of inspection, reissue or suspend the license. 
4.  Transfer of license. Upon application in writing for transfer of license and payment of the transfer fee, the City Clerk shall issue a transfer of license. 
5.  License suspension. The City may suspend any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has been found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter, and was not corrected within fifteen (15) days of the violation. However, no suspension shall be effective until at least five (5) days after mailing a notice of intention to suspend. A licensee shall be entitled to be heard by the City Clerk and to present evidence bearing on the question of whether a suspension is warranted under this Section. Each suspension shall continue in force until the cause of the suspension has been fully corrected. A license also shall be subject to suspension under this Section for the failure of the licensee to comply with any requirements imposed by Colorado law or by regulations issued by any agency of the State of Colorado pertaining to anchoring or tying down mobile homes as a safety precaution against natural hazards. Upon suspension, no new homes will be allowed to move in, and if the City corrects the violation it will be at the cost of the licensee. 
E.  License application. Applications for licenses to operate manufactured home communities or parks shall be filed with the Community Development Department. Every application for a license shall be signed by each owner, and each of them will be responsible for any violation of this Chapter regardless of where the event or condition causing the violation occurs within the manufactured home park/community. Such application shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant. In case the applicant is a firm or corporation, the applicant shall state the names of the persons composing the firm or officers of the corporation, including any registered agent. 
2.  The location and legal description of the park. 
3.  A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of Section 18.04.090.F. 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the home park. 
5.  Further information, as may be requested by the City staff. 
F.  Manufactured Home Park Plan - planned unit development (PUD) plan. The manufactured home park plan shall conform to all of the requirements for planned unit developments as written in Section 18.04.110, Planned Unit Developments. 
G.  Additional Manufactured Home Park Plan requirements. 
1.  The area devoted to each home space shall be no less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, and shall have the following setbacks. 
2.  Separation between mobile homes. 
a.  Homes placed end-to-end shall have a minimum of a ten-foot separation. 
b.  Homes placed side-by-side shall have a minimum of twenty-foot separation. 
c.  Homes placed side-to-end shall have a minimum of fifteen-foot separation. 
d.  No home shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
e.  Homes including nonremovable tow hitches shall be set back at least five (5) feet from private streets and roadways, and twenty-five (25) feet from public rights-of-way. 
3.  Parking. 
a.  Two (2) paved off-street parking spaces shall be required per home. 
b.  On-street parking shall be allowed only if a twenty-foot wide traveled way is maintained at all times. 
c.  Visitor parking lots should be established and distributed in an accessible manner functional with surrounding properties. 
4.  Skirting. Each home shall have perimeter skirting between the ground and the bottom of the home floor within thirty (30) days after placement is made. Such skirting shall be durable, rigid weather-resistant material. 
5.  Tie-down requirements. All licensees, as well as owners and occupiers of homes, shall be required to comply with any requirements imposed by Colorado law or by regulations issued by any agency of the State of Colorado, including but not limited to the Colorado Division of Housing, pertaining to anchoring or tying down homes as a safety precaution against wind. 
6.  Decks/landing. A deck/landing is required at all exterior doors complying with minimum standards as set forth by the International Building Code. 
H.  Directory poster requirements - space designation posting requirements. 
1.  A poster shall be installed at or near each entrance to such home park to assist fire, police and service personnel in locating particular home spaces within the park. The poster shall be at least five (5) feet by four (4) feet and shall depict an aerial view of the community in such a way as to identify homes by the number or letter to be posted at each home space. Each home space shall be equipped with a permanent sign with the appropriate number and/or letter having a minimum height of five (5) inches and a minimum stroke of one (1) inch, prominently displayed, showing the number or letter assigned to each such home space. 
2.  Existing manufactured home parks/communities shall comply with the installation of a directory poster, and will not be considered legal nonconforming. 
I.  Location. Manufactured home communities shall be located only in areas zoned for uses which are consistent with the Evans Comprehensive Plan and specifically permitted under the City's zoning and development regulations. Manufactured homes may be located in licensed manufactured home parks within the RMH (residential manufactured home) and PUD (planned unit development) zoning districts. 
J.  Modifications to homes. No structural enlarging will be allowed, so homes can maintain the intended use of their structural purpose. 
K.  Storage, accessory structures. 
1.  Storage. No storage shall be permitted underneath any home unless properly designed and enclosed with skirting. No flammable, combustible or hazardous material shall be stored underneath any home. 
2.  Accessory structures shall only be permitted in accordance with Section 18.04.120. 
L.  Supervision. The licensee shall be in charge at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permittee, for the violation of any provision of this Chapter to which the licensee or permittee is subject. 
M.  Legal nonconforming manufactured home parks. Legal nonconforming mobile home parks shall be regulated by Section 18.04.090. 
N.  Violation - penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of the City of Evans Municipal Code. 
CHAPTER 18.07 - Development Standards 

18.07.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum standards for all development in the City. These standards promote a high quality of design in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare; promote environmental protection and conservation; and preserve the quality of life for City residents and businesses. 
B.  The City encourages the use of innovative design or development practices which further the goals of this Section. The standards included in this Article shall be the minimum standards applicable to all development in the City. 
18.07.020 - Design Standards. 
A.  Compliance with regulations. No final plat shall be approved by the Council unless it complies with the standards set out in this Chapter and the engineering criteria provided by the Public Works Department. 
B.  General standards. 
1.  The design and development of subdivisions shall preserve, insofar as it is possible, the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil and trees. 
2.  Land subject to hazardous conditions, such as landslides, mudflows, rock falls, snow drifts, possible mine subsidence, shallow water table, open quarries, floods and polluted or nonpotable water supply, shall be identified and shall not be subdivided until the hazards have been eliminated or will be eliminated by the subdivision and construction plans. 
3.  Provision shall be made to preserve groves of trees, streams, unusually attractive topography and other desirable natural landscape features. 
4.  A proposed subdivision shall be designed in such a manner as to be coordinated with adjoining subdivisions with respect to the alignment of street rights-of-way and utility and drainage easements and open spaces. 
5.  A proposed subdivision shall not, by reason of its location or design, cast an undue burden on public utility systems and community facilities on or adjacent to the tract. Where extension and enlargement or public utility systems and community facilities are necessary, the subdivider shall make provision to offset higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost necessitated by the subdivision. Due consideration shall be given to difference between anticipated public costs of installation, operation and maintenance and anticipated revenue derived from the fully developed subdivision in determining added net public cost. 
C.  Street plan and general requirements. 
1.  Street plan. The arrangement, extent, width, type and location of all streets shall be designed in relation to existing or planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety and in relation to the proposed use of land to be served. Streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the property, except where such extension is prevented by the topography or other physical conditions or where the connection of streets with existing or probable future streets is deemed unnecessary for the advantageous development of adjacent properties. All building sites shall have access to a public street. 
2.  Through traffic. Local streets shall be arranged so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
3.  Stub streets. Stub streets or extensions of new streets must be provided to connect to existing stub streets for an efficient street system. Not more than six (6) lots shall front on a stub street except where a temporary turnaround is provided. 
4.  Intersections. Freeways and arterial streets shall not be intersected by local streets. Collector streets shall not intersect arterial streets at intervals of less than one quarter (1/4) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet). 
5.  Street standards. Developers may apply for the following street standard options contingent upon the property being developed in accordance with the coinciding requirements: 
City of Evans Street Standards 
*Right-of-way
(in feet) Roadway width
(in feet)(flow line-to-flow line) Travel lanes (number, width in feet) Parking (number, width in feet) Sidewalk on both sides (in feet) Conditions: Gateway Arterial 120 72 4, 12 None 10-foot detached 13-foot landscaped parkways + 
20-foot raised median  
Driveways not permitted. Arterial 110 68 4, 12 None 10-foot detached Driveways not permitted. 11-foot landscaped parkways + 
16-foot turn lane or raised median  Major Collector 80 52 4, 12 None 8-foot detached Driveways discouraged. -foot landscaped parkways + Commercial Collector 70 50 2, 12 2, 7 8-foot attached Driveways discouraged. 12-foot turn lane or median  Minor Collector #1 65 40 2, 12 None 8-foot attached 12-foot turn lane Minor Collector #2 65 28' 2, 12 None 8-foot detached 7-foot landscaped parkways + 
Driveways not permitted 
Vertical curb & gutter 
No parking signs Boulevard Collector 80 50 2, 12 2, 7 8-foot attached 12-foot median  
7-foot landscaped parkways + Local #1 60 34 2, 10 2, 7 5-foot detached and 6-foot attached 6-foot landscaped parkways + Local #2 55 27 2, 10 1, 7 5-foot detached 6-foot landscaped parkways + Rural Local 60 28 2, 12 None None Permitted only adjacent lots of one acre or greater. 
Driveway crossing permitted at approved locations only 
Minimum 10' drainage easements, minimum 5' utility easements outside right-of-way, both sides. Alley 24 20 20 None None N/A  
* Right-of-way option: In accordance with traffic studies/warrants, additional right-of-way may be needed as required by the Director of Public Works. 
+ Parkway landscaping: parkways shall consist of ground cover with landscaped/xeriscaped areas that include shrubs, bushes, hedges or other landscaping ornament as approved by the City. Minimum two-inch caliper deciduous trees shall be planted at thirty- to forty-foot spacings in the center of all parkways. Species shall be selected from the City-approved plant materials list. The placement of all trees shall meet the city's sight distance standards as provided in Chapter 15.58. 
 Landscaped median: medians shall consist of ground cover with landscaped/xeriscaped areas that include two-inch caliper deciduous trees planted at thirty- to forty-foot spacings in the center of all medians. Shrub groupings may be added to the median design, but shall not substitute for any trees. Species shall be selected from the City approved plant materials list. The placement of all trees shall meet the city's sight distance standards as provided in Chapter 15.58. The developer shall be responsible for installing the median and providing a perpetual maintenance mechanism for the median. 
6.  Access and circulation standards. 
a.  Access from the City's street system to individual parcels may be granted after consideration of the public health, safety and welfare, impact upon traffic flow, street right-of-way drainage and the functional level of the street. It is the City's intent to protect the safety, traffic operations and the assigned functional classification of the street system while considering the access needs of the abutting properties. The location, design and construction of approved accesses shall be in accordance with Section Four, Design Standards and Specifications, of the State Highway Access Code. 
b.  Vehicular access and circulation shall be designed to be safe and efficient for use by all modes of transportation. Every use or site shall have access to a public street or right-of-way or a City approved private road, court or other area dedicated to public or private use, or common element guaranteeing perpetual access. Alleys shall not be used as primary access unless approved by the City. 
c.  Adequate access to and throughout the site shall be provided for emergency service vehicles as identified in the fire code or otherwise required by law. 
d.  Provision shall be made for the dedication of all rights-of-way needed for the improvement of existing streets or the construction of new streets identified in the City's Transportation Plan, except as otherwise agreed to in writing by the City. 
e.  Streets stubbed to the boundary of a site by previously approved development plans or existing development shall be incorporated and continued, to the extent practical, to provide for logical, orderly and convenient movement of vehicular traffic throughout the development, from one (1) neighborhood to the next and to local destinations such as parks, schools and shopping areas. 
f.  Commercial and industrial developments shall be designed to minimize the use of residential streets. 
7.  Half-streets. Half-streets shall not be permitted unless: 
a.  They are required to complete a half-street already in existence. 
b.  They are required to extend an existing street. 
c.  They are developed in accordance with Section 18.07.060.B. 
8.  Dead-end streets (not cul-de-sacs). Dead-end streets shall not be permitted. 
9.  Cul-de-sac streets. Permanent cul-de-sac streets, not exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length as measured from a point on the closest right-of-way line of the intersecting street, such point also being the centerline of the cul-de-sac, continuing along said centerline to the radius point of the cul-de-sac bulb, may be permitted, and must be provided with a right-of-way radius at the turnaround of fifty-five (55) feet or more, radius of roadway must be forty-five (45) feet flowline to flowline or more. 
10.  Number of streets at intersections. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one (1) point. 
11.  Angle of street intersections. Streets shall intersect at ninety (90) degrees, except where this may be impractical. Angles of less than ninety (90) degrees may be designed, subject to the approval of the City. 
12.  Centerlines of intersecting streets. Two (2) streets meeting a third street from opposite sides shall meet at the same point, or their centerlines shall be offset at least two hundred (200) feet. This requirement shall not apply to the alignment of opposing cul-de-sac streets. 
D.  Street names. Streets shall have the names of existing streets which are in alignment in the City. There shall be no duplication of street names within the area. The subdivider shall bear full costs for material and installation of street signs. 
E.  Streets - curvature and alignment. 
1.  To ensure adequate sight distances, when street roadway lines deflect more than five (5) degrees, connection shall be made by horizontal curves. The minimum centerline radii for local streets shall be one hundred (100) feet; for collector streets, two hundred (200) feet; and for all other streets, three hundred (300) feet. On collector and major streets, a minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet shall be required between a curve and street intersection; a minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet shall be required between reverse curves. 
2.  Vertical curves. 
a.  Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding one (1) percent, and shall be designed to provide minimum sight distances of two hundred (200) feet for local streets and three hundred (300) feet for all other streets. 
b.  No vertical grade shall be less than two-tenths (0.2) percent in order to facilitate adequate drainage. 
c.  Maximum percent of street grade, except as provided below, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Local streets, eight (8) percent; 
(2)  Collector streets, seven (7) percent; and 
(3)  Arterial streets, five (5) percent. 
d.  Where a horizontal curve occurs on a grade of over five (5) percent, the maximum allowable percent of grade on the curve shall be reduced by five-tenths (0.5) percent of each fifty (50) feet that the curve radius is less than four hundred (400) feet. 
e.  Street grades shall not exceed four-tenths (0.4) percent for a distance extending at least forty (40) feet in each direction from a street intersection. 
F.  Frontage near major highways. Where a residential subdivision abuts a major highway, service roads may be required. A subdivision that adjoins or contains an existing or proposed freeway or arterial provided in the Comprehensive Plan may be required to provide service roads at least thirty-six (36) feet in roadway width, with a sixty-foot right-of-way. 
G.  Roadbed construction standards. Roadbed construction shall be constructed in accordance with standards provided by the City under separate cover. 
H.  Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways, curbs and gutters. 
1.  Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways. 
a.  A system of public sidewalks constructed of asphalt, concrete or other approved materials and pedestrian pathways constructed of asphalt, concrete or other approved materials shall be incorporated into the site to move pedestrians throughout the site. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets and have dimensions in accordance with Section 18.07.020.C, unless sidewalks and their dimensions are specifically exempted by the City. 
b.  Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall connect the site with public sidewalks; all principal buildings on the site; parking lots and where logical connections to off-site locations can be made, as identified in the City's Transportation Plan for pedestrian and bicycle route maps. 
2.  Curbs and gutters. All streets shall be provided with concrete curb and gutter for pavement edging, unless otherwise specifically exempted by the City. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed according to standards as set by the Public Works Department. 
I.  Block standards. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Requirements of the zoning ordinance as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
3.  Need for convenient access, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation and of emergency vehicles; 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography; 
5.  Maximum block length between intersecting streets shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
J.  Lot sizes and standards. 
1.  Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and minimum building setback lines, shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall facilitate the placement of buildings with sufficient access, outdoor space, privacy and view. No lot shall be more than three (3) times as long as it is wide. 
2.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking, landscaping or planting area and loading areas required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
3.  Lots. 
a.  City and county boundaries. No single lot shall be divided by a municipal or county boundary line. 
b.  No separation by roads. A lot shall not be divided by a road, alley or other lot. 
c.  Access. Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
d.  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to accommodate the required building setback line on both street frontages. 
e.  Wedge-shaped lots. In the case of wedge-shaped lots, no lot shall be less than thirty (30) feet in width at the front property lines. 
f.  Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at substantially right angles and radial to curved streets. Where lot lines are not at right angles to the street lines, this shall be indicated. 
g.  Fronting on public streets. Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots shall not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential properties from arterial streets or adjacent commercial uses. 
h.  A statement dissolving right of access from individual lots to an arterial street shall be included on the final plat. 
K.  Easements. 
1.  Easements shall follow rear and side lot lines whenever practical, and shall have a minimum total width of twenty (20) feet along rear lot line and ten (10) feet alongside lot lines, apportioned equally in abutting properties. 
2.  Easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient installation of utilities. Special guying easements at corners may be required. Public utility installations shall be so located as to permit multiple installations within the easements to avoid cross connections, minimize trenching, and adequately separate incompatible systems. 
3.  The developer shall establish rough-cut final utility grades prior to utility installations. 
L.  Alleys. Service access to the interior of blocks may be permitted in certain instances, in which case such alleys must be indicated in the plats and be paved. 
M.  Driveways. Driveways shall be provided for vehicular access to each structure or parking or loading area. Driveways shall not be permitted to have direct access to arterial streets. 
N.  Sewage disposal facilities. In all cases, sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be provided for every lot or parcel by a complete community or public sanitary system. All sewer mains shall be installed in easements and/or dedicated rights-of-way. 
O.  Water supply and distribution. 
1.  All lots shall be provided water from the City water system. 
2.  The water distribution system within any development or subdivision shall be shown graphically. The graphics shall illustrate existing and proposed water lines, fire hydrants, valves, tees and all obvious and identifiable appurtenances thereto. Static pressure and flow rate shall be delineated at each fire hydrant within the subdivision, and at each fire hydrant outside the subdivision for a distance of six hundred (600) feet. The method for analyzing the pipe network system to acquire design values shall be the "Hardy Cross Method." Frictional losses shall be from published data, or furnished by the City of Evans. Head losses shall be computed using the "Darcy Weisbach" equation. 
3.  The burden of proof shall lie upon the subdivider or developer to show that sufficient water is available at peak demand to provide acceptable pressures for domestic use and firefighting needs. 
4.  All water mains shall be within dedicated public rights-of-way. 
5.  No water main shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any sanitary sewer main or service. 
6.  Fire hydrants shall be no further than five hundred (500) feet apart. 
7.  No water main or service shall have less than four and one half (41/2) feet of cover for pipelines twenty (20) inches and smaller, nor less than four (4) feet of cover for pipelines larger than twenty (20) inches, as measured from finished grade to top of pipe. 
8.  The minimum size water main in any local street shall be six (6) inches. The city reserves the right to over-size the pipe if it deems such action necessary. 
9.  The minimum size water main in any collector street shall be eight (8) inches. The City reserves the right to oversize or undersize the pipe if it deems such action necessary. 
10.  The minimum size water main in any arterial street shall be twelve (12) inches. The City reserves the right to oversize or undersize the pipe if it deems such action necessary. 
11.  Material and installation specifications shall be in accordance with the City's water department standards. 
12.  All City construction regulations and ordinances shall meet current Colorado State health statutes and regulations. 
P.  Storm drainage system requirements. 
1.  Drainage areas shall be left in a natural state unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. 
2.  A plan to prevent pollution or disturbance of a natural waterway shall be submitted whenever and wherever modification of topography is required by construction, within any distance of a waterway that stands to be affected by said construction. 
3.  A drainage plan shall be designed for any lot, parcel or subdivision, by an engineer licensed by the State of Colorado. 
4.  The drainage plan shall be shown graphically, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Existing topography of the site; 
b.  Proposed topography of the site; 
c.  Proposed improvements to the site; 
d.  Above ground and underground storm sewer facilities proposed; 
e.  Detention or retention facilities proposed; 
f.  Details of any structure designed to facilitate the diversion or containment of storm water; 
g.  Calculated flows (Q's) for a five-year storm frequency and a one-hundred-year storm frequency at all street intersections, intersecting water courses, inlets to below ground facilities, outlets from above ground facilities and outlets from below ground facilities; 
h.  Five-year and one-hundred-year flows (Q's) from any adjacent properties, with said flows (Q's) being a consideration in said plan; 
i.  The sequence of construction of all facilities as relates to the development construction; 
j.  Easements dedicated for watercourses, pipelines, etc., for the purpose of maintaining same; 
k.  Method of detaining any storm through a one-hundred-year frequency with a discharge equal to, or less than, that of a five-year historic frequency; 
l.  The carrying capacity of all above ground and below ground facilities; 
m.  The top of foundation elevation for each lot; 
n.  The design elevation at the lowest corner of each lot, and the design elevation at the lowest corner of each lot; 
o.  A general location map for the subdivision, showing the entire drainage basin involved and the development accurately outlined on same. The acreage within and without the development shall be shown. 
5.  The City shall designate the information source from which all storm design values must be extracted for the purpose of the design. 
6.  It is suggested and encouraged that detention and retention facilities serve a multipurpose function, i.e. parks, recreation, etc. 
7.  Flow arrows clearly showing the runoff flow pattern throughout the development must be given. 
8.  The impact of a five-year frequency storm discharge on any downstream structures and waterways must be furnished. 
9.  Pipe sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the computed flow of a five-year storm with zero head. No underground stormwater pipe smaller than eighteen (18) inches diameter shall be used unless approved by the City. No underground stormwater pipe smaller than twelve (12) inches diameter shall be allowed. The City reserves the right to oversize any pipe. 
10.  The velocity in an unlined water course shall not be designed to reach that velocity which may cause erosion of said water courses. No open water course exceeding two (2) feet in depth shall be constructed without lining and fencing, unless specifically permitted by the City. 
11.  Upon construction completion of the drainage facilities, whether in whole or in part, and prior to said facilities being acceptable to the City, a letter from an engineer licensed in the State of Colorado shall be submitted to the City attesting that said facilities have been constructed in accordance with the design approved by said commission and department. Said letter shall bear the signature and seal of said engineer. The drainage facilities shall be considered as unacceptable by the City until said letter is received and acknowledged by the Public Works Department. 
12.  No lot, parcel or development shall be allowed to discharge stormwater at a rate which exceeds the historic runoff rate of a calculated five-year storm, unless first approved by the City. 
13.  It will be unacceptable for any storm of one-hundred-year frequency and smaller to be designed to exceed the dedicated rights-of-way and drainage easement boundaries. 
14.  No landowner shall alter the drainage pattern of any lot such as to increase the quantity or decrease the time of stormwater runoff onto adjacent properties, nor shall any landowner impede the flow of stormwater through easements dedicated in whole or in part for drainage. 
Q.  Aquifers construction restrictions. 
1.  Any use of land which would pollute or contaminate an aquifer is prohibited. 
2.  The following regulations apply to development over aquifers that are within twenty (20) feet of the land surface and in the areas of aquifer recharge: 
a.  Construction of buildings shall not be permitted unless approved by the State Health Department and the Colorado Geological Survey; 
b.  Building construction shall have foundations designed by a professional engineer. 
R.  Floodplain use restrictions. For regulations regarding floodplain use restrictions, refer to Chapters 16.04 through 16.24 of this Code. 
S.  Irrigation ditches. Existing irrigation ditches shall be incorporated within the subdivision plan in a manner such that their function is not impaired. The ditches shall be protected from encroachment, and may be fenced in a manner acceptable to the ditch company. 
T.  Partial development of a parcel. Where an entire parcel is not subdivided, the subdivider must indicate his or her intended plans for disposition of the remainder of the parcel. 
U.  Public sites, parks and open spaces - dedication. Dedication of public sites, parks and open spaces shall comply with the regulations specified in Title 16, Chapter 16.42 of this Code. 
V.  Fire safety requirements. 
1.  All subdivisions shall be required to provide minimum fire protection. 
2.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced no more than five hundred (500) feet apart. 
3.  A fire hydrant shall be located at the entrance of each cul-de-sac street. 
4.  Minimum waterline size shall be six (6) inches within all subdivisions. 
5.  Fire hydrants that have two and one half (21/2) inch outlets shall have the National Standard Thread. Four and one-half (41/2) inch streamers shall have National Standard Threads, four (4) threads per inch. 
6.  Minimum residual pressure of twenty (20) to thirty (30) psi under fire flow conditions at the fire hydrant will be considered to provide minimum fire protection. 
7.  Fire hydrants shall be located on dedicated street rights-of-way, and be accessible to the standard fire pumper. 
W.  Undergrounding of electric, telephone and cable systems. 
1.  Electric power, telephone and a cable system connections and wire shall be placed below the surface of the ground in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
2.  Transformers, switching bases, terminal boxes, meters, cabinets, pedestal ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground connections shall not be located on power poles, but shall be placed on or under the surface of the ground and, where placed on the surface, shall be adequately screened and fenced as necessary for safety and concealment. 
3.  Electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and communication trunk and feeder lines may be placed above ground. 
X.  Street lights. Ornamental street lighting and associated underground street-lighting supply circuits shall be installed. The minimum requirements shall be seven thousand (7,000) lumen lamps at a maximum spacing of four hundred (400) feet. The street lighting plan specifying the number, kind and approximate location of street lights must be included with the final plat. 
18.07.030 - Residential neighborhood design standards. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to implement the City of Evans Comprehensive Plan and promote the health, safety and general welfare of its residents through thoughtful neighborhood design that discourages crime and encourages pedestrian activity and livability. 
B.  Applicability. These residential neighborhood design standards shall apply to all residential subdivisions created after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Chapter, unless otherwise stated herein. 
C.  Definitions. 
    Character means those attributes, qualities and features that make up, distinguish a development project, and give such project a sense of purpose, function, definition and uniqueness. 
    Commercial-grade equipment means playground and/or picnic/barbeque equipment used and intended for installation in high-use areas or public settings, such as parks or other recreational facilities. 
    Compatible or compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities or design which allow them to be located near or adjacent to each other in harmony. Some elements affecting compatibility include height, scale, mass and bulk of structures. Other characteristics that affect compatibility are landscaping, lighting, noise, odor and architecture. Compatibility does not mean "the same as." Rather, compatibility refers to the sensitivity of development proposals in maintaining the character of existing development. 
    Connectivity means the ability to be linked between areas, through vehicular and pedestrian transportation systems, including adjacent and proposed residential neighborhoods and schools, parks, trails, shopping and employment areas. 
    Crusher fines means crushed granite or other similar types of crushed rock, used for the surface of trails. 
    Multi-modal trail means a trail intended for use by different types or modes of transportation, such as pedestrians, bicyclists and/or equestrians. 
    Pedestrian plaza means an open space that may be improved, landscaped or paved usually surrounded by buildings or streets and available for pedestrian use. 
    Pocket park means a privately owned and maintained park providing passive recreational opportunities. 
D.  Homeowners' Associations. Homeowners' Associations shall be created and maintained pursuant to Title 38, Article 33.3, C.R.S., Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, as amended. Prior to selling any lots or obtaining any building permits, the developer shall deliver to the City a copy of the recorded declaration of covenants, rules and restrictions, and copies of the articles and bylaws creating the nonprofit association and filed with the Colorado Secretary of State. 
E.  Minimum subdivision design standards. Subdivisions shall be designed to include the following requirements: 
1.  Perimeter open space. No single-family or two-family lot shall directly about any arterial or major collector right-of-way. Such lots shall be separated from such right-of-way by an outlot at least twenty (20) feet in width. Neighborhood development plans shall include landscaping plans for such outlots in accordance with Section 18.07.070. A detailed landscaping and irrigation plan shall be reviewed for approval by the Director of Parks and Recreation prior to approval of the final plat. Such outlots shall be deeded to and maintained in perpetuity by the Homeowners' Association. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as precluding approved sidewalks, trails, subdivision signs, drainage swales or utilities in such outlots. 
2.  Perimeter fencing. The developer shall install a solid, six-foot-high perimeter fence or wall along all collector or arterial roadways adjacent to the development within the open space outlot required by the preceding Subsection. Perimeter fences shall be constructed of durable materials such as wood or vinyl pickets, stone, masonry or architectural block - chain link shall not be permitted for perimeter fencing - and such fences shall include columns or similar features, at least every sixty (60) feet. Breaks in perimeter fencing for pedestrian walkways are encouraged. Where a park or open space within the development adjoins a collector or arterial roadway, perimeter fencing shall not be required. Perimeter fences shall be maintained in perpetuity by the Homeowners' Association. 
3.  No more than fifty (50) percent of the certificates of occupancy in any given phase shall be issued prior to perimeter open space landscaping and perimeter fencing being completed in such phase. The Community Development Director may issue an extension for installation of landscaping due to weather unfavorable to planting; such extension not to exceed six (6) months. 
4.  All residential subdivisions shall provide ornamental street lighting, as approved by the Community Development Director or designee. 
5.  Where it is necessary for the primary pedestrian route to cross an internal roadway, the pedestrian crossing shall be designed to emphasize and prioritize pedestrian access and safety. Such crossings shall be identified using pavement treatments, signals, lighting, traffic-calming techniques, median refuge areas and/or landscaping, along with signs and striping. 
6.  If existing oil and gas facilities are located within the proposed subdivision, such facilities shall be located on outlots encompassing the entire building setback, except where roads and/or rights-of-way are located within such building setbacks. The developer shall install landscaping and irrigation pursuant to Section 18.07.070.M in such outlots, which shall be maintained by the developer or Homeowners' Association until such time such facilities are abandoned in accordance with Chapter 16.28 of the Municipal Code and the property is replatted for development. 
7.  A system of public concrete sidewalks ranging from five (5) feet to ten (10) feet wide and six (6) inches thick shall be provided to connect the site with off-site sidewalks and destinations as identified in the City's pedestrian and bicycle route maps in the Transportation Plan, as amended. In no event is the placement of a sidewalk or pedestrian pathway intended to displace existing landscaped areas or to duplicate existing pedestrian routes. 
F.  Neighborhood identity features. The purpose of this Section is to provide an organizational framework or structure for the layout of new residential subdivisions. On a neighborhood-wide scale, residents will have easy access to at least one (1) central neighborhood identity feature or gathering place (i.e. neighborhood park or recreation center). Such neighborhood identity features lend a "sense of place" to a new subdivision, thereby encouraging people to connect with their physical surroundings and interact with their neighbors. 
1.  Neighborhood identity features shall be provided within all eligible single-family, two-family, multifamily and mixed use residential developments as shown in the Neighborhood Identity Feature Table below. 
2.  Identity features may include, but are not limited to, a school (as approved by the appropriate school district), pocket park, trail system, pedestrian plaza or courtyard, community building, community garden, artwork such as a sculpture, water feature or fountain, picnic/barbeque area, or playground. Fencing, signage and/or other aspects of a required perimeter treatment shall not be counted as an identity feature. In no event shall credit be given for items that are required by other provisions of the Municipal Code, such as parkland dedication requirements, landscaping or perimeter treatment. All identity features not dedicated to and accepted by the City shall be maintained in perpetuity by the Homeowners' Association. 
3.  Neighborhood Identity Feature Table. Where the number of acres and the number of dwelling units proposed in a development results in two (2) different numbers of required identity features, the larger number of required identity features shall be used. 
Neighborhood Identity Feature Table 
Size of Residential Development
(residential acreage, dwelling units) Number of required features Under 5 acres or up to 20 dwelling units None 5-10 acres or 21-50 dwelling units One 11-50 acres or 51-150 dwelling units Two 51-100 acres or 151-300 dwelling units Three Over 100 acres or over 301 dwelling units Four  
4.  Credit shall be given for identity features as follows: 
a.  A system of trails, other than required public sidewalks, throughout the entire development shall count as one (1) identity feature. Trails should be designed to provide interesting and distinct areas for walking, bicycling and/or horseback riding in areas separate from and in addition to traditional sidewalks. Trails shall be designed and constructed using one (1) of the following designs appropriate for the location as determined by the Public Works Director and Parks and Recreation Director or designee: 
(1)  Ten-foot-wide concrete, concrete paver or brick, multi-modal trail; 
(2)  Ten-foot-wide crusher fines trail with collared edges intended for the preservation of wetland and natural riparian areas. 
b.  A pocket park or parks meeting all of the following criteria: 
(1)  No pocket park shall be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  The developer shall landscape the pocket park with groundcover and one (1) tree and five (5) shrubs per three thousand (3,000) square feet of area, which can be grouped or dispersed throughout the park, and install an irrigation system. Such landscaping shall meet the requirements of Section 18.07.070. 
(3)  If the combined area of all pocket parks is between one-half (1/2) acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet) and one (1) acre, it shall count as one-half (1/2) an identity feature. If the area is greater than one (1) acre, it shall count as one (1) identity feature. 
c.  A water feature, fountain or artwork such as a sculpture, shall each count as one-half (1/2) identity feature. 
d.  Playgrounds with commercial-grade equipment, picnic/barbeque areas with commercial-grade equipment, or court games (tennis, volleyball or basketball) at least one thousand (1,000) square feet in area shall each count as one (1) identity feature. Such features shall be reviewed and approved by the Parks and Recreation Director. 
e.  Plazas, courtyards or community gardens with irrigation systems and collars to define garden edges, which cover at least one thousand (1,000) square feet in area, shall each count as one (1) identity feature. 
f.  A community building at least two thousand (2,000) square feet in area shall count as two (2) identity features. An in-the-ground swimming pool site or splash park site at least two thousand (2,000) square feet in area shall count as two (2) identity features. This identity feature does not meet the City of Evans design standards and therefore cannot be dedicated to the City, unless reviewed, approved and constructed in accordance with the Parks and Recreation Department's regulations. If not City-owned, these facilities shall be maintained in perpetuity by the Homeowners' Association. 
g.  Other features may be considered credit toward meeting the identity feature requirement, subject to approval by the City Council after a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
h.  All neighborhood identity features not dedicated or not eligible for dedication to the City shall be considered common area and shall be maintained in perpetuity by the Homeowner's Association, unless otherwise stated herein. 
G.  Variety of lot sizes. All subdivisions or portions of subdivisions zoned R-1 or R-2 and containing twenty (20) or more residential lots shall provide a mixture of residential lot sizes in order to avoid monotonous streetscapes. Larger and wider lots are encouraged on corner lots, while smaller lots are encouraged adjacent to parks and open spaces. For the purpose of the following provisions, tracts, outlots and areas intended for parks, open space, future replatting or streets shall not be included. 
1.  No more than thirty (30) percent of all single-family and two-family lots of less than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet within the subject subdivision shall have lot areas that are within five hundred (500) square feet of each other. At least five (5) percent of all lots within the subject subdivision shall be greater than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet. Where adjoining two-family units are on separate lots, the sum of the area of the two (2) lots shall be used for the purpose of determining compliance with this Section. 
2.  The neighborhood development plan (NDP) shall include a lot statistics table, similar to the one depicted below, and shall list the number and percentage of single-family and two-family lots in each five-hundred-square-foot range between six thousand (6,000) and thirteen thousand (13,000) or greater. 
Lot Statistics Table 
Lot range (square feet) Number of lots Percent of lots From To 6,000 6,500 Not more than 30% for any one range. 6,501 7,000 7,001 7,500 7,501 8,000 8,001 8,500 8,501 9,000 9,001 9,500 9,501 10,000 10,001 10,500 10,501 11,000 11,001 11,500 11,501 12,000 12,001 12,500 12,501 13,000 >13,000 5% minimum Total  
H.  Neighborhood development review procedure. 
1.  Neighborhood development plan required. The neighborhood development plan (NDP) is a conceptual master plan intended to accomplish the goals of integrated master planning, connectivity between major developments, creation of park and open space networks across neighborhood boundaries, creation of neighborhood features and centers, provision of adequate utilities and high levels of residential design quality. NDP approval shall be required for all multifamily developments that contain more than twenty (20) units, whether or not on separate lots, and all subdivisions that contain more than twenty (20) single-family and/or ten (10), two-family lots or that contain more than five (5) acres. The requirements of this Chapter shall not be circumvented by successive replats of twenty (20) or fewer lots/units. 
2.  Submittal timing. An NDP shall be submitted concurrently with or prior to the final plat submittal, except for multifamily development, for which an NDP may be submitted after final plat approval. No building permits shall be issued for property that has not received NDP approval, unless such approval is not required by the provisions of this Chapter. Review of an NDP by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council shall be required prior to recordation of the final plat of the subject subdivision. The NDP shall be recorded concurrently with or prior to the final plat at the Weld County Clerk and Recorder's office. 
3.  Submittal requirements. 
a.  Application requirements. An NDP application shall contain at least five (5) color copies of the proposed development map, on twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch paper, at a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and containing the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  North arrow, date and graphic scale. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of developer and owner. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of engineer or designer responsible. 
(5)  Vicinity map. 
(6)  Existing and proposed street names. 
(7)  Dimensions of all lots to nearest foot, which may be scaled values. 
(8)  Lots and blocks numbered consecutively. 
(9)  Lot statistics table. 
(10)  Total acreage of the subdivision. 
(11)  Location and specifications of each neighborhood identity feature. 
(12)  Signature blocks: 
i.  Owner/developer: 
This neighborhood development plan has been submitted by me to the City of Evans for its approval. I understand that I am required to install the features shown on this plan and failure to do so may result in the City's refusal to issue building permits in this subdivision. 
      ___________ 
ii.  Notarial Certificate: 
State of ___________) 
County of ___________) ss 
The foregoing was acknowledged before me by _______ this _______ day of _______ , A.D. _______. 
My commission expires _______ . 
      Witness My Hand and Seal 
      ___________ 
      Notary Public 
iii.  Planning Commission Certificate: 
This Neighborhood Development Plan is hereby reviewed by the Evans Planning Commission this _______ day of _______, A.D. _______. 
_____
Chairman  
iv.  City Council Certificate: 
This Neighborhood Development Plan is hereby approved by the Evans City Council this _______ day of _______, A.D. _______. 
_____
Mayor  
Attest: ___________ 
   City Clerk 
b.  Each NDP shall contain the following elements unless the Director of Public Works determines that one (1) or more of the elements are unnecessary because all planning issues concerning the internal organization of the development and the relationship of the development to surrounding areas can be resolved through either subsequent subdivision or development review for the development. 
(1)  Land analysis element that identifies: 
i.  Natural or manmade features and amenities such as streams, irrigation ditches, significant views, stands of mature trees, historic or archeological sites or areas, agricultural outbuildings and actual and potential wildlife habitat (as identified by the Colorado Division of Wildlife) on the site and within one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
ii.  Land uses, existing or approved by the City, located within one-half (1/2) mile of the boundaries of the subject property, including oil and gas mining facilities. 
(2)  Location and provision of neighborhood features that will serve as focal points for the community, and identification of any design themes for the proposed neighborhood feature such as common architectural themes, landscaping themes, general materials and general styles. 
(3)  General organization of land uses and densities, including the placement of neighborhood features and activity centers. An NDP may include identification of general locations of conditional uses if the applicant chooses, but approval of an NDP shall not constitute approval of specific conditional uses. 
(4)  General auto, pedestrian circulation and trails network that complies with this Chapter, the Evans' subdivision regulations, as amended, and applicable City road standards and specifications. 
(5)  General park and open space network that complies with these design standards, the Evans' subdivision regulations, as amended, and the parks, recreation and trails master plan. 
4.  Review criteria. The City Council shall review an NDP and shall take final action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the NDP based on its compliance with the following criteria: 
a.  The NDP is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and with all other duly adopted plans and policies; 
b.  The NDP complies with all applicable zoning district, development and subdivision regulations; and 
c.  The NDP complies with this Chapter. 
5.  Staff review for compliance. 
a.  In the staff report compiled for the Planning Commission and City Council, the Director of Public Works shall include a written finding regarding the application's compliance or noncompliance with this Chapter. 
6.  The documents shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The submittal shall be reviewed for completeness within ten (10) working days. The applicant shall be notified of any inadequacies. Neighborhood development plan submittals shall be accompanied at the time of filing by a fee as established by City Council by resolution. 
7.  Additional review criteria. 
a.  Preliminary subdivision plats. In addition to the review criteria set forth in Section 18.06.080, as amended, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review all applications for preliminary subdivision plats for compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The plat complies with the terms and conditions of any previously approved neighborhood development plan; 
(2)  The plat complies with the residential site planning and site design standards and the mix of residential lot dimensions standards set forth in this Chapter; and 
(3)  The plat evidences the availability and adequacy of public facilities and services needed to meet the demand generated by the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  The City Council shall deny a preliminary subdivision plat that does not evidence such compliance, unless pursuant to waivers or exceptions contained in an approved PUD plan. 
b.  Final subdivision plats. In addition to the review criteria set forth in Section 18.06.090, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review all applications for final subdivision plats for compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The plat complies with the terms and conditions of any previously approved neighborhood development plan and/or a preliminary subdivision plat; 
(2)  The plat complies with this Chapter, including, without limitation, standards requiring a mix of lot sizes; and 
(3)  The plat evidences the availability and adequacy of public facilities and services needed to meet the demand generated by the proposed subdivision, or has provided measures to substantially mitigate any inadequacies. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall not recommend approval nor shall the City Council approve a final subdivision plat that does not evidence compliance with this Chapter, unless pursuant to waivers or exceptions contained in an approved PUD plan. 
18.07.040 - Architectural Standards. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to implement the City of Evans Comprehensive Plan and promote the health, safety and general welfare of its residents by encouraging high quality in the site design, organization and construction of new developments and neighborhoods. 
B.  Applicability. All new development shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise stated herein. 
C.  Existing uses and structures. 
1.  The standards of this Chapter shall apply to all building permits applied for after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter, except as may otherwise be provided for under the provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  Structures that were conforming prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter, but that do not meet one (1) or more standards of this Chapter, shall be considered legal nonconforming in accordance with Section 18.04.140. 
D.  Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, be defined as follows: 
    Adjacent house means a house on a lot sharing a side property line with the subject lot. 
    Architectural shingle roof means shingles that have added dimensionality because of extra layers or tabs, giving them a shake-like appearance. 
    Change of plane of front faade means thirty (30) percent to fifty (50) percent of the front faade of the house, excluding any garage or porch, is at least two (2) feet closer to or farther from the front property line than the rest of the faade. 
    Change of plane of rear faade means thirty (30) percent to fifty (50) percent of the rear faade of the house, excluding any garage or porch, is at least two (2) feet closer to or farther from the rear property line than the rest of the faade. 
    Decorative windows means: 
1.  Bay, box or oriel windows; 
2.  Window arches which form a semicircle over a door or another window below it; 
3.  Transom windows which form a semicircle over, but are not connected to, a door or another window below it; 
4.  Picture windows which are a minimum four (4) feet by six (6) feet, fixed pane; 
5.  Windows of unusual shape such as octagons, circles, etc., and with a minimum glass area of four (4) square feet; and 
6.  Sidelights which include at least one (1) window adjacent the front door, a minimum of one-foot wide and the same height as the door. 
    Double front doors means two (2) adjacent standard size front doors at the entrance to the house. 
    Eave means the projecting edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
    Exterior lights means lights of forty (40) to one hundred fifty (150) watts attached to the soffits of the house at least every fifteen (15) linear feet and decorative "wall lantern" lights on either side of the garage door. Security lights such as halogen lights and lights required by the building code shall not satisfy the requirements of this feature. 
    False vent on gable means a vent painted to match the siding or the trim of the house and being at least two (2) square feet in area, or having a diameter of two (2) feet for circular vents, on at least one (1) gable. 
    Fireplace chimney means a decorative structure on the roof of the house with stone or brick fascia and which is at least two (2) feet wide by one (1) foot thick and which projects above the roof at least one (1) foot at the nearest point. 
    Flush, recessed, alley-accessed, side-loaded or detached garage means a garage that is no closer to the front property line than the ground-level front faade of the principal structure. 
    Front faade means the exterior walls of the principal residential building that faces the street from which the building is accessed or addressed. 
    Front faade of one hundred (100) percent stone and/or brick means all siding on the front faade and each side elevation a depth of two (2) feet back from the front corners of the house is covered with either stone or brick material, or a combination of both. 
    Front faade of one hundred (100) percent stucco means all siding on the front faade and each side elevation a depth of two (2) feet back from the front corners of the house is covered with stucco. 
    Front faade of one hundred (100) percent stucco faade with stone or brick wainscot means all siding on the front faade and each side elevation a depth of two (2) feet back from the front corners of the house is covered with stucco and has a wainscot of stone or brick at least two (2) feet in height. 
    Front porch means a covered porch on the front of the house with a minimum depth of six (6) feet and a minimum area of seventy-two (72) square feet, excluding the stoop and any projections (e.g., bay windows). Front porches shall be open on all sides except where they adjoin a wall of the house and shall have columns that are at least four (4) inches wide. 
    Front yard landscaping means installation of a landscape and irrigation plan approved by City staff and shall, over the entire pervious area of the front yard, consist of: 
1.  Four (4) cubic yards of compost per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscape area, tilled in to the soil; and 
2.  Trees and shrubs in the front yard including a minimum of one (1), two-inch caliper deciduous tree or six-foot tall evergreen tree and three (3), five-gallon container shrubs or nine (9), one-gallon container shrubs; and 
3.  Nonliving groundcover materials such as decorative rock or bark mulch in twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the front yard; and 
4.  Groundcover consisting of established grass seed or sod in seventy (70) percent area of the front yard; and 
An irrigation system (drip-irrigation for woody plant materials and sprinklers for turf grass). 
    Front yards may be xeriscaped with a variety of low-water plants, such as native grasses and low-water shrubs and trees, to be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Irrigation for xeriscaped front yards is required, and no more than thirty (30) percent of the front yard shall contain nonliving groundcover. 
    Garage door painted to match house means a garage painted a color, other than white, that is the same as either the siding or the trim of the principal structure. 
    Garage door windows means two (2) windows per stall in the garage door panels of either the top row or the second from the top row. 
    Porch columns, eight-inch means all roof supports within the area of a front porch (and wraparound porch, if applicable) at least eight (8) inches by eight (8) inches, or eight (8) inches in diameter, as applicable, or clad entirely with brick or stone material. 
    Rear faade means the exterior walls of the principal residential building that are opposite and generally parallel to the front faade. 
    Rear faade of one hundred (100) percent stone and/or brick means all siding on the rear faade is covered with either stone or brick material, or a combination of both. 
    Rear faade of one hundred (100) percent stucco means all siding on the rear faade is covered with stucco. 
    Rear faade of one hundred (100) percent stucco faade with stone or brick wainscot means all siding on the rear faade is covered with stucco and has a wainscot of stone or brick at least two (2) feet in height. 
    Roof dormer means at least one (1) projection in the roof of the house with the same material as the rest of the roof and containing a window at least two (2) feet by two (2) feet or two (2) feet in diameter. 
    Roof pitch means the degree of roof incline, expressed in inches, as the ratio of the rise to the span, for the entire roof except that area over a front porch. 
    Shake shingle roof means real or simulated wood shingles. 
    Stone or brick wainscot means that at least the lowest two (2) feet of siding on the front faade, including a two-foot wraparound to the side faade is covered with stone or brick. 
    Substantial improvement means any change to an existing improvement that causes the size, height or area to increase by fifty (50) percent or more, or which costs fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the improvement prior to the change. 
    Three-car garage means a garage with three (3) stalls, each measuring at least nine (9) feet in width, and which conforms to all the requirements of Section 18.04.120.I. 
    Three-foot offset from adjacent houses means the plane of the structure nearest the front property line is at least three (3) feet closer to or farther from the front property line than the structures nearest the front property lines on either adjacent lot. 
    Three-tone paint means three (3) separate and distinct paint colors consisting of one (1) primary color, one (1) contrasting color, and one (1) brighter accent color used on the exterior of the house. 
    Tile roof means painted cement, clay, stone or slate tiles covering the entire roof. 
    Variation in roofline means a roof: 
1.  With ridgelines that are no longer than twenty-five (25) feet in any one (1) direction and that have two (2) changes of elevations of at least one (1) foot; 
2.  That contains four (4) or more gables, which face the front property line, including "false" or nonstructural gables; 
3.  That is of a "Santa Fe" style (i.e., a flat roof with parapets); or 
4.  That has clipped gable ends, as defined as at least two (2) triangular areas with a slope of at least 4:12 and where the ridgelines terminate at least two (2) feet in from the exterior plane of the house. 
    Variation in roof color means the color of the roof of the principal structure is clearly different from the roof colors of the principal structures on either adjacent lot. 
    Wraparound porch means a covered porch on the side of a house that extends a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from a front porch, as measured from the front corner of the house, and contains a minimum width of six (6) feet, as measured from the side of the house. Wraparound porches shall be open on all sides except where they adjoin a wall of the house. 
E.  Single-family and two-family dwelling architectural design standards. Where a single-family or two-family dwelling is the principal use, such dwelling shall comply with all of the following criteria prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy: 
1.  The primary entrance to a dwelling unit or units shall face the adjacent public street to the maximum extent possible. 
2.  All pitched roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12. 
3.  All pitched roofs shall have a minimum of twelve-inch eaves. 
4.  All vents and vent piping shall be painted to match the principal structure. 
5.  All doors and windows not bordered by brick or stone material shall have minimum three-inch trim. 
6.  No more than the lowest nine (9) inches of a foundation wall shall be exposed to view on any side of a house. 
7.  The faade facing a side street property line on a corner lot shall have at least one (1) window and/or break in the plane of the faade of at least two (2) feet. 
8.  Front faades. In addition to the above standards, each single-family and two-family dwelling on any lot platted after July 16, 2002, shall incorporate a total of sixteen (16) points worth of architectural features from the table below: 
Feature Credit towards
requirement Can count if same adjacent? 1 Flush, recessed, alley-accessed, side-loaded or detached garage 5 Yes 2 Front faade of 100% stone and/or brick 5 See below 3 Front yard landscaping 5 Yes 4 Front faade of 100% stucco with stone or brick wainscot 4 See below 5 Finished floor area of at least 1,800 square feet, excluding the basement 4 Yes 6 Tile roof 4 Yes 7 Front faade of 100% stucco 3 See below 8 Roof pitch of 8:12 or greater 3 Yes 9 Roof dormers 3 No 10 Stone or brick wainscot on front faade 3 See below 11 Shake shingle roof 3 Yes 12 Three-car garage 3 No 13 Variation in roofline 2 Yes 14 Roof pitch of 6:12 or 7:12 2 Yes 15 Architectural shingle roof 2 Yes 16 Three-tone paint 2 See below 17 Three-foot offset from adjacent houses 2 Yes 18 Garage door windows 2 Yes 19 Exterior lights on front faade 2 Yes 20 Double front doors 2 No 21 Front porch 2 Yes 22 Wraparound porch 2 Yes 23 Porch columns, eight-inch 2 No 24 Variation in roof color 2 See below 25 Fireplace chimney 1 No 26 False vent on gable on front faade 1 No 27 Garage door painted to match house 1 Yes 28 Shutters around windows on front faade 1 1 No 29 Decorative windows on front faade 1 See below 30 Change of plane of front faade 1 Yes 31 18-inch or wider eaves 1 No Total: (minimum 16 points required) 76  
Features in the table above with the word "No" in the right-hand column shall not count for credit if a house on either adjacent lot received credit for the same feature. The features numbered 2, 4, 7, 10, 16, 24 and 29 in the table above may count for credit on adjacent lots only if the appearance of the features differs in characteristics such as color, material or style. For example, two (2) adjacent houses may receive credit for using brick, if the brick on one (1) house is a different color from the brick on the other. 
1  Shutters around windows shall each be one half (1/2) the area of the window to which they are adjacent and shall be placed on all windows except decorative windows. 
9.  Rear faades. In addition to the above standards, each single-family or two-family dwelling on any lot platted after July 16, 2002, and along the perimeter of a subdivision and which is within one hundred (100) feet of an arterial or major collector right-of-way shall incorporate a total of eight (8) points worth of architectural features from the table below prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy: 
Feature Credit towards
requirement Can count if same adjacent? 1 Rear faade of 100% stone and/or brick 5 See below 2 Rear faade of 100% stucco with stone or brick wainscot 4 See below 3 Tile roof 4 Yes 4 Rear faade of 100% stucco 3 See below 5 Roof pitch of at least 8:12 3 Yes 6 Shake shingle roof 3 Yes 7 Variation in roofline 2 Yes 8 Roof pitch of 6:12 or 7:12 2 Yes 9 Architectural shingle roof 2 Yes 10 Three-tone paint 2 See below 11 Variation in roof color 2 See below 12 Shutters around windows on rear faade 1 1 No 13 Decorative windows on rear faade 1 See below 14 Change of plane of rear faade 1 Yes 15 Rear faade of 100% stone and/or brick 5 See below 16 Rear faade of 100% stucco with stone or brick wainscot 4 See below 17 Tile roof 4 Yes 18 Rear faade of 100% stucco 3 See below 19 Roof pitch of at least 8:12 3 Yes 20 Shake shingle roof 3 Yes 21 Variation in roofline 2 Yes 22 Roof pitch of 6:12 or 7:12 2 Yes 23 Architectural shingle roof 2 Yes 24 Three-tone paint 2 See below 25 Variation in roof color 2 See below 26 Shutters around windows on rear faade 1 No 27 Decorative windows on rear faade 1 1 See below 28 Change of plane of rear faade 1 Yes Total: (Minimum 8 points required) 35  
Features in the table above with the word "No" in the right-hand column shall not count for credit if a house on either adjacent lot received credit for the same feature. The features numbered 1, 2, 4, 10, 11 and 13 in the table above may count for credit on adjacent lots only if the appearance of the features differs in characteristics such as color, material or style. For example, two (2) adjacent houses may receive credit for using brick, if the brick on one (1) house is a different color from the brick on the other. 
1   Shutters around windows shall each be one-half (1/2) the area of the window to which they are adjacent and shall be placed on all windows except decorative windows. 
10.  An applicant may request consideration of a feature not listed in tables above. The Director of Public Works may approve the request and shall determine a point value for the feature for credit toward the requirements of this Section. The Director's decision whether to approve the request and, if so, the point value to award it, shall be based on the feature's size, uniqueness, and any other factors that may contribute to the distinctiveness of the house and the streetscape. 
F.  Multifamily architectural and site design standards. Any lot where a multifamily dwelling is the principal use shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  Elevations, materials and colors. 
a.  Exterior architecture elevations, including proposed roof style and pitch, window and door detail and materials and colors, shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding area if there is an established character. 
b.  All sides of any multifamily building shall include a combination of durable materials such as stucco, brick, stone; colored and textured concrete and decorative masonry block; glass or acrylic block; vinyl, concrete or wood siding; and hardwood and pressure-treated wood. 
c.  Accent and decorative components may also include marble and granite; steel, copper and aluminum; heavy timber; and terracotta. Other materials may be approved on a case-by-case basis. Materials and colors shall be indicated on elevation illustrations. 
d.  Every elevation shall be broken up through the use of decorative architectural features such as change in plane; molding, columns, cornice, frieze or arches; rigid awnings or canopies; color and texture variations; recessed windows or doors, bay windows, window sills or window boxes; decks and covered patios; or exposed structural elements like steel or timber beams. 
e.  Building entrances shall be identified and directly accessible from a public sidewalk or sidewalk internal to the site. 
f.  No fewer than one (1) building entry shall accommodate each four (4) units. Individual exterior entry doors for each unit are encouraged. 
g.  Windows and doors shall have at least three-inch exterior trim, unless otherwise enhanced with approved decorative features. 
h.  Windows and glazing shall not be highly reflective. 
i.  Reflective, neon, primary (red, blue, yellow) and secondary (purple, green, orange) colors shall not be permitted as exterior paint colors on any structure within a multi-family development, except for trim and accent by approval of the Community Development Director. Acceptable colors include subtle warm and cool colors, earth-tone colors and neutral colors. Samples of proposed materials and colors shall be provided upon request of the Community Development Director. 
2.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall be gable, gambrel, hipped or otherwise broken up through varying planes. Flat roofs with varying planes shall be considered on a case-by-case basis when appropriate to the architectural character of the building. 
b.  Roofs shall be constructed of asphalt, fiberglass, nonreflective metal shake or wood shake shingle; clay, concrete, fiber cement or non-reflective metal tile; slate; or non-reflective metal standing seam. Other materials may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Roof material shall be indicated on the elevation illustrations. 
3.  Screening and service areas. 
a.  Uses that generate noise and glare (including outdoor vending machines) and which operate twenty-four (24) hours per day shall not be located in areas of the site that are visible or audible from any residential land uses. Amenities, such as swimming pools, hot tubs and tennis courts, may be integrated into the site plan and located within visibility and/or audibility of residential units within the subject multifamily development, provided such amenity is not located closer than forty (40) feet from any unit, including a patio or balcony. 
b.  Individual exterior air conditioning and similar units are not permitted. Exterior mechanical units, whether ground or rooftop, shall be fully screened from view. The location of exterior mechanical units shall be indicated on the site plan. 
c.  Each multifamily development shall include one (1) or more areas, as required, for trash receptacles fully screened on all sides with minimum six-foot-tall privacy fences or walls constructed of materials consistent with the multifamily buildings. Such receptacles shall be, at a minimum, the equivalent of ninety-six (96) gallons (approximately one-half (1/2) cubic yard) per dwelling unit. Such areas shall be located such that each dwelling unit is within two hundred (200) feet of a trash receptacle area. 
4.  Site design. 
a.  Multifamily developments between five (5) and fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of one (1) public street or private drive, with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips that is continuous through the site, and connects to a public street on either end (referred to as a "through-access drive"). 
b.  Multifamily development sites greater than fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of two (2) through-access drives with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips. Multifamily buildings shall be arranged to enclose and frame common areas, which may include gardens, courtyards, recreation and play areas. Such common areas shall contain at least three (3) of the following features: 
(1)  Seasonal planting areas; 
(2)  Large, flowering trees; 
(3)  Community garden; 
(4)  Seating; 
(5)  Pedestrian-scaled lighting; 
(6)  Gazebos or other decorative structures; 
(7)  Play structures for children ages five (5) to twelve (12); or 
(8)  Natural environmental features, such as an existing creek, rock outcropping or grove of existing trees, but not a field of weeds as defined by Chapter 8.12 of the Municipal Code. 
c.  Other amenities may be approved on a case-by-case basis. Storm water detention areas or required setback areas around oil and gas facilities shall not count toward common area features. 
5.  Central mailbox stations shall be provided in accordance with U.S. Postal Service standards and shall be indicated on the site plan. 
6.  Parking. 
a.  Parking lot striping shall be an approved, reflective, white paint. 
b.  Required parking stalls and driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or a similar material upon approval of the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Minimum six-inch-high curbs shall delineate parking areas from pedestrian areas. 
7.  City of Evans standard ornamental light fixture shall be installed on public and private streets. Adequate pedestrian lighting shall be supplied throughout the development and may be in the form of low-glare pole or wall-mount fixtures, bollards or other acceptable type. The placement and type of fixtures shall be indicated on the site plan, for review and approval of the Director of Public Works/Planning. 
G.  Institutional and commercial architectural design standards. The following standards shall apply to all structures built in commercial zoning districts, as well as commercial structures in RC (residential commercial) zoning districts and institutional structures. 
1.  Elevations, materials and colors. 
a.  Exterior architecture elevations including proposed roof style and pitch, window and door detail, materials and colors shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding area if there is an established character. Colors shall be chosen from the Benjamin Moore "Historical Colors" color palette, or an approved color palette provided or made available by the City for viewing. 
b.  All sides of any commercial or institutional building shall include a combination of durable materials such as stucco, brick, stone, marble and granite; colored and textured concrete and decorative masonry block; glass or acrylic block; and hardwood and pressure-treated wood. Accent and decorative components may also include steel, copper and aluminum; heavy timber; and terracotta. Other materials may be approved on a case-by-case basis. Materials shall be indicated on elevation illustrations. 
c.  Front and street side elevations shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the wall area as window and/or glass door area. 
d.  Every elevation shall be broken up through the use of decorative architectural features such as change in plane; molding, columns, cornice, frieze or arches; rigid awnings or canopy; color and texture variations; recessed windows or doors, bay windows, window sills, window boxes or false windows; decks and covered patios; and exposed structural elements like steel or timber beams. 
e.  Building entrances shall be identified and directly accessible from a public sidewalk or sidewalk internal to the site. 
f.  Windows and doors shall have at least three-inch exterior trim, unless otherwise enhanced with approved decorative features. 
g.  Windows and glazing shall not be highly reflective. 
2.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall be gable, gambrel, hipped or otherwise broken up through varying planes. Flat roofs with varying planes shall be considered on a case-by-case basis when appropriate to the architectural character of the building. 
b.  Roofs shall be constructed of asphalt, fiberglass, nonreflective metal shake or wood shake shingle; clay, concrete, fiber cement or non-reflective metal tile; slate; or nonreflective metal standing seam. Other materials may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Roof material shall be indicated on the elevation illustrations. 
3.  Screening and service areas. 
a.  Uses that generate noise and glare (including outdoor vending machines) shall not be located in areas of the site that are visible or audible from any residential land uses. 
b.  Service and loading areas shall be fully screened, through the use of landscaping and/or fencing, from adjacent residentially zoned properties, internal parking lot driveways and public and private rights-of-way. Service and loading areas shall not be placed on the front or street side of a building, but rather at the rear or side of the building. 
c.  Trash receptacles shall be fully screened on all sides with minimum six-foot-tall privacy fences or walls constructed of materials consistent with the commercial building. 
d.  Exterior mechanical units, whether ground or rooftop, shall be fully screened from view. The location of exterior mechanical units shall be indicated on the site plan. 
4.  Site design. 
a.  Individual commercial buildings, whether on one (1) or more lots, that share common access driveways and parking spaces, shall be arranged to enclose and frame common areas, which may include parking areas with designated pedestrian crosswalks, pedestrian plazas and gathering areas, landscaping and similar common areas. Commercial developments between five (5) and fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of one (1) public street or private drive, with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips that is continuous through the site, and connects to a public street on either end (referred to as a "through-access drive"). 
b.  Commercial developments greater than fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of two (2) through-access drives with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips. 
5.  City of Evans standard ornamental light fixture shall be installed on public and private streets. Adequate pedestrian lighting shall be supplied throughout the development and may be in the form of low-glare pole or wall-mount fixtures, bollards or other acceptable type. The placement and type of fixtures shall be indicated on the site plan, for review and approval of the Director of Public Works/Planning. 
6.  Parking. 
a.  Parking lot striping shall be an approved, reflective, white paint. 
b.  Required parking stalls and driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or a similar material upon approval of the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Minimum six-inch-high curbs shall delineate parking areas from pedestrian areas. 
H.  Industrial architectural design standards. The following standards shall apply to all structures built in industrial zoning districts. 
1.  Elevations, materials and colors. 
a.  Building entrances shall be identified and directly accessible from a public sidewalk or sidewalk internal to the site. 
b.  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the front and street-facing elevations, up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the side elevations, and up to one hundred percent (100%) of the rear elevation may incorporate nonreflective steel siding or steel architectural panels. Other materials shall include a combination of durable materials such as stucco, brick, stone, marble and granite; colored and textured concrete and decorative masonry block; glass or acrylic block; and hardwood and pressure-treated wood. Accent and decorative components may also include steel, copper and aluminum; heavy timber; and terracotta. Other materials may be approved on a case-by-case basis. Materials and colors shall be indicated on the elevation illustrations. Colors shall be chosen from the Benjamin Moore "Historical Colors" color palette, or an approved color palette provided or made available by the City for viewing. 
c.  Front and street side elevations shall have a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the wall area as window and/or glass door area. 
d.  Front and street side and side elevations shall be broken up through the use of decorative architectural features such as change in plane; columns or arches; rigid awnings or canopies; color and texture variations; recessed windows or doors, false windows; or exposed structural elements like steel or timber beams. 
e.  Windows and doors shall have at least three-inch exterior trim, unless otherwise enhanced with approved decorative features. 
f.  Windows and glazing shall not be highly reflective. 
2.  Roof. 
a.  Pitched roofs shall have a minimum 4:12 pitch and shall not be constructed of reflective material. Roof material and color shall be indicated on the elevation illustrations. Flat roofs shall be allowed where appropriate for the architectural character and style of the building. 
b.  Roofs shall be constructed of asphalt, fiberglass, nonreflective metal shake or wood shake shingle; clay, concrete, fiber cement or nonreflective metal tile; slate; or non-reflective metal standing seam. Other materials may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Roof material shall be indicated on the elevation illustrations. 
3.  Site design. 
a.  When possible, individual industrial buildings, whether on one (1) or more lots, that share common access driveways and parking spaces, shall be arranged to enclose and frame common areas, which may include parking areas with designated pedestrian crosswalks, pedestrian plazas and gathering areas, landscaping, and similar common areas. 
b.  Industrial developments between five (5) and fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of one (1) public street or private drive, with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips that is continuous through the site, and connects to a public street on either end (referred to as a "through-access drive"). 
c.  Industrial developments greater than fifteen (15) acres shall include a minimum of two (2) through-access drives with detached sidewalks and six-foot landscaped planting strips. 
4.  Screening and service areas. 
a.  Uses that generate noise and glare (including outdoor vending machines) shall not be located in areas of the site that are visible or audible from any residential land uses. 
b.  Service and loading areas shall be fully screened, through the use of landscaping and/or fencing, from adjacent residentially zoned properties, internal parking lot driveways and public and private rights-of-way. Service and loading areas shall not be placed on the front or street side of a building, but rather at the rear or side of the building. 
c.  Exterior mechanical units, whether ground or rooftop, shall be fully screened from view. The location of exterior mechanical units shall be indicated on the site plan. 
d.  Trash receptacles shall be fully screened on all sides with a minimum six-foot-tall privacy fence or wall constructed of materials consistent with the building. Location and materials shall be indicated on the site plan. 
e.  Allowed outdoor storage areas shall be fully screened using a solid fence or wall. Chain link is permitted with tight-fitting, neutral-colored slats, such as white, ivory, beige, tan, or grey, or other pre-approved color. Fence location, materials and color shall be indicated on the site plan. 
5.  City of Evans standard ornamental light fixture shall be installed on public and private streets. Adequate pedestrian lighting shall be supplied throughout the development and may be in the form of low-glare pole or wall-mount fixtures, bollards or other acceptable type. The placement and type of fixtures shall be indicated on the site plan, for review and approval of the Community Development Director. 
6.  Parking. 
a.  Parking lot striping shall be an approved, reflective, white paint. 
b.  Required parking stalls and driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or a similar material upon approval of the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Minimum six-inch-high curbs shall delineate parking areas from pedestrian areas. 
18.07.050 - Adequate Public Facilities. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of the enhanced adequate public facilities regulation is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support new development are available concurrently and meet or exceed the adopted level of service standards established in this regulation, and to coordinate the impact of development with the City of Evans Capital Improvements Plan. 
B.  Applicability. This regulation shall apply to all development applications received after the date on which the regulation is adopted. 
C.  General requirements. An applicant for a development permit shall demonstrate that the following adequate public facilities are available or will be available to serve the proposed development by the time any portion of the development is occupied or in use. 
1.  Transportation. 
a.  All developments that are required to prepare a traffic impact study shall demonstrate compliance with the following transportation level of service (LOS) standards. 
i.  Existing levels of service at peak hour are maintained on all arterial and collector roads and at all intersections within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the primary access to the site, or the level of service shall not fall below LOS "D" as defined by the Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209 (Washington D.C.: National Research Council, 1998), as amended, as set forth below. 
LOS Volume to capacity ratio A 0.59 B 0.69 C 0.79 D 0.89 E 0.99 F 1.00  
ii.  However, if the current level of service on streets adjacent to the site or within one-fourth (1/4) mile is currently below LOS "D," then the applicant shall demonstrate that the LOS will not fall below the current level. 
b.  All developments required to prepare a traffic study shall also provide an overall access management plan that demonstrates free-flowing access to the site and avoids unsafe congestion conditions on adjacent public roads and streets. 
c.  The City shall prepare a Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) that coordinates transportation projects with the City of Evans Transportation Plan, as amended. The City shall continue to monitor the impact of new and already approved development for adequacy of the CIP. 
d.  The City Council may waive these requirements upon a showing by the applicant that the impact of the proposed development on roads and intersections will be nominal. 
2.  Water/wastewater/storm drainage. All development shall provide adequate and functional mains, stubs and appurtenances to each lot in accordance with the City's design criteria and construction standards and any applicable utility or drainage and/or erosion control report. 
18.07.060 - Improvements and Utilities. 
A.  Improvements to be constructed by subdivider. The following improvements shall be constructed at the expense of the subdivider in a manner which is consistent with sound construction practices and this Title. Where specific requirements are spelled out in other sections of these regulations, they shall apply: 
1.  Road grading and surfacing; 
2.  Curbs, gutters and driveways; 
3.  Sidewalks; 
4.  Sanitary sewer laterals; 
5.  Storm sewers or storm drainage system, as required; 
6.  Water distribution system; 
7.  Street signs at all street intersections; 
8.  Permanent reference monuments and monument boxes; 
9.  Street lighting; 
10.  Underground electric and communication utility lines and services, and all street lighting circuits; 
11.  Other facilities as may be specified or required by the City. 
B.  Improvements required for development of half-streets. 
1.  Arterial and collector streets. The developer shall construct all of the improvements required by Section 18.07.060.A, on the half-street, which is dedicated, with not less than two (2) traffic lanes completed. 
2.  Local streets. Development of half-streets designated as local streets shall not be permitted unless: 
a.  The developer obtains for the City a dedication from the abutting land owner of the other one-half (1/2) of the street; and 
b.  The developer obtains from the abutting landowner an agreement, in a form satisfactory to the City, which guarantees the cost of the improvements and construction of the same within time suitable to the City; and 
c.  The developer guarantees the construction of the improvements, as required in Section 18..07.060.A, on the half-street which he or she is dedicating. 
3.  Building permits shall not be issued for lots fronting on half-streets unless the requirements of this Subsection B and Section 18.07.060.E., below are complied with. 
4.  Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for lots fronting on half-streets unless: 
a.  Arterial and collector streets. The requirements of Section 18.07.060.E.. below are met and not less than two (2) traffic lanes are completed. 
b.  Local streets. The requirements of Section 18.07.060.E. are met, which includes development of the entire street and not just one-half (1/2) of the street. 
C.  Construction inspection, material testing and final plans. 
1.  The developer shall notify the City in advance of any construction work in order to permit the City to conduct certain inspections. 
2.  The developer shall, at his or her expense, and as directed by the City, provide the City with a reasonable number of test reports of materials used in the subdivision improvements. Such testing to be made on asphaltic paving material, street base material and other material as may reasonably be required by the City. 
3.  The developer shall provide the City, at no expense, three (3) sets of "as built" drawings and plans of all subdivision improvements as constructed by the developer within one hundred twenty (120) days following the completion of the improvements and one (1) reproducible set of drawings and plans within thirty (30) days of the City's acceptance of the improvements, signed and dated by the person attesting to the accuracy of the as-builts. 
D.  Maintenance bond. 
1.  Following the completion of the installation or construction of streets, curb and gutters, sanitary sewers, water works improvements and other subdivision improvements, the developer shall call for, and the City shall provide, a final inspection of required subdivision improvements. Upon approval of said construction, the City shall issue to the developer a statement approving the subdivision improvements. 
2.  The developer shall, upon receiving written approval from the City of the construction of subdivision improvements, provide the City with adequate surety covering the maintenance of all subdivision improvements for a period of one (1) year. Said surety to be subject to the approval of the City. 
3.  The developer shall, during said one-year maintenance period, provide any and all maintenance and repair required on the subdivision improvements and as directed by the City. At the end of the one-year maintenance period, the developer and the City shall conduct a final inspection of all subdivision improvements and the developer shall, where necessary, and at the direction of the City, provide any and all final maintenance and repair to all subdivision improvements prior to the City's letter of acceptance of the same for maintenance purposes. 
E.  Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
1.  A building permit shall not be issued until the following improvements have been installed by the developer and inspected by the City Public Works Department: 
a.  Water mains. 
b.  Sewer mains. 
c.  Fire hydrants within five hundred (500) feet of construction site. 
2.  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all of the improvements to be constructed by the developer as specified in Section 18.07.060.A are completed and approved by the Public Works Department. Exception: If a condition exists which is beyond the control of the developer, such as weather or frozen ground, and prevents completion of the development, then a certificate of occupancy may be issued provided the following items are completed: 
a.  Curb, gutter and sidewalk are installed. 
b.  All required utilities are installed including fire hydrants. 
c.  Street grading and base construction are complete. 
d.  The developer places in escrow with the City an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the cost of completing the development. Such cost to be determined by the developer and acceptable to the City Public Works Department. 
e.  The developer agrees in writing to complete the required development within two hundred seventy (270) days of placing the funds in escrow with the City. If the development is not completed within the specified time period, the City shall use the escrowed funds for completion. 
f.  The required developments under this Section shall be inspected and approved by the Public Works Department prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
3.  The provisions of this Section should not be construed as requiring development of an entire subdivision prior to obtaining a building permit or certificate of occupancy. A subdivision may be developed in phases with the provisions of this Section being applied to each phase. A minimum phase shall be total development of the length of one (1) street between intersecting streets. 
18.07.070 - Landscaping. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Chapter shall be to implement certain goals and objectives of the Evans Comprehensive Plan and to recognize the aesthetic, economic and environmental value of landscaping. 
B.  Definitions The following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, be defined as follows: 
    Caliper means the method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of size grading. The caliper of the trunk is measured six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to four (4) inches in diameter, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for trees measuring greater than four (4) inches in diameter. 
    Coniferous tree means any species of tree designated as a coniferous tree on the City's planting list. 
    Diameter at Breast Height or DBH means the diameter of a tree four and one-half (41/2) feet above ground level. 
    Groundcover means grasses or other plants and landscaping materials used to keep soil from being blown or washed away. Such materials may include, but are not limited to: turf, native grasses, low-lying shrubs or bushes, ivy, boulder/stone, wood chips, mulch, bark or other similar coverings, but not including weeds or bare dirt. 
    Multifamily residential means, for the purposes of this Chapter, any building or property containing three (3) or more separate dwelling units, regardless of whether the units are on separate lots, but shall not include commercial residences. 
    Nonresidential means any building or land use that does not contain a dwelling unit, except that it shall include security residences and commercial residences. 
    Oil or gas facilities means batteries, oil wells, gas wells, gas storage wells and gas facilities, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Oil and Gas Commission of the State of Colorado. 
    Ornamental tree means any species of tree designated as an ornamental tree on the City's planting list. 
    Service area means that area of nonresidential and multifamily residential properties used for trash or garbage collection, dock loading and unloading, outdoor storage or repair and similar uses. 
    Shade tree means any species of tree designated as a shade tree on the City's planting list. 
    Single- or two-family residential means, for the purposes of this Chapter, any property containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units, regardless of whether such units were built on-site or partially or wholly in a factory, but shall exclude properties zoned agricultural. 
    Street frontage means that part of a lot that adjoins street right-of-way, excluding alleys and right-of-way along rear property lines. 
    Weed means any plant listed as a weed by the Colorado Department of Agricultural. 
C.  Planting list. All species of required plantings shall be selected from the planting list provided by the Parks and Recreation Department, unless otherwise approved by the City Forester. 
D.  Minimum species diversity. To prevent uniform insect or disease susceptibility and eventual uniform aging and death of trees on a development site or subdivision, species diversity is required and extensive monocultures are prohibited. The percentage of trees of a single species relative to the total number of required trees for a development site or subdivision shall not exceed the amount shown in the table below, unless otherwise approved by the City Forester: 
Number of trees required Maximum percentage of any one species 10-19 50% 20-39 33% 40-59 25% 60 or more 15%  
E.  Size of plantings. Required plantings shall be of the following minimum sizes, unless otherwise noted in this Chapter: 
Shade tree Two-inch caliper, balled and burlapped Ornamental tree One and one-half-inch caliper, balled and burlapped Coniferous tree Six-foot tall, balled and burlapped Shrub Five-gallon container  
F.  Condition of plant materials. Required plantings shall have been grown in a recognized nursery in accordance with proper horticultural practice; shall be healthy, well-branched, vigorous stock with a growth habit normal to the species and variety; shall be free of diseases, pest infestation, or damage and shall conform to the standards set by the American Association of Nurserymen, as amended from time to time. 
G.  Irrigation. All required landscaping shall be irrigated. Use of nonpotable irrigation water is encouraged. The Director of Parks and Recreation may approve a temporary irrigation system for plants that can survive without irrigation once established. 
H.  Soil amendments and rock mulch or gravel. Soil in areas intended for plantings shall first be amended according to City standards in order to loosen compacted soil, improve the viability of plantings and reduce the amount of watering required. Rock mulch or gravel shall not be placed within two (2) feet of required trees. 
I.  Sight distance area. Plantings shall not be located where an immediate or eventual violation of the City's sight distance criteria as provided in the Municipal Code would likely occur. 
J.  Coniferous trees. To lessen the impact of icy road conditions during the winter months, coniferous trees shall be planted only where the shadow created by such tree does not, nor will not upon maturity, create a hazardous surface for drivers or pedestrians during the winter months. 
K.  Stormwater detention areas. Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be designed in conjunction with the stormwater drainage plan for the subject property in such a manner as to maximize the buffering effect of stormwater detention areas. Stormwater detention areas, whether or not located on property separate from the development, shall meet all of the following provisions: 
1.  Design and construction in a natural form to blend with the surrounding area. 
2.  Trickle channels designed to appear natural, using materials such as cobble, river rock or similar materials. 
3.  Landscaping with a bluegrass blend sod or seed mix or other City-approved type of sod or seed mix. 
4.  Installation of trees within and around the perimeter of the area at the rate of one (1) tree for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of surface area, with no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of such trees being ornamental. 
5.  No trees or shrubs planted such that they would have the effect of reducing the volumes of the pond below the design capacity. 
6.  Installation of an irrigation system approved by the City. 
L.  Screening of service areas. All service areas shall be screened with an appropriate, designated landscape area between the service area and rights-of-way or abutting residential property, and shall be designed to block views to the maximum extent possible without obstructing any sight distance areas. The width and length and number of trees and shrubs required in such landscape area shall be determined by the City based on the size and use of the service area and surrounding land uses. 
M.  Screening of oil and gas facilities. 
1.  The developer of any property containing one (1) or more oil or gas facilities shall install groundcover within the area of the facility setback except where paved and a minimum of six (6) trees per oil or gas facility either along adjacent right-of-way (shade trees), along adjacent residential properties (coniferous trees), or a combination of both. 
2.  Such trees shall not be located such that they would obstruct access to the facility, or within ten (10) feet of any pipeline. 
N.  Mature tree preservation and mitigation. Existing healthy trees and shrubs shall be preserved and incorporated into the overall site and landscape design to the maximum extent practical, as determined by the City. Certain trees and shrubs may be deemed unsuitable or unpreservable but must be shown on the landscape plan and shall not be removed until approval is granted by the City. The value of trees that cannot be preserved and need to be removed shall be determined by the City Forester and appropriate new replacements shall be planted at the rate of one (1) tree for every four (4) inches of DBH (diameter at breast height) lost. Location of replacement trees may be within the development or at an acceptable location within City right-of-way as approved by the City Forester. 
O.  Maintenance. Landscaped areas shall be maintained by the owner of the property. Property owners shall also maintain landscaped areas within the adjacent right-of-way unless an approved Homeowners Association assumes this obligation. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, irrigating, mowing, pruning, removal of trash and weeds and replacement of any required plantings that become diseased, infested or otherwise unhealthy. 
P.  Landscaping and irrigation plan requirements. All proposed landscaping and irrigation plans submitted for approval shall contain the following information: 
1.  Existing and proposed features. The approximate location and character of the following existing and proposed features and improvements: 
a.  Buildings and signs. 
b.  Landscaping. 
c.  Mature trees and other existing vegetation, labeled "to be removed" or "to remain." 
d.  Floodplains, wetlands, drainage ways and detention areas. 
e.  Overhead and underground utilities, including manholes. 
f.  Oil and gas facilities, if any. 
g.  Property lines and easements. 
h.  Other features or improvements which may affect the location of proposed streets, structures and landscaping. 
2.  A list of all proposed plant and landscape material including species, size and quantity and labeled on the plan. 
3.  Scale, date and north arrow. 
4.  Name and/or address of the project. 
5.  Name and mailing address of the owner/developer. 
6.  Signature of the owner/developer. 
Q.  Single-family and two-family residential areas. 
1.  Within two (2) years of the date of the original occupancy certificate for any single-family or two-family dwelling located in a subdivision approved after March 21, 2000, the owner of such property shall install groundcover, as defined by this Chapter, over all land not within the building footprint, paved or otherwise overlain by impervious surface, including such areas located on adjoining rights-of-way. After such two-year period, it shall be the responsibility of the current owners of the property to comply with this provision. 
2.  Homeowners and builders are strongly encouraged to plant trees along adjacent parkways within two (2) years of the date of the original occupancy certificate for any single- or two-family dwelling in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Such trees shall be installed within fifteen (15) feet of the street curb in the front yard and/or street side yard. 
b.  Such trees shall be shade trees. 
c.  All requirements of Chapter 8.14 (permit required for trees in the right-of-way) and this Chapter shall be met, except that such trees shall be at least one and one-quarter (11/4) inch caliper (containerized or balled and burlapped). 
d.  The number of trees that should be planted is based on the amount of street frontage (excluding collector or arterial frontage) of the subject lot as shown in the following table: 
Total street frontage of lot Minimum number of trees Up to 75 feet 1 75 to 150 feet 2 150 to 250 feet 3 Over 250 feet 4  
3.  The developer of any single-family or two-family subdivision approved after September 21, 2004, shall install shade trees and groundcover between the curb and the detached sidewalk of any arterial or collector street within or adjacent to the subdivision; one tree every thirty-five (35) feet. 
4.  The City shall not grant initial acceptance of improvements for single- or two-family subdivisions, or a phase of such subdivision, until a landscape and irrigation plan has been approved by the City for the landscaping of any arterial and collector rights-of-way, stormwater detention areas, and perimeter treatments located within the subdivision and until such plan is implemented. If weather conditions do not allow for installation of landscaping at the time the initial acceptance is requested, or if City staff has other reason to believe the immediate installation of landscaping would jeopardize its viability, City staff may grant initial acceptance if the applicant provides both 1) a cost estimate from a local landscaping company for the cost of materials and labor of the landscaping to be reviewed and approved by the City with an estimated date of completion, and 2) a letter of credit or other acceptable security in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the cost estimate. All landscaping improvements shall be inspected by the City for compliance with the approved landscaping and irrigation plan and regulations of this Chapter prior to granting initial acceptance or releasing the letter of credit, as the case may be. The City shall not grant final acceptance of improvements for single- or two-family subdivisions, or a phase of such subdivision, until all required plantings have that become diseased, infested or otherwise unhealthy have been replaced. 
R.  Multifamily residential areas. 
1.  The City shall not issue building permits for new multifamily dwellings until a landscaping and irrigation plan has been approved by the City for the site. City staff may, at its discretion, issue building permits with the condition that a landscaping and irrigation plan shall be reviewed, approved and implemented prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If weather conditions do not allow for installation of landscaping at the time the certificate of occupancy is requested, or if City staff has other reason to believe the immediate installation of landscaping would jeopardize its viability, such as in the case where additional buildings are yet to be constructed on the same lot, City staff may issue the certificate if the applicant provides both 1) a cost estimate from a local landscaping company for the cost of materials and labor of the landscaping to be reviewed and approved by the City, and 2) a letter of credit or other acceptable security in the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost estimate. All landscaping improvements shall be inspected by the City for compliance with the approved landscaping and irrigation plan and regulations of this Chapter prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of the letter of credit, as the case may be. 
2.  Landscaping and irrigation plans for all multifamily residential projects shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Trees and shrubs. For every three thousand (3,000) square feet or fraction thereof of the total property area, an average of one tree and five (5) shrubs shall be included. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required number of trees shall be ornamental trees. 
b.  Foundation plantings. Structures containing more than four (4) dwelling units shall have landscape areas along the perimeter of the foundation, except where pavement prevents such landscaping. Such landscape areas shall contain an average of one (1) shrub every five (5) feet. 
c.  All land not within the building footprint, paved or otherwise overlain by impervious surface or gravel, including such areas located on adjoining rights-of-way, shall be landscaped with shrubs, sod, or other groundcover, as defined by this Chapter. 
d.  In addition to the other requirements of this Section, one shade tree per thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage shall be installed in the right-of-way or within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way. 

S.  Nonresidential areas. 
1.  The City shall not issue building permits for new nonresidential buildings, except for accessory structures, until a landscaping and irrigation plan has been approved by the City for the site. City staff may, at its discretion, issue building permits with the condition that a landscaping and irrigation plan shall be reviewed, approved and implemented prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If weather conditions do not allow for installation of landscaping at the time the certificate of occupancy is requested, or if City staff has other reason to believe the immediate installation of landscaping would jeopardize its viability, such as in the case where additional buildings are yet to be constructed on the same lot, City staff may issue the certificate if the applicant provides both 1) a cost estimate from a local landscaping company for the cost of materials and labor of the landscaping to be reviewed and approved by the City, and 2) a letter of credit or other acceptable security in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the cost estimate. All landscaping improvements shall be inspected by the City for compliance with the approved landscaping and irrigation plan and regulations of this Chapter prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of the letter of credit, as the case may be. 
2.  Landscaping and irrigation plans for all nonresidential projects shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Properties less than one acre (forty three thousand five hundred sixty [43,560] square feet) in area shall have a five-foot wide landscape strip extending inward from any property line which abuts right-of-way. Properties one (1) acre or greater in area shall have a ten-foot wide landscape strip extending inward from any property line which abuts right-of-way. 
(1)  Such landscape strips shall include one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs for every thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage, as well as groundcover. Such trees and shrubs may be located within the adjacent right-of-way, contingent upon approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(2)  Such landscape strips shall not be utilized for storage or display of any goods. 
(3)  No structures (including fences) other than approved signs and retaining walls shall be located within such landscape strips. 
b.  All land not within the building footprint, paved, or otherwise overlain by impervious surface or gravel, including such areas located on adjoining rights-of-way, shall be landscaped with shrubs, sod or other groundcover. 

T.  Parking lot landscaping. The following requirements are intended to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights and parking lot lights, to delineate driving lanes and rows of parking, and to provide shade. The requirements of this Section shall not apply to single- and two-family residential properties. 
1.  Parking lots shall contain one (1) landscape island approximately every fifteen (15) parking spaces, equidistant from any other landscape island and one (1) landscape island at the end of each parking row, except where impractical, as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
a.  Each such landscape island shall be at least eight (8) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long, as measured from inside curb to inside curb, shall contain groundcover and one (1) shade tree, and shall be bordered by concrete curbing. 
b.  When parking lots require more than four (4) landscape islands, ornamental trees may be substituted for shade trees in no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the landscape islands. 
2.  Where parking rows abut end-to-end and each row contains more than twenty (20) parking spaces, the rows shall be separated by a planting strip at least a five-foot wide as measured from inside curb to inside curb. Such planting strips shall contain one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs approximately every thirty (30) feet, plus groundcover. 
3.  Parking spaces shall not be allowed to be located within five (5) feet of any property line. 

U.  Bufferyards. 
1.  Bufferyards are intended to shield residential properties from adverse impacts of adjacent development. 
2.  Bufferyards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel and may be required along all property lines to ensure buffering purposes, as determined by the Community Development Director. 
3.  Bufferyards shall not include any paved area, except for pedestrian sidewalks or paths, or vehicular access drives which may intersect a bufferyard at a point which is perpendicular to the bufferyard and which shall be the minimum width necessary to provide vehicular or pedestrian access, as determined by the Community Development Director. 
4.  Bufferyards shall not be used for storage or display of any goods at any time. 
5.  Bufferyards shall not be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated public right-of-way, unless approved by the Director of Public Works. 
6.  Fences may also be required in order to screen the property, as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
7.  Bufferyards shall include one (1) tree and five (5) shrubs for every five hundred (500) square feet of bufferyard area, plus groundcover over the entire bufferyard area. 
8.  Any development or redevelopment of a site which abuts a residentially zoned and/or residentially developed property (including but not limited to single-family, two-family, multifamily, mobile or manufactured home) shall install a landscaped bufferyard along the property line shared with the residential property, except residentially zoned property developed as a nonresidential use, such as drainage detention, recreational facilities or public service facilities. Properties separated by right-of-way shall not be considered abutting. The required width of such bufferyard shall be determined by the Community Development Director, based on the proposed use and the corresponding bufferyard requirement in the following table. For proposed uses that are not listed in the table, the Director of Public Works shall determine an appropriate bufferyard. However, single-family and two-family residential lots shall not be required to include a bufferyard. 
Use Required bufferyard along abutting residential property (in feet) Adult business 30 Animals, confined 30 Car wash facilities 20 Cemetery 20 Commercial residence 20 Community facilities 20 Congregate residence 10 Crematoriums 30 Day care center 10 Dwelling, multi-family 10 Flammable and/or combustible liquids and gases storage 30 Flea market 30 Group homes 10 Hospital 20 Industrial uses facility 30 Junkyard 30 Kennel 30 Long-term care facility 10 Manufacturing/assembly plant 30 Mini storage units 20 Mortuary or funeral home 10 Natural resource extraction and treatment 30 Nightclub, bar, tavern 20 Office and financial use 10 Personal service establishment 10 Public service facilities 20 Recreational facilities, indoor 10 Recreational facilities, intensive 20 Recreational vehicle (RV) park/campground 30 Recreational vehicle storage 10 Repair shops 30 Research laboratory 20 Retail uses, intensive 20 Retail uses, extensive 30 School 10 Staff supervised residential facilities 10 Theater 20 Treatment of humans, restrained 30 Warehouse 30  

V.  Nonconforming areas. 
1.  Any property that does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter, but which contains an existing principal structure that was issued a certificate of occupancy prior to September 21, 2004, shall be considered legal nonconforming. No building permit which would have the effect of increasing the gross floor area of any structure on such property, or of allowing any additional structure to be constructed on such property, shall be issued until a landscaping and irrigation plan meeting the requirements of this Chapter has been approved by the City. 
2.  The foregoing notwithstanding, existing multifamily properties shall be required to install screening for service areas and shall not be considered legal nonconforming. 
3.  Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to require the removal of any previously legal nonconforming structure located in a required bufferyard or landscape strip. 
W.  Violation-Penalty. 
1.  In addition to the other provisions of this Chapter, the following are prohibited: 
a.  Failure to implement a landscape and irrigation plan as approved; 
b.  Alteration of the landscaping of an approved landscape and irrigation plan without the prior approval of the City; 
c.  Destruction or removal of any tree of a species listed on the City's planting list without the prior approval of the City Forester, except on single-family and two-family lots. 
2.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a violation of the Municipal Code and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this Code. 
3.  In the event a property owner fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the City may perform the required action and invoice the property owner responsible, plus a ten-percent fee for inspection and other administrative costs. The City shall first give written notice to the property owner of the required action and allow at least fourteen (14) days to comply. In the event a property owner fails to pay an invoice from the City for such costs and fees within thirty (30) days of receipt, the City may file a lien on the property with the County Treasurer's office to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with an additional ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general property taxes and prior assessments. Nothing in this Section shall preclude or prevent the City from punishing violations of this Code in accordance with Section 1.16.010. 
18.07.080 - Off-street parking and loading. 
A.  Intent. These standards are to ensure that off-street parking areas are designed to be safe, accessible, convenient, and attractive. Off-street parking and loading areas should reduce traffic congestion, hazards and pedestrian and vehicular conflicts; protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by more intense land uses and districts. Parking facilities shall accommodate the proportional needs generated by varying types of land uses. 
B.  Minimum parking requirements. 
1.  The off-street parking requirements in the parking requirements table have been established to meet the expected typical parking demand for land uses. In cases not specifically addressed by these requirements, the Community Development Director shall be authorized to determine parking requirements using the parking requirements table as a guide. When the number of parking spaces required by this table results in a fractional space any fraction shall be counted as one (1) additional space. 
2.  The following off-street parking areas shall be provided in connection with the erection or increase by units or dimensions of any of the following buildings or structures: 
Land use Number of spaces required Single-family Residential 2 For dwelling units located on lots with less than 35' of street frontage: 1 additional space per unit Two-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit Multi-family dwellings (3 or more units) 1.5 spaces per unit, plus guest parking as identified below  One-bedroom multi-family units  Two-bedroom multi-family units 1.75 spaces per unit, plus guest parking as identified below  Three-bedroom multi-family units 2 spaces per unit, plus guest parking as identified below  Four+-bedroom multi-family units 3 spaces per unit, plus guest parking as identified below Guest parking (for multi-family units, to be provided in addition to required resident parking): 1 spaces for the first 5 dwelling units or portion thereof, plus 1 space per every 5 additional dwelling units or portion thereof, up to 100 dwelling units For dwelling units located on lots with less than 35' of street frontage: 1 additional space per unit Congregate residences 0.5 space per bed or 1 space per bedroom, whichever is greater Hospitals 1 space per 2 beds, plus 2 spaces per 3 employees on the major shift Long-term care facilities 1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space per employee Office and financial uses 1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area Mortuaries and funeral parlors 1 space per 4 seats Bowling alleys 4 spaces per lane (plus additional spaces required by this schedule for supplemented activities, such as dining rooms, coffee shops, lounges, pro shops, etc. Theaters, auditoriums, sports arenas and stadiums 1 space per 3 seats Churches 1 space per 4 seats Establishments handling the sale and consumption on the premises of food, alcoholic beverages and other refreshments 1 space per 3 seats Retail sales and service 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Commercial Residence (hotels, motels, etc.) 1 space per guest room, plus specified requirements for related commercial uses, conference pace and manager's unit Schools (elementary, middle or junior high) 2 spaces per classroom Schools (high school) 1 space per 4 students, plus 1 space per employee Trade and business schools 1 space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area Wholesale sales and service 1 space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area Manufacturing and industrial activities 1 space for each 2 employees, determined on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any period of time (plus 1 additional for each company vehicle based at the location) Any land use activity not otherwise identified in this section A number of spaces determined by the administrative officer to be reasonably necessary requirements shall be consistent with the requirements set forth above for comparable use activities  
C.  Improvement of parking areas. 
1.  Where lights are required for nighttime parking, they shall not shine directly on adjacent properties; 
2.  All entrances and exits to parking lots shall be clearly marked with white pavement markings or attractive signs clearly visible from the street; 
3.  Entrances and exits to parking areas and/or facilities shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the intersecting property lines at street intersections; 
4.  All parking areas shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete surfacing, and shall have appropriate bumper guards where needed. 
D.  Size and location of off-street spaces. 
1.  The required minimum area for an off-street parking space shall be nine (9) feet wide by nineteen (19) feet long and the maximum area for driveway frontage shall be twenty (20) feet. Driveway frontage in excess of twenty (20) feet shall require written approval from the Public Works Director. 
2.  Off-street parking spaces may be located on the same lot as the use for which they are provided or they may be located on one or several separate parcels located adjacent to the use which they serve. 
3.  At least forty-five percent (45%) of the front yard of a lot shall be open space, except on irregular-shaped lots having less than thirty-five (35) feet of lot frontage. 
4.  For residential land uses, required off-street parking shall not be located within the first fifteen (15) feet of a front yard setback (extending from the front yard property line). 
E.  Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading spaces, each containing five hundred (500) square feet with no one (1) dimension less than ten (10) feet, shall be required as an accessory use for new construction or major additions involving an increase in floor area, as follows: One (1) off-street loading space for floor area between ten thousand (10,000) square feet and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, plus one (1) additional off-street loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof of floor area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, no such loading space occupies any part of a public street, alley, driveway or sidewalk. 
18.07.090 - Special yard regulations. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of establishing special yard regulations is to ensure the quality appearance of the community. 
B.  Special yard requirements. 
1.  In any residential or commercial district where lots comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of the street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of not more than ten (10) feet, the average front yard of such buildings shall be the minimum required. In transitional areas, a variance may be granted by approval of the City Council. 
2.  When a side yard is otherwise required by this Title, the side yard along the street side of a reverse corner lot shall be not less than the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
3.  No part of a yard required for a building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Title shall be included as a yard for another building. 
4.  Cornices, canopies, chimneys, eaves, fire escapes and similar architectural features may extend into a required yard setback not more than two (2) feet. 
CHAPTER 18.08 - Signs 

18.08.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum standards for the design, placement, size and maintenance of signs located within the City in order to promote, preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
B.  It is the intent of this Chapter to promote signage that: 
1.  Clearly identifies the location of businesses, public places, residential developments and similar establishments and uses; 
2.  Visually enhances the property on which it is located, as well as adjacent properties and the City, overall; 
3.  Minimizes distractions and obstructions to visibility for pedestrians and motorists, thus reducing traffic and safety hazards from signs; 
4.  Is appropriate for the zoning district in which the signage is located and the use to which it pertains; and 
5.  Is consistent with other community planning, land use, traffic, building and development standards. 
18.08.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases below shall have the following meanings: 
    Accessory wall sign means a sign that does not contain the name of the business, but contains the logo, trademark or description of a primary service offered such as "building supplies" or "pharmacy." 
    Address sign means a permanent sign that gives only the address or name of a building or residence, without reference to, or inclusion of, the name or logo of a product sold or service performed on the lot or in a building, structure or business enterprise occupying the site. 
    Advertise means to attract attention to a business, product, service, event or activity through the use of print, broadcast or electric media, such as with a sign or banner or with other materials, such as display items, pennants or balloons. 
    Awning means a projecting architectural feature made of fabric or a flexible material, with a rigid frame for support, usually over a door or window. 
    Awning sign means a permanent sign either attached to or painted onto an awning. 
    Balloon means a type of inflatable sign. 
    Banner sign means a temporary sign applied to fabric or other flexible material with no enclosing framework. 
    Bus stop sign means signs on benches and bus shelters at actual bus stops of Greeley Transit Services. 
    Business means for profit and non-profit organizations, such as churches, as applicable. 
    Cabinet or cabinet sign means an individual box-like structure consisting of a perimeter frame to support sign faces, not including the internal components, embellishments or support structure. 
    Canopy means an architectural feature projecting at least three (3) feet out from a wall and made of a rigid material, usually over a door or window; also, a freestanding, roof-like structure with at least three (3) open sides to protect pedestrians from weather and provide nighttime lighting, such as for gas station islands. 
    Canopy sign means a permanent sign affixed to a canopy. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion of a sign that can be easily changed manually or electronically for the purpose of displaying frequently changing information incidental to the sign owner's business, such as a gasoline price sign or drive-thru menu board, or that displays other information such as the time and temperature, and which displays all copy for at least three (3) seconds. 
    Channel letters and channel sign means individual letters or symbols constructed to be applied singly in the formation of a wall sign or a freestanding sign, whether or not illuminated. 
    Clearance means the minimum vertical distance between the grade of the nearest adjacent sidewalk, street or curb and the lowest point of a sign, including frame. 
    Coming soon sign means a temporary sign erected prior to the opening of the establishment to which the sign relates. 
    Commemorative sign means a permanent sign, tablet, cornerstone or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or landmark. 
    Community event sign means a temporary sign that provides information relating to any community event sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency or by any religious or charitable institution. 
    Community facility sign means a permanent sign identifying a facility or service offered by a government agency. Examples include signs for parks, museums, public hospitals, swimming pools, fire stations and schools. 
    Comprehensive sign program means a graphic representation, including plans and elevations, showing all signage proposed for a multi-tenant building, multi-tenant center or subdivision. 
    Contractor sign means a temporary sign naming those engaged in the design, financing, marketing and/or construction on the property where the sign is located. 
    Dilapidated sign means any sign with broken, cracked or discolored display panels, broken, bent, corroded or discolored support structure or frame, torn or discolored material or that is otherwise unreadable under normal viewing circumstances; any sign or portion thereof that exhibits visually obvious conditions of poor maintenance; faded, broken or missing panels or general deterioration; any sign or portion thereof that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such cause. 
    Directional sign means a permanent, on-site sign that provides directions necessary or convenient for visitors, clients or customers entering a site; for example, signs indicating "entrance," "exit," "parking" or "loading zone." 
    Display item means an on-site representation or sample of a product a business offers and located in a place not intended for its long-term storage, such as in a parking area. Examples of display items include tires, hot tubs, scooters and similar items. 
    Election sign means a temporary sign relating to a public election identifying or supporting candidates or issues in connection with any political party or candidate running for public office during a specific election. 
    Flag means a piece of cloth, usually rectangular in shape, of distinctive color and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal or emblem, representative of an organization of nations, states, or cities, or fraternal, religious, or civic organizations or educational institution, or used to advertise. 
    Flashing sign means any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times, but not including signs that meet the definition of changeable copy signs contained herein. 
    Freestanding sign means a permanent, self-supporting sign attached to the ground, rather than to a structure, by means of one (1) or more columns, uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground. 
    Garage/yard sale sign means a temporary sign advertising the sale of personal property by the owner of a residential property on his or her property. 
    Grand opening event means the promotional period beginning on the date a new business is open for business, including a change in ownership, change of business location, major remodeling (more than fifty percent [50%] of the size or replacement value), or change in type of business. 
    Grand opening event sign means a temporary sign for a grand opening event. 
    Holiday decorations means temporary signs in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, state, local, religious or commonly recognized holiday. 
    Home occupation sign means a permanent, nonilluminated window sign identifying a licensed and permitted home occupation within a residential unit. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign with an internal or external light source for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
    Inflatable sign means any air- or gas-filled, balloon-like advertising device either located on the ground or attached by means of a rope, tether or similar apparatus to a fixed location. 
    Kiosk/plaza sign means a freestanding sign owned by the City and located in a public right-of-way or on private property, with the property owner's written permission, for the purpose of directing the public to development projects, businesses and/or public facilities. 
    Logo means any graphic identification, with or without lettering, used to identify a business. 
    Lot means an integral unit of land held under unified ownership in fee or co-tenancy, or under legal control equivalent to such ownership, whether part of a platted subdivision or otherwise, upon which an establishment or residence customarily uses for conducting business or residing. 
    Monument sign means an on-site sign attached to the ground, rather than to a structure, that has a base at least as wide and deep as the frame that holds the panels, cabinets or channel sign. 
    Moving sign means a permanent sign that, in whole or in part, rotates, revolves or otherwise is in motion. 
    Multi-tenant building/multi-tenant center means a building or center that contains two (2) or more businesses that share the same site and use common points of ingress and egress to and from the site, whether or not on a single lot. 
    Multi-tenant sign means a permanent, freestanding sign displaying the name of each business in a multi-tenant building or multi-tenant center. 
    Nonplanar sign means a sign that has a depth greater than two (2) feet. 
    Nonresidential sign in a residential zone means a permanent sign within a residential zoning district identifying a lawful use other than a home occupation within such zoning district. Examples include signs for day care centers that have special approval, churches and other cultural or religious facilities, privately owned golf courses, group homes and long-term care facilities. 
    Off-premise or off-site sign means a sign that advertises a business, product, service, event or activity not located or offered on the premises where the sign is displayed. 
    On-premise or on-site sign means a sign that advertises a business, product, service, event or activity legally located or offered on the premises where the sign is displayed, or a sign advertising the sale or lease of the property on which the sign is located. 
    Open house sign means a temporary sign for the purpose of directing people to a residential unit being offered for sale. 
    Painted wall sign means letters, numbers, motif, symbol, figure, object, mural or any other design painted on a wall and meant to advertise a product or service, but not any other surface such as a panel to be affixed to a wall or post. 
    Pennant means one (1) or more pieces of plastic or cloth, usually each triangular in shape and attached to each other through a line, wire or cord, to call out attention to a property or item. 
    Permanent sign means a sign attached to a permanent structure or the ground and made of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of the time that the business, product, service, event or activity is located on the lot. 
    Permanent structure means the principal structure, which shall be structurally sound and designed to remain continuously in place. Trees, shrubbery, sign supports, utility poles, accessory structures, fences and similar objects shall not be considered permanent structures. 
    Planar sign means a sign that has a depth of two (2) feet or less. 
    Pole sign means a self-supporting, permanent sign mounted on one (1) or more freestanding poles, columns or similar support. 
    Portable sign means a sign located on an object with wheels, such as a trailer, but not including signs on motorized vehicles. 
    Post and panel sign means a temporary or permanent sign with nonilluminated, planar sign face supported by two (2) posts. 
    Primary building frontage means the face of the building providing main vehicular and/or pedestrian access and/or the primary orientation of the building. 
    Primary street frontage means that portion of a lot adjacent to the right-of-way, excluding alley frontage. 
    Principal wall sign means the sign containing the name of the business. 
    Prohibited activities sign means a permanent sign located on a permanent structure posting a warning or prohibited activity, such as "no hunting" or "no swimming." 
    Projecting sign means a sign attached by one vertical side of the sign to a structure and that extends out from the structure at an approximate ninety-degree angle. 
    Public sign means a sign required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, which may be of any type, number, area, height above grade, location, illumination or animation specified or allowed by such law, statute or ordinance; for example: speed limit signs and historic markers. 
    Pylon sign means a permanent, freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more poles that are no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total sign height and that are encased in decorative material, such as stone, brick or stucco, to fully conceal the support structure. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary, on-site sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of all or a portion of a building and/or land. 
    Religious or ideological sign shall means a sign that conveys one's personal views on worship, ethics, philosophy of life, political or similar beliefs. Religious or ideological signs do not include election signs. 
    Revolving beacon means a light that shines outward and rotates from a single point or location. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected upon or above a roof or above a parapet wall of a building or any portion of a sign that extends beyond the roofline or parapet wall. 
    Sandwich board sign means a sign constructed to form an "A" or tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top, and not secured to the ground or a structure. 
    Sign means any device, display, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, structure or any other contrivance designed, intended or used to attract attention, convey a message, advertise or to give information in the nature of advertising, including all necessary supports, brackets, framework, structural components and similar equipment whether or not actual graphics are attached or in place, and that is visible from the travel way of any public right-of-way. 
    Sign face means the surface area upon which a message is displayed, including any perimeter frame used to support such surface area, but not including the support structure or base of a freestanding sign. 
    Special sign means a temporary sign advertising a product, sale, promotion or other special offer and which does not meet the definition of any other temporary sign defined herein. 
    Street frontage means that portion of a lot that adjoins any public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
    Subdivision means, for the purposes of this Chapter, a residential neighborhood, manufactured home community, mobile home park, business or industrial park, multifamily complex, or similar contiguous development of land identified within the community for a group of homes or businesses. Examples of subdivisions include Willowbrook Subdivision, Evans Industrial Park, and Cave Creek Land-Lease Community. 
    Subdivision sign means a permanent sign identifying a recognized subdivision. 
    Suspended sign means a permanent sign that suspended from the underside of a surface, such as an eave, canopy or awning, and which is supported by such surface. 
    Temporary sign means a sign that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
    Wall means the exterior face of any building, including but not limited to mansards, parapets, doors and similar architectural features, excluding windows, that are nearly perpendicular to the surrounding grade, or at seventy-five-degree to one hundred ten-degree angles as measured from the surrounding grade, that have the capability of being seen from public right-of-way. 
    Wall area means that portion of a vertical plane of a building owned or leased by a business, including any windows or gables, but not including any roof area. 
    Wall sign means a sign with its backing affixed flush to an exterior wall of a building. 
    Window sign means a temporary or permanent sign posted, painted, placed or affixed to the interior or within two (2) feet inside of an exterior window. 
18.08.030 - Sign measurement. 
A.  Height shall be measured by the vertical distance from the nearest surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign or structure, including base and/or support structure. 
B.  Sign setback shall be measured from the property line inward to the nearest point of the sign or support structure. 
C.  Size. 
1.  Linear objects shall be measured in linear feet and shall be the maximum distance, end to end, of the object. 
2.  Planar signs. 
a.  Planar signs shall be measured in square feet by the sign face area. 
b.  Unless otherwise indicated herein, only one (1) side of a two-sided sign shall be counted toward the maximum sign face area allowed as long as the angle between the sign faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less. 
c.  Cabinet sign face area shall be measured by that portion of the extreme limits of the frame contained within a continuous rectangular perimeter. In the case of an irregularly shaped frame, the area shall be calculated using the smallest rectangular area within which the frame would fit. 
d.  Channel sign face area shall be measured by that portion of the extreme limits of the channel letters contained within a continuous perimeter drawn with not more than twelve (12) straight lines at ninety-degree angles to each other. 
e.  Flags, banners and other flexible fabric-sign face area shall be measured by the area of the smallest rectangle that would encase the extreme limits of the fabric when placed flat in a two-dimensional plane. 
f.  Painted wall sign face area shall be measured by that portion of the extreme limits of the painted sign contained within a continuous perimeter drawn with not more than twelve (12) straight lines at ninety-degree angles to each other. 
g.  Window sign face area shall be measured by the combined area contained within the smallest continuous perimeter drawn with not more than twelve (12) straight lines at ninety-degree angles to each other and encompassing all signs located in each window. For nonplanar window signs located inside the window, sign area shall be calculated as if the object were planar in nature and measured using the width and height as visible from the outside of the window. 
h.  Nonplanar signs shall be measured in square feet by calculating the sum of the sign face area of the front and two (2) sides of the sign as if each were two-dimensional. 
D.  Duration. For the purpose of temporary signs, a sign erected or displayed for any amount of time within a calendar day shall be considered to have been displayed for that "day." 
18.08.040 - Legal nonconforming signs. 
    Legal nonconforming signs shall comply with Section 18.04.140.D(11), Legal nonconforming signs, of this Code. Temporary signs, window signs and dilapidated signs shall not be considered legal nonconforming. 
18.08.050 - Signs prohibited in all zoning districts. 
    The signs or types of signs listed in this Section shall be prohibited within the City. This Section shall not apply to public signs. 
A.  Any sign that does not comply with the content or intent of this Chapter. 
B.  Any sign that does not have a valid permit, if required. 
C.  Any sign or portion of a sign that is an obstruction or hazard or potential hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or property, including but not limited to any sign that does not comply with the requirements of Section 15.58, Sight Distance, of the Municipal Code or any sign determined to have the potential for interfering with the operation of traffic signals. 
D.  Any sign or portion of a sign determined by the City to be in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance due to deterioration, damage, decay, inadequate maintenance or any other reason. 
E.  Any sign or portion of a sign located within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant. 
F.  Any sign or portion of a sign that utilizes an exposed incandescent or exposed high-intensity lamp, not including neon, visible from any property line of the property on which the sign is located. 
G.  Any sign for which a permit is required that does not have the appearance of being professionally made. 
H.  Any sign on public right-of-way, except for the following (all subject to limitations within this Chapter): 
1.  Kiosk/plaza signs. 
2.  Community event signs approved by the City. 
3.  Bus stop signs. 
4.  Public signs. 
I.  Off-premise or off-site signs, except for the following (all subject to limitations within this Chapter): 
1.  Kiosk/plaza signs. 
2.  Community event signs approved by the City. 
3.  Bus stop signs. 
4.  Public signs. 
5.  Coming soon signs. 
6.  Garage sale directional signs. 
7.  Open house directional signs. 
8.  Multi-tenant center signs that contain signage for businesses on adjacent lots, in lieu of such businesses having individual freestanding signs. 
J.  Dilapidated signs. 
K.  Flashing signs. 
L.  Moving signs, including revolving beacons. 
M.  Roof signs. 
N.  Sandwich board signs, except open house signs as provided herein. 
18.08.060 - Signs allowed in residential zoning districts. 
    Only the following signs shall be allowed in residential zoning districts (not including RC, residential-commercial zoning districts), provided they comply with the standards set forth in this Chapter. 
A.  Address sign. 
B.  Bus stop sign. 
C.  Community event sign. 
D.  Community facility sign. 
E.  Contractor sign. 
F.  Flag. 
G.  Garage sale/yard sale sign. 
H.  Holiday decorations. 
I.  Home occupation sign. 
J.  Kiosk/plaza sign. 
K.  Nonresidential sign in a residential zone. 
L.  Open house sign. 
M.  Election sign. 
N.  Prohibited activities sign. 
O.  Public sign. 
P.  Real estate sign. 
Q.  Religious or ideological sign. 
R.  Subdivision sign. 
18.08.070 - Permit required. 
    Prior to the installation or erection of any sign structure a building permit must be obtained from the City, unless otherwise stated herein. Fees shall be charged in accordance with the schedule established for commercial building permits. A permit shall not be required to replace the copy on changeable copy signs, or to replace only the panel within a cabinet sign. 
18.08.080 - Permanent signs requiring a permit. 
    Signs of the following types shall require a permit and shall comply with the provisions set forth for each sign type. 
A.  Awning signs. 
1.  Type. Awning signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Awning signs shall count toward the allowable wall sign face area. The sign face area of an awning sign shall not exceed the area of the face of the awning where the sign is to be placed. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) sign containing the name and/or logo of the business or primary service offered such as "dry cleaning," per awning is allowed. For multi-tenant buildings with multiple awnings, one (1) awning sign per business shall be allowed. 
4.  Location. An awning sign shall only be placed on an on-site awning and shall not extend past the awning on any side. 
B.  Canopy signs. 
1.  Type. Canopy signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Canopy signs shall count toward the allowable sign face area for wall signs. The sign face area of a canopy sign shall not exceed the area of the face of the canopy where the sign is to be placed. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) sign containing the name and/or logo of the business, or primary service offered such as "fuel," per side per canopy is allowed. For multi-tenant buildings with multiple canopies, one (1) canopy sign per business shall be allowed. 
4.  Location. A canopy sign shall only be placed on an on-site canopy and shall not extend past the canopy on any side. 
C.  Changeable copy signs. 
1.  Type. Changeable copy signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Changeable copy sign face area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and shall count toward the allowable sign face area for wall signs or the allowable sign face area for freestanding signs. 
3.  Quantity. No more than one (1) internally illuminated changeable copy sign is allowed per business, not including menu boards for restaurants. 
D.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Type. 
a.  Freestanding signs on properties abutting a U.S. highway, West Service Road, or 8th Avenue shall only be of the following types: 
Monument signs. 
Pylon signs. 
Post and panel signs. 
Pole signs. 
b.  Freestanding signs on all other properties shall only be of the following types: 
Monument signs. 
Pylon signs. 
Post and panel signs. 
Signs mounted on at least two (2) poles less than two (2) [feet] in height as measured from the surrounding grade to the bottom of the sign. 
c.  Freestanding signs may be planar or nonplanar in type. 
2.  Size. 
a.  The maximum area of any sign face shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet, unless otherwise stated herein. 
b.  Where single-family and two-family dwellings are the principal use, signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area. Where multifamily dwellings are the principal use, signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and sixty-four (64) square feet in sign face area. 
c.  The total sign face area of all freestanding signage for nonresidential property shall be a factor of the functional classification of the primary street frontage, as determined in the Evans Transportation Plan, and the primary street frontage, not to exceed the following: 
Primary street frontage classification Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) Local street 100% of primary street frontage (150 sq. ft. maximum) Collector street 115% of primary street frontage (300 sq. ft. maximum) Arterial street 125% of primary street frontage (450 sq. ft. maximum) U.S. highway or highway frontage road 150% of primary street frontage (600 sq. ft. maximum)  
d.  Regardless of lot frontage, properties on local streets shall be allowed at least thirty-two (32) square feet of freestanding sign face area; properties on collector streets shall be allowed at least fifty (50) square feet of freestanding sign face area; and properties on arterial streets and U.S. highways shall be allowed at least sixty-four (64) square feet of freestanding sign face area. For properties that adjoin two (2) streets with different classifications, the higher classification shall be used. 
3.  Height. 
a.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign on nonresidential property abutting a U.S. highway, West Service Road, or 8th Avenue shall be twenty-five (25) feet, except that for a sign set back at least thirty-five (35) feet from the right-of-way, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign on nonresidential property not abutting a U.S. highway, West Service Road, or 8th Avenue shall be twelve (12) feet, except that for a sign set back at least sixteen (16) feet from the right-of-way, the maximum height shall be sixteen (16) feet. 
4.  Quantity. The maximum number of freestanding signs per lot is one (1) per street frontage. The maximum number of individual sign cabinets per freestanding sign is three (3). 
5.  Setback. The minimum setback for a freestanding sign shall be ten (10) feet from the nearest flowline of any street, or greater if necessary for the sign to be located on-site. 
6.  Separation. Freestanding signs shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from other freestanding signs on adjoining lots and at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from other freestanding signs on the same lot. The intent of this provision is to reduce cluttering and increase visibility of freestanding signs along roadways, not to prevent any business from erecting a freestanding sign. Where it is not possible or practical to maintain the above separation, a freestanding sign shall be located the maximum distance possible or practical from other freestanding signs, as approved by the Director of Public Works/Planning. 
E.  Freestanding multi-tenant and subdivision signs. 
1.  Comprehensive sign program required. A comprehensive sign program is required for any multi-tenant building permit application and any final plat application received after the adoption of this Chapter. Such comprehensive sign program shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council. 
2.  Criteria for comprehensive sign program approval. The following factors shall be considered for a proposed comprehensive sign program for multi-tenant centers: 
Classification and speed limit of adjoining roads. 
Proximity of residential property. 
Location of proposed signs and proximity of signs to sidewalks, roads and driveways. 
Potential number of tenants in the center. 
Integration with building architecture and/or character of subdivision. 
Classification and speed limit of adjoining roads. 
Proximity of residential property. 
Location of proposed signs and proximity of signs to sidewalks, roads and driveways. 
Potential number of tenants in the center. 
Integration with building architecture and/or character of subdivision. 
Classification and speed limit of adjoining roads. 
Proximity of residential property. 
3.  Type. Freestanding multi-tenant and subdivision signs shall be monument or pylon in type. 
4.  Quantity. The maximum number of multi-tenant or subdivision signs is one (1) per vehicular entrance onto the site. 
5.  Existing multi-tenant buildings/centers. 
a.  For existing multi-tenant buildings and centers with no freestanding sign, a multi-tenant sign is required in lieu of multiple freestanding signs, and shall be reviewed in accordance with this Section. 
b.  For existing multi-tenant buildings and centers with multiple freestanding signs, but no multi-tenant sign, any new freestanding sign permit application shall be considered by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis and may be denied if a replacement multi-tenant sign is deemed to be a feasible alternative. 
6.  Existing subdivisions. For subdivisions existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter and not having subdivision signage, a comprehensive sign program shall be required in accordance with this Section prior to constructing any new signage. 
7.  Multi-tenant and subdivision signs shall comply with the freestanding sign provisions contained herein regarding size, height, setback and separation requirements, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission as part of a comprehensive sign program. 
8.  Subdivision signs shall be located on outlots owned by a homeowners association, if one exists, or the developer, if a Homeowners Association does not exist, and maintenance of any such sign shall be the responsibility of such Homeowners Association or developer. 
F.  Nonresidential signs in a residential zone. 
1.  Type. Nonresidential signs in residential zones shall be planar in type, except that individual letters may project from the background of a sign up to twenty-four (24) inches. Nonresidential signs in residential zones shall not be internally illuminated. 
2.  Size. Each sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign face or six (6) feet in height for freestanding signs. 
3.  Quantity. No more than one (1) wall sign per street frontage, plus one (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed. 
4.  Location. Nonresidential signs in residential zones shall meet the other applicable requirements for the type of signs utilized; for example, freestanding sign setbacks and separation. 
G.  Planned unit development signs. 
1.  Signs in planned unit development (PUD) zoning districts shall require a comprehensive sign program as part of the approved PUD plan. 
2.  Changes to the comprehensive sign program shall not require an amendment to the PUD plan, but shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works and Planning on a case-by-case basis to determine appropriateness of the requested signage for the underlying land use and compatibility with surrounding land uses. The Director of Public Works and Planning shall decide whether to approve, deny or refer the requested change to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
H.  Projecting signs. 
1.  Type. Projecting signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Projecting sign face area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face and shall not project more than five (5) feet from a wall. 
3.  Quantity. No business or other establishment shall be allowed more than one (1) projecting sign. 
4.  Location. Projecting signs shall be located in accordance with all provisions of this Chapter. 
I.  Suspended signs. 
1.  Type. Suspended signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Suspended sign face area shall be calculated as part of the allowable wall sign face area. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) suspended sign is allowed per business. 
4.  Location. Suspended signs shall be permanently and securely affixed under a canopy, roofline or similar permanent structure. The clearance shall not be less than eight (8) feet above grade. No portion of the sign shall extend beyond any canopy, roofline or similar structure supporting the suspended sign. 
J.  Wall signs. 
1.  Type. Wall signs shall be planar in type, except that individual letters may project up to twenty-four (24) inches from the background of a sign. Channel-letter signs are encouraged to be used rather than cabinet signs. 
2.  Size. The sign face area for each sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. The total maximum allowable sign face area for each business shall be a factor of the primary building frontage and the functional classification of the primary street frontage, as determined in the Evans Transportation Plan, not exceed the following: 
Primary street frontage classification Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) Local street 75% of primary building frontage Collector street 100% of primary building frontage Arterial street 125% of primary building frontage U.S. highway or highway frontage road 150% of primary building frontage  
For example, a business in a multi-tenant center that leases forty (40) feet of primary building frontage in a building located next to an arterial street is allowed fifty (50) square feet of wall sign face area (forty [40] feet times 1.25). Painted wall signs that do not contain the logo, trademark or name of the business and are not meant to advertise a product or service, but are rather decorative or artistic in nature, do not have a size limitation, as determined by the Director of Public Works/Planning. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) primary wall sign and up to three (3) accessory wall signs per business per wall shall be allowed as long as the area of all sign faces does not exceed the maximum allowable sign face area. 
4.  Location. Wall signs shall be located upon the faade of the units owned or leased by the subject business and shall not be located on accessory structures. 
5.  Lighting. Wall signs facing residential property within one hundred (100) feet of the sign shall not be internally illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
18.08.085 - Signs allowed without a permit. 
    The following sign types listed in this Section shall not require a permit. Such signs shall comply with the provisions set forth for each sign type. 
A.  Address signs. 
1.  Type. Address signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum sign face area of any single address sign shall be two (2) square feet in residentially zoned areas and six (6) square feet for nonresidential areas. 
3.  Quantity. No more than two (2) address signs shall be permitted per dwelling unit or place of business per street frontage. 
4.  Location. Address signs shall be affixed to a permanent structure visible from the right-of-way. 
B.  Bus stop signs. Bus stop signs shall comply with the requirements of Greeley Transit Services. 
C.  Commemorative signs. 
1.  Type. Commemorative signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum sign face area of any single commemorative sign shall be nine (9) square feet. 
3.  Quantity. The maximum number of commemorative signs allowed per lot shall be one (1) per street frontage. 
4.  Location. Commemorative signs shall be affixed to a permanent structure. 
D.  Community facility signs. Each community facility sign shall be compatible in size, materials, etc., for the area in which it is located, as determined by the Director of Public Works/Planning. 
E.  Directional signs. 
1.  Type. Directional signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Directional signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet per sign face. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) per type of directional movement is allowed, for example, one (1) "entrance" sign per driveway; one (1) directional "restroom" sign; one (1) directional "loading area" sign. 
4.  Location. Directional signs shall be on the subject property and not in the right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle. 
5.  Contents. Directional signs may contain a logo or the name of the on-site business or multi-tenant center, provided not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the sign face area is used for such logo or lettering. 
F.  Flags. United States flags should be displayed in accordance with federal law. 
1.  Type. Flags shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Each flag shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in sign face area, with the exception of the United States flag, which shall have no size limitation. 
3.  Quantity. No more than two (2) flags are allowed in addition to the United States flag. 
4.  Location. Flags shall be located on-site, attached to a pole meant for the use of supporting a flag and of adequate structure to support such flag. 
G.  Kiosk/plaza signs. 
1.  Type. Kiosk/plaza signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Kiosk or plaza signs shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and sixty (60) square feet in sign face area per side. 
3.  Location. Kiosk/plaza signs shall not be located closer than five hundred (500) feet apart and shall not be located in any sight distance triangle. 
H.  Mobile home park directory posters as required by Chapter 18.30 of this Code. 
I.  Prohibited activities signs. 
1.  Type. Prohibited activities signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Any single prohibited activities sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet per sign face. 
3.  Quantity. Any prohibited activities sign shall not be placed closer than twenty (20) feet from another prohibited activities sign. 
4.  Location. Prohibited activities signs are permitted on a permanent structure or on-site fence, provided the sign is not in the right-of-way or in a sight distance triangle. 
J.  Public signs. 
K.  Religious or ideological signs. 
1.  Size. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face. 
2.  Location. No religious or ideological sign shall be located in any right-of-way or sight distance triangle. 
L.  Window signs. 
1.  Type. Window signs may be planar or nonplanar. 
2.  Size. The sign face area, except home occupation signs, shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the window between three and six (6) feet above the surrounding grade. Additionally, total sign face area shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of all windows combined. 
3.  Quantity. There is no limit on the quantity of individual window signs. 
4.  Location. Window signs shall be placed inside or to within two (2) feet inside an exterior window. 
18.08.090 - Regulations applying to all temporary signs. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all temporary signs. 
A.  Temporary signs shall be securely affixed and properly maintained at all times. 
B.  Temporary signs other than garage/yard sale signs shall be constructed of durable materials. 
C.  Unless otherwise stated herein, and with the exception of temporary window signs, no more than one (1) temporary sign shall be displayed at any given time for each business. 
D.  In the event a temporary sign type is erected that cannot be easily classified as a certain sign type according to the definitions contained herein, the Director of Public Works/Planning shall determine the classification that best represents the sign type. 
18.08.100 - Temporary signs requiring a permit. 
    The following temporary signs shall require prior approval of a permit by the City and shall comply with the provisions set forth for each type. 
A.  Community event sign. 
1.  Type. Community event signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. Each community event sign shall be no more than twenty (20) square feet per sign face side. 
3.  Quantity. Up to three (3) community event signs are allowed on a property at any given time, with up to four (4) events per calendar year per business. 
4.  Location. Community event signs shall not be located in any sight distance triangle. Community event signs may be allowed off-site and/or within a right-of-way, with prior written approval from the subject property owner where the sign will be placed, if applicable, and the City. 
5.  Duration. Community event signs shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to the subject event and shall be removed within seven (7) days following the subject event. 
B.  Display items. 
1.  Type. Display items may be planar or nonplanar. 
2.  Size. The linear frontage of the display item shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the primary street frontage. In the case of a multi-tenant building or center, the linear frontage of all display items for all businesses shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the primary street frontage, with each business having its proportionate share of linear display item frontage based on each business's primary building frontage. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) on-site display item, as defined herein, per business is allowed. 
4.  Location. No display item shall be located in any right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle or within required landscape areas. Typically, display items are placed in parking areas unless a display area is provided. 
5.  Duration. Display items shall not be displayed in areas not intended for their long term-storage, such as parking areas, except during hours the subject business is open. 
C.  Grand opening event signs. 
1.  Type. Grand opening event signs shall be planar in type, with the exception of pennants which are linear in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of the sign shall be twenty (20) square feet per sign face. The maximum length of all pennants shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) sign and up to three (3) strings of pennants per grand opening is allowed. 
4.  Location. The sign and pennants shall be located on-site. The sign shall be attached to a permanent structure; the pennants shall be attached to a permanent structure or fence. 
5.  Duration. The sign and pennants shall not be displayed for more than a total of forty-five (45) consecutive days. 
D.  Inflatable signs. 
1.  Size. The total area of an inflatable sign, as measured in accordance with this chapter, shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, thirty (30) feet in height or ten (10) feet in width. For a group of balloons or similar grouped items, the height and width of all items together shall constitute the area. The maximum length of a tether or line shall be fifty (50) linear feet. Inflatable signs shall be securely tethered. 
2.  Quantity. One (1) per business is allowed. A group of balloons shall count as one (1) inflatable sign. 
3.  Location. Inflatable signs are not permitted in any R (residential) or RC (residential-commercial) zoning districts, except in accordance with this Chapter. In no case shall an inflatable sign be permitted in any right-of-way or sight distance triangle or within required landscape areas. 
4.  Duration. No business shall display inflatable signs more than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
E.  Portable signs. 
1.  Type. Portable signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of each portable sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face and the maximum height shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
3.  Location. Portable signs shall only be placed on private parking areas and not within any sight distance triangle. 
4.  Duration. No business shall display portable signs more than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
18.08.110 - Temporary signs allowed without a permit. 
    The following temporary sign types listed in this Subsection shall not require prior approval of a permit by the City. Such signs shall comply with the provisions set forth for each sign type. 
A.  Banner signs. 
1.  Type. Banner signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of banner signs shall be thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. Banner signs shall count toward a business's allowable wall sign area. 
3.  Location. Banner signs shall be located on-site. The entire banner shall be securely attached to the primary building, but not on the roof of any building. 
4.  Duration. No business shall display banner signs more than thirty (30) days within any three-month period. 
B.  Coming soon signs. 
1.  Type. Coming soon signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of coming soon signs shall be twenty (20) square feet per sign face. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) sign per building or tenant, as applicable. 
4.  Location. Coming soon signs shall be located on the future site of the business, not located in the right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle. 
5.  Duration. Coming soon signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the subject business's opening. In no event shall a coming soon sign remain on a property for more than six (6) consecutive months. 
C.  Contractor signs. 
1.  Type. Contractor signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of any single contractor sign shall be twenty (20) square feet per sign face for nonresidential property and nine (9) square feet per face for residential property, unless additional signage is required by federal or state law. 
3.  Quantity. No more than one (1) per entrance into a residential subdivision, or one (1) per driveway for multifamily and nonresidential development, or one (1) per lot, is allowed. 
4.  Location. All contractor signs must be located on the site where the contractor is performing the work and not in the right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle. 
5.  Duration. Contractor signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of completion of the contractor's work at the subject property or subdivision. 
D.  Election signs. 
1.  Type. Election signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of any single election sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face in any nonresidential zoning district, or nine (9) square feet per sign face in any residential or residential-commercial zoning district. 
3.  Location. Election signs shall only be placed on private property and with the prior consent of the property owner and shall not be located in the public right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle. 
4.  Duration. Election signs shall be removed within seven (7) days following the election to which they pertain. 
E.  Garage/yard sale signs. 
1.  Type. Garage sale/yard sale signs shall be planar in type, with the exception of balloons and pennants. Balloons and/or pennants are permitted on-site in addition to the garage/yard sale sign, provided the balloons and/or pennants are removed within one (1) day following the last day of the sale. 
2.  Size. Each sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet per sign face. Directional signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet per sign face. The length of each tether for each balloon shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in length. The combined length of all pennants shall not exceed one hundred (100) linear feet. 
3.  Quantity. One (1) per property where the sale is to be held, plus two (2) off-site directional signs. 
4.  Location. Garage/yard sale signs shall be located in accordance with Section 5.16.060 of this Code. Balloons and/or pennants must be securely affixed to a permanent structure or fence. 
5.  Duration. Garage sale signs shall not be displayed earlier than seven (7) days prior to the sale or later than one (1) day following the sale. 
F.  Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations shall not be located in the public right-of-way (except for City-installed decorations) or in any sight distance triangle. 
G.  Open house signs. 
1.  Type. Open house signs shall be planar or sandwich board in type, with the exception of balloons and pennants. Balloons and/or pennants are permitted on-site in addition to the open house sign, provided the balloons and/or pennants are removed daily when the unit is not open for public showing. 
2.  Size. Each sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet per sign face, with a maximum of two (2) sign faces. Directional signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet per sign face. The length of each tether for each balloon shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in length. The combined length of all pennants shall not exceed one hundred (100) linear feet. 
3.  Quantity. Each open house shall be allowed only one (1) open house sign on the subject property, plus two (2) off-site directional signs. 
4.  Location. Open house signs shall be located on the subject property. Two (2) additional, freestanding directional signs may be located off-site on private property with the property owner's consent as long as no more than two (2) such signs are on any one (1) property. Open house signs shall not be located on public right-of-way or within sight distance triangles. Balloons and/or pennants must be securely affixed to a permanent structure or fence. 
5.  Duration. Open house signs shall only be displayed during the time the subject property is open to the public. 
H.  Real estate signs. 
1.  Type. Real estate signs shall be planar in type and nonilluminated. Inflatable signs and pennants are not allowed. 
2.  Size. 
a.  For single-family and two-family residentially zoned properties, or properties located within a residential-commercial zoning district, each sign face shall not exceed eight (8) square feet and six (6) feet in height. 
b.  The foregoing notwithstanding, each subdivision containing single-family and/or two-family residentially zoned properties shall be allowed one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face and eight (8) feet in height per arterial or collector roadway that abuts the subdivision for the purpose of advertising multiple lots or homes within the subdivision. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of the last certificate of occupancy for the subdivision or upon the sale of the last unit for condominiums. 
c.  For property zoned multifamily, commercial or industrial, each sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face and eight (8) feet in height. 
3.  Quantity. A maximum of one (1) real estate sign per street frontage is allowed per property or building. 
4.  Location. A real estate sign may be placed on the offered building or unit, on an on-site fence facing the right-of-way, or may be an on-site freestanding sign. Real estate signs shall not be located on public right-of-way or within sight distance triangles. 
5.  Duration. A real estate sign may be displayed for the time the subject property is offered for sale or for lease and for seven (7) days following such sale or lease. In the event more than one (1) unit is for lease or for sale, a real estate sign may continue to be displayed as long as it is properly maintained. 
I.  Special signs. 
1.  Type. Special signs shall be planar in type. 
2.  Size. The maximum size of special signs shall be twenty (20) square feet per sign face. 
3.  Quantity. No business shall display more than one (1) special sign at any given time. 
4.  Location. The sign shall be located on-site and attached to a permanent structure, not located in the right-of-way or in any sight distance triangle. 
5.  Duration. No business shall display special signs more than thirty (30) days within any three-month period. 
18.08.120 - Design and construction. 
    The design and construction of signs in all zoning districts are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Design. 
1.  Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this Section. Bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs supported on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted to the ground in a manner so as to avoid over stressing the elements of the structural frame. The overturning moment produced by lateral forces shall not exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
2.  Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in Chapter 16 of the building code. 
3.  Seismic loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in Chapter 16 of the building code. 
4.  Combined loads. Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only the loading producing the larger stress need be used. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with wind or seismic loads. 
5.  Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete, steel or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of Chapters 19, 20, 21 and 22 of the building code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in Chapter 18 of the building code. The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. Working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in Chapters 16 and 18 of the building code. 
B.  Construction. 
1.  General. Supports for signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
2.  Materials. Materials utilized for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the building code. In signs and sign structures the materials and details of construction shall, in the absence of specified requirements, conform with the following: 
a.  Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of cold-formed steel as specified in the International Building Code and, in addition, shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than 0.024 inch thick. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of hot rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch, except that, if galvanized, such members shall be not less than one-eighth ( 1 / 8 ) inch thick. Steel pipes shall conform to the International Building Code. Steel members may be connected with not less than one (1) galvanized bolt, provided the connection is adequate to transfer the load to supporting members. 
b.  Anchors and supports of wood embedded in the soil, or within six (6) inches of the soil, shall be all heartwood of a durable species or shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be marked or branded by an approved agency. 
3.  Restrictions on combustible materials. Freestanding or ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this Code. All other signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, except that nonelectric wall signs may be constructed of unprotected combustible materials on walls permitted to be of unprotected combustible construction. Combustible materials other than approved plastics shall not be used in the construction of electric signs. 
4.  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surfaces may be of wood, metal, approved plastics or a combination thereof. 
5.  Anchorage. Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either the horizontal or vertical directions, shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pullout amounting to a force twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line. Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to the base shall be proportioned so that the weight and size of the base will be adequate to resist the wind loads specified in this Chapter. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied. Wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall not be considered to provide anchorage, except for signs attached to wood framing. The anchorage or support of a sign shall not be connected to, or supported by, an unbraced parapet wall, unless the wall is designed in accordance with the requirements for parapet walls specified for seismic zones in the building code. 
6.  Display surfaces. Display surfaces of signs may be made of metal, glass or approved plastics. Glass thickness and area limitations shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Size, Thickness and Type of Glass Panels In Signs 
Maximum size of exposed glass panel Minimum thickness of glass (in inches) Type of glass Any dimension (in inches) Area (in square inches) 30 500 1/8Plain, plate or wired 45 700 3/16plain, plate or wired 144 3,600 1/8glass Over 144 Over 3,600 1/4  
Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet in area. 
Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall be separated three (3) feet laterally and six (6) feet vertically by required exterior wall construction. 
EXCEPTION: Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may not be required to be separated if approved by the Building Official. 
7.  Approved plastics. Substantiating data shall be submitted to the Building Official to justify the proposed use of plastic materials. If it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory for the use intended, the use may be approved. 
C.  Projection clearance. 
1.  General. Signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this Section. 
2.  Clearance from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located not less than six (6) feet horizontally or twelve (12) feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts. The term "overhead conductors" as used in this Section means an electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground, except when conductors are enclosed in iron pipe or other approved material covering of equal strength. 
3.  Clearance from fire escapes, exits or standpipes. Signs or sign structures shall not be erected in such a manner that a portion of their surface or supports will interfere with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. 
4.  Obstruction of openings. Signs shall not obstruct openings to the extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by the International Building Code. Signs erected within five (5) feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material or approved plastics. 
5.  Projection over public rights-of-way and alleys. Signs or sign structures shall not project into public rights-of-way or alleys. 
6.  Clearance from streets. Signs shall not project within two (2) feet of the curb line. 
7.  Clearance above driveways, parking lots and pedestrian ways. 
a.  Signs shall not project over driveways, parking lots or similar areas of vehicular travel below a height of fourteen (14) feet above grade. 
b.  Signs shall not project over pedestrian ways below a height of eight (8) feet above grade. 
D.  Electric signs. 
1.  General. Electric signs shall be constructed of noncombustible material, except as provided in this Section. 
a.  The enclosed shell of electric signs shall be watertight, except that service holes fitted with covers shall provide access into each compartment of the sign. 
b.  Installation. Electrical signs and equipment used in connection with such signs shall be installed in accordance with local ordinances regulating electrical installations and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved agency. 
c.  Erector's name. Electric signs shall have the name of the sign erector and date of erection included on the surface of the sign. The name and date shall be of sufficient size and contrast to be readable from a reasonable distance. 
18.08.130 - Variances. 
    A variance to sign height, setback, sign area or location on a lot or building of permitted signs may be requested in accordance with Section 18.04.190. 
18.08.140 - Maintenance. 
    All signs shall be maintained in good structural and visually attractive condition at all times and kept neatly painted, including all structural supports and metal trim. Components of signs which are made of rust resistive materials need not be painted; however, such components must be maintained in good condition. 
18.08.150 - Violations. 
A.  Serving of notice. Notices of violation of this Chapter shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the record owner of the real estate and/or person in possession, control or ownership of the property in question, or personally served upon such individual by the City. Failure to comply with a notice of violation may result in a summons to appear in Municipal Court. If the sign in violation is located on public right-of-way, the City may remove and dispose of such sign without notice. 
B.  Penalty and removal. Every conviction of violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 of this Title. In addition, the Court may order the defendant to remove any sign found to be in violation of any part of this Chapter, and if the defendant fails to do so, the City may remove such sign and send notice to the defendant to pay the City's cost of removal. Should payment not be made within thirty (30) days of such notice, the City may assess the amount of the cost of removal, plus ten (10) percent to defray the cost of collection as provided by state law, to the property on which the sign is located and file a lien against the property; such lien to have priority over all liens except general taxes and prior special assessments and to be placed upon the tax list for the current year to be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected. The City may file such lien at any time after said thirty (30) days. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a sign under provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Enforcement authority. The administrative authority is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Right of entry on property. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the administrative authority or agents of the City may enter upon any property, vacant lots or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed by this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 18.09 - Public Notices 

18.09.010 - Public hearing notice. 
    City staff shall provide notice of public hearings for the land use applications listed in accordance with the table below, and as described within this Chapter: 
Notice requiredType of application Certified mail Regular mail Published notice Sign notice Zoning Amendment Required Required Required Required Variance Required Required Required Required Special Use Required Required Required Required Site Plans Required Required Preliminary Plan Required Required Required Final Plat Required Required Planned Unit Development Required Required Required  
    The applicant shall submit estimated costs for postage and publication. City staff shall send an invoice to the applicant for any balance of the cost of postage and publication. Receipt of payment shall be a condition of approval of the application. 
18.09.020 - Certified mail notice. 
    Notice of a public hearing for a land use application for which certified mail notice is indicated as "required" in the table of Section 18.09.020 shall be mailed via certified mail and regular, first-class, postage prepaid mail to owners of record of property abutting the property for which the public hearing is to be held. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals and at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing before the Council. 
18.09.030 - Regular mail notice. 
    Notice of a public hearing for a land use application for which regular mail notice is indicated as "required" in the table of Section 18.09.020 shall be mailed via regular, first-class, postage prepaid mail to owners of record of property within five hundred (500) feet of the property for which the public hearing is to be held, excluding owners of property mailed notice in accordance with the Section 18.09.020. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals and at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing before the Council. 
18.09.040 - Published notice. 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, at least ten (10) days prior to any public hearing required in this Title. 
18.09.050 - Posted sign notice. 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the premises at least ten (10) days prior to any such hearing date. Such sign shall be a minimum size of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and composed of letters not less than one and one-half (11/2) inches in height. The notice shall contain the following information: 
NOTICE 
PUBLIC HEARING 
Land Use Proposal 
(Phone Number) 
(Ord. 329-05) 
18.09.060 - Additional or Combined Notices. 
A.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent or preclude the City from providing notice of public hearings in addition to the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent or preclude the City from providing notice of multiple public hearings in one notice. 
CHAPTER 18.10 - Appeals Where a Process is Not Otherwise Designated 

18.10.010 - Generally. 
    The process to appeal decisions made in connection with many land development applications are provided for in the sections addressing the particular type of land development application. To the extent no appeal process is specified in the sections relating to particular types of land development applications, the following process shall apply: 
    Appeal of a final decision by a member of staff other than the city manager shall be made to the city manager. Appeal of a final decision by the city manager shall be made to city council. Appeal of a final decision by the planning commission or board of zoning adjustment shall be made to city council. Appeal of a final decision by city council shall be limited to judicial review as provided by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
    Notice of appeal must indicate all reasons for the appeal and must be filed in writing with the reviewing person or entity within ten (10) days of the date of the final decision being appealed. Appeals to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk. The person or entity whose decision is being appealed shall submit materials to the reviewing person or entity within fifteen (15) days of the notice of appeal. The reviewing person or entity may hold a formal or informal hearing if they deem it appropriate. Any appeal to city council shall require a public hearing. 
    The reviewing person or entity shall render a decision in writing within thirty (30) days of receiving materials from the person or entity whose decision is being appealed or thirty (30) days of a hearing, if one is held. The time periods provided in this section may be extended for good cause if the request to extend is made in advance of the expiration of the time period. 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1.01.160 ..... 1.16.010 2.20.010 ..... 2.06.010 2.20.020 ..... 2.06.020 2.20.030 ..... 2.06.030 3.10.010 ..... 3.08.010 3.10.020 ..... 3.08.020 3.10.030 ..... 3.08.030 3.10.040 ..... 3.08.050 3.10.050 ..... 3.08.060 3.10.060 ..... 3.08.040 3.10.070 ..... 3.08.070 3.10.080 ..... 3.08.080 3.10.090 ..... 3.08.090 3.10.100 ..... 3.08.100 3.10.110 ..... 3.08.110 3.10.120 ..... 3.08.120 5.08.010 ..... 5.12.040 5.08.020 ..... 5.12.100 5.08.030 ..... 5.12.070 5.08.040 ..... 5.12.010, 5.12.020 5.08.050 ..... 5.12.080 6.12 ..... 8.04.010, 8.04.020       8.04.030, 8.04.040       8.04.060, 8.04.070       8.04.080, 8.04.090       8.04.100, 8.04.110       8.04.120, 8.04.130       8.04.140 7.04.010 ..... 6.04.010 7.04.020 ..... 6.04.040, 6.04.050       6.04.060,6.04.070       6.04.090, 6.04.100 7.04.020(1) ..... 6.04.030 7.04.030 ..... 6.04.020 7.04.040 ..... 6.04.210 7.04.050 ..... 6.04.120 7.04.060 ..... 6.04.080, 6.04.110       6.04.160 7.04.070 ..... 6.04.180 7.04.080 ..... 6.04.140 7.04.090 ..... 6.04.190 7.04.100 ..... 6.04.220, 6.04.230       6.04.240, 6.04.250       6.04.270, 6.04.280 7.04.110 ..... 6.04.150 7.04.120 ..... 6.04.300 7.04.130 ..... 6.04.310 7.04.140 ..... 6.04.200 7.04.150 ..... 6.04.320 7.04.160 ..... 6.04.130 7.04.170 ..... 6.04.170 7.04.180 ..... 6.04.330 7.04.190 ..... 6.04.290 7.04.200 ..... 6.04.340 10.04.010 ..... 10.04.010 10.04.020 ..... 10.04.030 10.12.020 ..... 9.24.160 12.08.010 ..... 13.04.010 12.08.020 ..... 13.04.020 12.08.030 ..... 13.04.030 12.08.040 ..... 13.04.120 12.08.070 ..... 13.04.140 12.08.090 ..... 13.04.200 12.08.110 ..... 13.04.050 12.08.120 ..... 13.04.040, 13.04.050 12.08.130 ..... 13.04.040 12.08.140 ..... 13.04.080 12.08.150 ..... 13.04.190 12.08.160 ..... 13.04.150 12.08.170 ..... 13.04.050 12.08.180 ..... 13.04.050 12.08.190 ..... 13.04.130 12.08.250 ..... 13.04.260 13.20.010 ..... 12.04.010 13.20.020 ..... 12.04.020 13.20.030 ..... 12.04.030 13.20.040 ..... 12.04.220 13.20.050 ..... 12.04.050 13.20.060 ..... 12.04.040 13.20.070 ..... 12.04.080 13.20.080 ..... 12.04.100 13.20.090 ..... 12.04.110 13.20.100 ..... 12.04.120 13.20.130 ..... 12.04.150 13.20.140 ..... 12.04.130 13.20.150 ..... 12.04.140 13.20.170 ..... 12.04.210 13.20.180 ..... 12.04.090 13.20.190 ..... 12.04.230 15.03 ..... 19.02.010, 19.02.020 15.06 ..... 19.04.010, 19.04.030       19.04.050, 19.04.130       19.04.150, 19.04.480       19.04.880, 19.04.950 19.04.960 15.09 ..... 19.06.010, 19.06.020       19.06.030, 19.06.040 15.12 ..... 19.10.010 15.15 ..... 19.14.010 15.16 ..... 19.04.340 15.18 ..... 19.12.010 15.21 ..... 19.18.010 15.24 ..... 19.20.010 15.63 ..... 19.50.010 15.66 ..... 19.46.010 15.72 ..... 19.56.010 15.80.021 ..... 16.04.010 15.80.022 ..... 16.04.020 15.80.023 ..... 16.04.030 15.80.024 ..... 16.04.040 15.80.030 ..... 16.04.050 15.80.041 ..... 16.04.060 15.80.042 ..... 16.04.070 15.80.043 ..... 16.04.080 15.80.044 ..... 16.04.090 15.80.045 ..... 16.04.100 15.80.046 ..... 16.04.110 15.80.051 ..... 16.04.120 15.80.052 ..... 16.04.130 15.80.053 ..... 16.04.140 15.80.054 ..... 16.04.160 15.80.054 ..... 16.04.150 15.80.061 ..... 16.04.170, 16.04.180 16.04.190 15.80.0614 ..... 16.04.200 15.80.062 ..... 16.04.210 15.80.063 ..... 16.04.220  
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 
Year Ord. No. Subject Sectio n Disposition 1956 120 Social Security 2.36.010-2.36.060 1972 239 Municipal Court 2.28.060 2.28.080-2.28.220 2.28.240-2.28.340 1972 241 City Council 2.04.010 1972 249 Form of government 1.08.010 1973 265 Street and curb cuts 12.08.010-12.08.060 1973 266 Improvement districts 12.12.010-12.12.280 1973 273 City Council 2.04.010-2.04.040 Department of Finance 2.08.010-2.08.030 Police Department 2.12.010-2.12.030 1973 274 Utilities 13.12.010-13.12.070 1973 275 City Council 2.04.050 1975 307 Pawnbrokers 5.20.010-5.20.060 3 8.04.050 1975 311 Garage sales 5.16.010, 5.16.040 5.16.060, 5.16.070 1977 347 Lost and confiscated property 2.40.010, 2.40.020 2.40.040 General offenses 9.04.010-9.04.050 9.08.010-9.08.080 9.12.010-9.12.050 9.16.010-9.16.090 9.20.010-9.20.060 9.24.010-9.24.130 9.24.150, 9.24.180 9.28.010, 9.28.020 9.32.010-9.32.060 9.32.080-9.32.130 9.36.010 1977 356 Building regulations 15.56.010-15.56.070 1977 360 Municipal Court 2.28.010-2.28.050 1977 361 Building regulations 15.52.010, 15.52.020 15.52.050-15.52.070 15.52.110 1978 380 Building regulations 15.36.010-15.36.070 1978 406 Telephone occupation tax 3.12.010-3.12.050 1979 410 Floodplain regulations 16.04.010-16.04.230 1980 430 City Council 2.04.030 1980 499 Reserve Police Force 2.16.010-2.16.050 1981 510 Improvement districts 12.12.190-12.12.220 12.12.250 1981 515 Model Traffic Code 10.04.010 10.04.030-10.04.060 1981 533 Nuisances 8.04.010-8.04.040 8.04.060-8.04.140 1982 549 Animal control 6.04.010-6.04.250 6.04.270-6.04.340 1982 550 Excavations and public ways 12.04.010-12.04.050 12.04.080-12.04.150 12.04.210-12.04.230 1982 551 Public accommodations tax 3.08.010-3.08.130 1982 552 Utilities 13.04.010-13.04.050 13.04.080 13.04.120-13.04.150 13.04.190, 13.04.200 13.04.260 1983 571 Ward boundaries 1.12.010 1984 577 Zoning map 1.20.010 1984 589 Boards and Commissions 2.06.010-2.06.030 1984 595 Floodplain regulations 16.40.010-16.40.060 1984 596 Building regulations 15.52.020 1984 597 Code adoption 1.01.010-1.01.100 1.04.010 1984 602 Floodplain regulations 16.28.010-16.28.190 1985 605 Development revenue bonds 3.17.010-3.17.050 1985 609 Utilities 13.20.010-13.20.100 1985 610 Water and Sewer Board 2.24.010-2.24.081 1985 612 City Council 2.04.030 1985 613 Utilities 13.04.080 1985 614 Public utilities 2.20.010-2.20.030 1985 615 Public Works and Planning 2.22.010, 2.22.030 1985 616 Utilities 13.05.010-13.05.040 1985 621 Utilities 13.09.010, 13.09.020 1986 651 Finance 2.08.010 1986 652 Animal control 6.04.010, 6.04.140 Floodplain regulations 16.40.020, 16.40.040 16.40.070 1986 653 Water and Sewer Board 2.24.010-2.24.081 1986 654 Planning Commission 2.52.010-2.52.080 1986 655 Zoning Board of Appeals 2.56.010-2.56.070 1986 657 Offenses, minors 9.28.030 1986 663 Water and Sewer Board 2.24.020 1987 673 Subdivisions 18.04.010-18.04.110 18.08.010-18.08.400 18.12.010-18.12.090 18.16.010-18.16.050 18.20.010 18.20.030-18.20.130 18.24.010-18.24.210 18.28.010-18.28.280 18.32.010-18.32.240 18.36.010-18.36.050 18.40.010-18.40.030 18.48.010 1 18.08.350, 18.16.040 1987 675 City Cemetery 2.32.010-2.32.060 1987 676 Water and Sewer Board 2.24.080, 2.24.081 1987 678 General offenses 9.24.010 1987 679 Offenses, minors 9.28.030 1987 687 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.010-5.08.330 1987 691 Emergency telephone service 5.30.010, 5.30.020 1988 702 Model Traffic Code 10.04.010 10.04.030-10.04.060 1988 703 Animal control 6.04.010-6.04.250 6.04.270-6.04.340 1988 707 City Council 2.04.010 1988 712 Utilities 13.24.010-13.24.030 1989 718 Building regulations 15.58.010-15.58.090 1989 720 Public accommodations tax 3.08.060, 3.08.120 1989 721 Finance 2.08.010 1989 723 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 1989 725 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 1989 726 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 1989 729 Floodplain regulations 16.04.010-16.04.230 1989 730 Public accommodations tax 3.08.120 1989 738 Nuisances 8.14.010-8.14.060 1989 739 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.120, 5.08.130 1989 747 Animal control 6.04.060, 6.04.070 6.04.100 1990 753 Temporary vendors 5.12.010-5.12.140 1990 757 Elections 1.14.020, 1.14.030 1990 761 Finance 2.08.010-2.08.030 1990 762 Public utilities 2.20.030 Public Works and Planning 2.22.010-2.22.030 1990 763 Parks and Recreation 2.23.010, 2.23.020 1990 765 Telephone occupation tax 3.12.010, 3.12.030 1990 766 Municipal Court 2.28.245 1990 767 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.230 1990 768 Floodplain regulations 16.40.010 16.40.100-16.40.120 1990 777 Economic development incentive plans 3.30.010-3.30.070 1990 779 General offenses 9.08.020 Utilities 1 13.20.090 1991 782 Municipal Court 2.28.040, 2.28.220 1991 788 Utilities 13.04.010-13.04.080 13.04.120-13.04.160 13.04.190, 13.04.200 13.04.260 1991 802 Open air markets 5.14.010-5.14.160 1991 805 Lost and confiscated property 2.40.020, 2.40.040 1991 808 Open air markets 5.14.130 1991 809 Zoning Board of Appeals 2.56.020, 2.56.030 2.56.050 1991 813 Reserve Police Force 2.16.040 1991 816 Animal control 6.04.010, 6.04.170 6.04.230, 6.04.300 1991 818 Floodplain regulations 16.28.060 1991 823 City Council 2.04.030 1992 827 Elections 1.14.020, 1.14.030 1992 833 General offenses 9.36.020 1992 837 Municipal Court 2.28.250 Model Traffic Code 10.04.040 1992 840 Unclaimed property 2.38.010-2.38.050 1992 841 General offenses 9.24.010, 9.24.040 1992 842 Penalties 1.16.010, 2.28.110 2.28.245, 3.08.130 3.12.050, 5.12.140 5.14.160, 5.16.070 5.20.060, 6.04.340 8.14.060, 9.36.010 10.04.030, 12.04.230 13.04.260, 13.05.020 13.20.100, 13.24.030 15.36.070, 15.52.110 15.56.070, 15.58.090 16.04.230, 16.40.120 18.48.010 1992 844 Unclaimed property 2.38.030 1992 847 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.340-5.08.420 1992 858 Private security services 5.32.010-5.32.280 1993 870 Zoning 19.45.010 1993 874 Offenses, minors 9.28.040 1993 875 Penalties, juveniles 1.16.020, 2.28.070 1993 876 Municipal Court 2.28.230, 2.28.320 1993 880 Ward boundaries 1.12.010 1993 893 City-owned real property 2.42.010-2.42.050 1993 894 General offenses 9.24.080 1993 896 Firearms and weapons 9.32.010-9.32.130 1993 897 Revenue and finance 3.32.010-3.32.030 1994 901 Building regulations 15.52.020 1994 905 Lost and confiscated property 2.40.020 1994 906 General offenses 9.16.040 1994 908 City revenues 3.34.010 1994 909 Penalties 1.16.030 1994 913 Zoning 19.24.010 1994 926 Open air markets 5.14.090, 5.14.110 1994 927 Enhanced sales tax incentive program 3.31.010-3.31.110 1994 937 Municipal Court 2.28.245 1994 943 Utilities 13.04.150 1994 944 Adult businesses 5.10.010-5.10.140 1995 951 Improvement districts 12.12.080, 12.12.120 1995 954 Zoning 19.26.010, 19.28.010 19.32.010, 19.34.010 1995 957 Animal control 6.04.010 1995 972 Fire Department 2.18.010-2.18.030 1995 980 Economic development incentive plans 3.30.010, 3.30.020 3.30.050 1996 1000 Utilities 13.28.010-13.28.040 1996 1022 Utilities 13.04.060, 13.20.050 1996 1027 Zoning 19.30.010, 19.44.010 1997 1030 Utilities 13.04.010, 13.04.020 1997 1031 Utilities 13.20.020 1997 1043 Utilities 13.08.010-13.08.090 1997 1044 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.230 Floodplain regulations 16.40.080 1997 1048 Zoning 19.36.010 1997 1057 Zoning 19.47.010 1997 1061 Subdivisions 18.28.290 18.30.010-18.30.140 19.22.040, 19.22.050 1997 1067 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.010-5.08.420 1997 1070 Floodplain regulations 16.28.060 1997 1075 Nuisances 8.18.010, 8.18.020 8.18.060 1997 1077 Subdivisions 18.28.150 1997 1080 Model Traffic Code 10.04.010-10.04.060 1997 1083 Animal control 6.04.010, 6.04.140 1998 1096 Zoning 19.04.670 1998 1097 Zoning 19.52.020 1998 1100 Building regulations 15.10.010-15.10.130 1998 1101 Zoning 19.16.010 1998 1104 Animal control 6.04.010, 6.04.035 1998 1109 Building regulations 15.52.020 1998 1110 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.205 1998 1112 Excavations and public ways 12.04.010-12.04.230 1998 1113 Ethics Code 2.05.010-2.05.060 1998 1118 General offenses 9.16.035 1998 1116 Utilities 13.16.010-13.16.220 1998 1119 Subdivisions 18.16.010, 18.20.010 18.24.020, 18.28.290 18.30.040, 19.22.040 1998 1121 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.135 1998 1124 Code adoption 1.01.010 Zoning map 1.20.010 Parks and Recreation 2.23.010, 2.23.020 City Cemetery 2.32.020, 2.32.030 Public accommodations tax 3.08.070 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.130, 5.08.150 5.08.230-5.08.250 5.08.270, 5.08.290 5.08.370 Adult businesses 5.10.090 Temporary vendors 5.12.080 Open air markets 5.14.080, 5.14.090 Pawnbrokers 5.20.030 Private security services 5.32.050 Animal control 6.04.070 Excavations and public ways 12.04.040 Utilities 13.04.120, 13.04.160 1998 1126 Animal control 6.04.100, 6.04.150 6.04.160, 6.04.230 6.04.270, 6.04.280 6.04.330       Rpld 6.04.260 1998 1134 Building regulations 15.56.010-15.56.070 1999 1146 Nuisances 8.04.010-8.04.140 1999 1148 General offenses 9.08.010, 9.08.020 9.08.040, 9.08.090 9.12.020, 9.16.010 9.16.030, 9.16.040 9.20.020, 9.24.010 9.24.050, 9.24.080 9.24.120, 9.24.150 9.24.160       Rpld 9.24.140, 9.24.170, 9.32.140 1999 1150 Floodplain regulations 16.40.010, 16.40.040 16.40.100, 16.40.110 1999 1158 Subdivisions 18.32.030 1999 1164 Zoning 19.48.010 1999 1170 Subdivisions 18.38.010-18.38.090 1999 1180 Subdivisions 18.08.380, 18.32.030 18.32.080 2000 005 Zoning 19.02.010, 19.02.020 19.04.010, 19.04.030 19.04.050, 19.04.070 19.04.110, 19.04.130 19.04.150-19.04.220 19.04.240 19.04.260-19.04.310 19.04.330-19.04.380 19.04.400-19.04.410 19.04.420-19.04.600 19.04.630-19.04.670 19.04.690, 19.04.730 19.04.740 19.04.760-19.04.850 19.04.870-19.04.890 19.04.910 19.04.940-19.04.980 19.06.010-19.06.040 19.08.010, 19.08.090 19.10.010-19.10.040 19.12.010-19.12.040 19.14.010-19.14.040 19.16.010-19.16.060 19.18.010-19.18.040 19.20.010-19.20.040 19.24.010-19.24.040 19.26.010-19.26.040 19.28.010-19.28.040 19.30.010-19.30.040 19.32.010-19.32.040 19.34.010-19.34.040 19.36.010-19.36.040 19.40.010, 19.40.020 2000 006 Zoning 19.42.010-19.42.110 2000 007 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 2000 015 Zoning 19.44.010-19.44.060 19.45.010, 19.45.020 19.45.050, 19.45.160 19.46.010-19.46.030 19.47.010-19.47.030 19.47.140, 19.47.170 19.47.220, 19.47.230 19.48.010-19.48.060 19.48.080-19.48.100 19.50.010, 19.50.020 19.52.010-19.52.050 19.56.010, 19.56.040 19.58.010 19.60.010-19.60.060 2000 022 Floodplain regulations 16.40.080 2000 025 Utilities 13.28.010-13.28.040 2000 026 Utilities 13.08.010-13.08.090 2000 031 Zoning 19.26.020, 19.28.020 19.28.030 2000 044 Subdivisions 18.24.250, 18.28.300 2000 045 Floodplain regulations 16.42.010-16.42.060 2000 049 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.075 2001 063 Subdivisions 18.34.010-18.34.030 2001 066 Zoning 19.04.090, 19.04.110 19.11.010-19.11.040 2001 104 Ward boundaries 1.12.010, 1.12.020 2001 111 Floodplain regulations 16.42.010-16.42.060 2001 113 General offenses 9.26.010-9.26.040 9.36.010 2001 114 Zoning 19.45.020 2001 115 Improvement districts 12.12.170 2001 120 Subdivisions 18.28.125 2001 121 Street impact fees 12.20.010-12.20.040 12.20.060-12.20.120 2002 138 Firearms and weapons 9.32.080 2002 141 Zoning 19.52.020 2002 160 Subdivisions 18.31.010-18.31.030 18.31.050, 18.31.060 18.31.090-18.31.110 18.33.010 18.33.040-18.33.110 2002 162 Utilities 13.04.200 2002 164 Municipal Court 2.28.010-2.28.340 2002 168 Building regulations 15.50.010-15.50.110 2002 171 Utilities 13.04.200 2002 181 Building regulations 15.52.010-15.52.110 2002 183 Building regulations 15.52.045 2002 185 Municipal Court 2.28.110, 2.28.160 2003 216 Utilities 13.04.200 2003 217 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 2003 221 Utilities 13.04.120 2003 224 Model Traffic Code 10.04.010-10.04.060 2003 228 Zoning 19.48.030 2003 229 Zoning 19.04.805, 19.04.807 19.30.030, 19.32.020 19.32.030, 19.34.020 19.34.030, 19.36.020 19.36.030 2003 232 Zoning 19.12.020, 19.14.020 19.16.020, 19.18.020 19.20.020, 19.24.020 19.26.020, 19.28.020 19.30.020, 19.32.020 19.34.020, 19.36.020 19.50.020 2003 233 Zoning 19.04.815, 19.24.030 19.28.030, 19.30.020 19.32.020, 19.34.020 19.36.020 2003 239 Zoning 19.52.010-19.52.050 2003 240 Building regulations 15.52.045 2003 241 Street impact fees 12.20.010-12.20.040 12.20.060-12.20.120 Title 12, Exhibit A 2003 243 City Council 2.04.030 2003 244 Subdivisions 18.31.010-18.31.030 18.31.050, 18.31.060 18.31.090-18.31.110 18.33.010 18.33.040-18.33.110 2003 245 Building regulations 15.50.100 2003 247 Subdivisions 18.34.010-18.34.030 2003 248 Zoning 19.45.020, 19.45.050 2003 249 Zoning 19.48.040 2003 299 Zoning 19.04.805, 19.04.807 2004 251 Model Traffic Code 10.04.040 2004 252 Subdivisions 18.32.030 2004 253 Zoning 19.04.155, 19.30.030 19.32.030, 19.34.030 19.36.030, 19.44.020 2004 256 Animal control 6.04.300 2004 257 Zoning 19.42.050 2004 263 Utilities 13.04.200 2004 264 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.200 2004 269 Public rights-of-way 12.24.010-12.24.100 2004 270 Zoning 19.04.435 2004 272 Subdivisions 18.30.110 18.33.050-18.33.080 Zoning 19.14.040 19.48.010-19.48.100 19.50.020 2004 273 Animal control 6.04.230, 6.04.310 6.04.340 2004 274 Access to public streets 12.10.010-12.10.050 2004 277 Subdivisions 18.26.010-18.26.030 Rpld 18.24.220-18.24.240 2004 280 Zoning 19.32.020, 19.32.030 19.34.020, 19.34.030 2004 285 General offenses 9.16.040, 19.34.020 2004 286 Zoning 19.47.010-19.47.230 2004 288 Utilities 13.06.010 2004 289 Utilities 13.04.200 2004 292 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.230 Floodplain regulations 16.40.080 2004 294 Economic development incentive plans 3.30.010-3.30.070 Enhanced sales tax incentive program 3.31.010-3.31.110 2004 295 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.025, 5.08.030 5.08.060-5.08.080 5.08.110-5.08.135 5.08.150, 5.08.160 5.08.180, 5.08.350 5.08.390 2004 302 Building regulations 15.52.045 2004 303 Building regulations 15.50.100 2004 304 Street impact fees 12.20.040 Title 12, Exhibit A 2005 232 Utilities 13.04.200 2005 315 Zoning 19.36.010-19.36.030 2005 320 Subdivisions 18.30.130 Zoning 19.56.010 19.56.020-19.56.040 19.56.060, 19.56.070 2005 322 Zoning 19.08.010, 19.08.090 2005 329 Zoning 19.64.010-19.64.060 2005 330 Zoning 19.60.010-19.60.080 2005 331 Zoning 19.44.010-19.44.060 2005 332 Zoning 19.58.010-19.58.080 2005 336 Zoning 19.62.010-19.62.070 19.62.110-19.62.160 19.62.180-19.62.230 2005 338 Zoning 19.28.030, 19.30.020 19.32.020, 19.34.020 19.36.020 2005 339 Zoning 19.48.040 2005 342 Subdivisions 18.30.070, 18.30.090 2005 345 Animal control 6.04.050, 6.04.060 6.04.080-6.04.100 2005 346 Subdivisions 18.31.010-18.31.110 18.33.010-18.33.110 2005 348 Zoning 19.04.240, 19.04.250 19.04.820, 19.04.830 19.04.930, 19.26.030 19.28.030, 19.30.030 2005 349 Zoning 19.44.010-19.44.060 2005 350 Zoning 19.48.010-19.48.100 2005 351 Zoning 19.04.030, 19.04.050 19.04.120, 19.04.215 19.04.405, 19.04.410 19.04.465, 19.04.808 19.04.860, 19.04.990 19.24.030, 19.32.030 19.34.030, 19.36.030 2005 354 Animal control 6.04.300 2005 355 General offenses 9.25.010 2005 356 Zoning 19.45.010-19.45.160 2005 357 Building regulations 15.50.100 2005 358 Street impact fees Title 12 Exhibit A 2005 359 Building regulations 15.52.045 2006 369 Floodplain regulations 16.40.030, 16.40.040 16.40.111 2006 370 Floodplain regulations 16.42.010-16.42.060 2006 371 Utilities 13.04.200 2006 372 Animal control 6.04.300 2006 374 Nuisances 8.18.010-8.18.060 2006 376 Utilities 13.04.200 2006 382 Zoning 19.52.040 2006 389 Building regulations 15.50.100 2006 390 Street impact fees Title 12 Exhibit A 2006 391 Building regulations 15.52.045 2007 400 Utilities 13.04.200 2007 402 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.125 2007 403 Floodplain regulations 16.28.010-16.28.190 2007 404 Utilities 13.32.010-13.32.210 2007 405 Utilities 13.34.010-13.34.160 2007 413 Ward boundaries 1.12.010 2007 414 Elections 1.14.010-1.14.030 2007 417 Street impact fees, Building regulations Title 12 Exhibit A, 15.50.100, 15.52.045 2007 418 Economic development incentive plans 3.30.010, 3.30.030 3.30.035 2008 426 Floodplain regulations 16.40.111, 16.40.112 2008 427 Nuisances 8.18.010, 8.18.020 Floodplain regulations 16.40.090 2008 431 Model Traffic Code 10.04.030 2008 433 Planning Commission 1       Rpld 2.52.010- 
2.52.080       Added 2.52.010- 
2.52.080 2008 436 Municipal Court 2.28.245 2008 438 Utilities 13.04.200 2008 446 Zoning 19.44.020 2008 451 Floodplain regulations 16.28.070, 16.28.140 2008 452 Garage sales 5.16.040 Rpld 5.16.020, 5.16.030; 5.16.050 2008 455 Alcoholic beverages 5.08.235 2008 456 Animal control 6.04.010, 6.04.140 2008 458 Street impact fees Title 12 Exhibit A Building regulations 15.50.100, 15.52.045 2009 466 Penalties 1.16.010-1.16.050 1.17.010-1.17.130 Nuisances 8.14.010-8.14.060 8.24.010-8.24.080 8.24.100-8.24.140 8.26.010-8.26.050 Rpld Ch. 8.12, 8.16 Vehicles and traffic 10.04.010-10.04.060 Rpld Ch. 10.12, 10.16 Streets and sidewalks Rpld Ch. 12.16 Zoning 19.48.040 2009 469 General offenses 9.16.010 2009 475 Firearms and weapons 9.32.150 2009 477 Street impact fees Title 12, Exhibit A Building regulations 15.50.100, 15.52.045 2009 479 Animal control 6.04.020, 6.04.025 6.04.220 2009 738 Nuisances 8.14.010-8.14.050 2010 483 Unclaimed, lost and confiscated property 2.38.020 2.40.010-2.40.030 2010 490 Utilities 13.04.200 2010 497 General offenses 9.16.045 2010 499 Subdivisions 18.30.010-18.30.140 Zoning 19.04.010, 19.04.030 19.04.050, 19.04.070 19.04.090 19.04.110-19.04.220 19.04.240-19.04.310 19.04.330-19.04.380 19.04.400-19.04.670 19.04.690, 19.04.730 19.04.740 19.04.760-19.04.890 19.04.910 19.04.930-19.04.990 19.22.010-19.22.110 19.56.010-19.56.040 19.56.060, 19.56.070 2010 500 Sales and use tax 3.04.010-3.04.060 3.04.200, 3.04.240 3.04.250 3.04.300-3.04.360 3.04.400-3.04.420 3.04.500-3.04.570 3.04.590-3.04.620 3.04.700-3.04.750 3.04.800-3.04.840 3.04.860-3.04.950 3.04.1000-3.04.1040 2010 503 Zoning 19.10.050 2010 504 Building regulations 15.50.100 2011 513 Utilities 13.36.010-13.36.060 2011 515 Utilities 13.04.200 2011 516 Lost and confiscated property 2.40.020, 2.40.050 2011 517 Nuisances Rpld Ch. 8.20 2011 519 General offenses 9.04.020, 9.28.010 2011 522 Zoning 19.08.010-19.08.100 2011 523 Zoning 19.56.010-19.56.040 19.56.060, 19.56.070 2011 524 Model Traffic Code 10.04.010-10.04.060 Rpld Ch. 10.12 2011 527 Ward boundaries 1.12.010 2011 528 Street impact fees 12.20.040 2011 529 Street impact fees Title 12 Exhibit A Building regulations 15.50.100, 15.52.045 2011 532 Subdivisions 18.25.010-18.25.070 2012 536 Utilities 13.04.200 2012 539 Building regulations 1 15.20.010-15.20.250 2012 541 Volunteer Firefighter Pension Board Rpld Ch. 2.19 2012 544 Street impact fees 1 Title 12 Exhibit A Building regulations 2 15.50.100 3 15.52.045 2012 548 Building regulations 1 Rpld Ch. 15.04 2 15.08.010-15.08.130 15.09.010-15.09.390 3 15.12.010-15.12.070 4 15.16.010-15.16.220 5 15.18.010-15.18.120 7 15.24.010-15.24.160 8 15.28.010-15.28.050 2012 549 Marijuana 1 9.27.010 2013 551 General offenses 1 9.16.095 2 9.20.010 2013 552 Building regulations 2 15.48.010 3 15.48.020 4 15.48.030 5 15.48.040 6 15.48.050 7 15.48.060 8 15.48.070 9 15.48.110-15.48.260 Rpld 15.48.100 10 15.48.080 11 15.48.090 2013 559 Utilities 1 13.04.200 2013 564 Sales and use tax 1, 2 3.04.030, 3.04.200 3.04.320 4 3.04.500 5 3.04.530 6 3.04.590 7 3.04.710 8 3.04.870 9 3.04.890 10 3.04.900 11 3.04.930 2013 567 Penalty citations for Code violations 1       Rpld 1.17 2       Rnctd 1.17 2013 577 Impact fees 1 12.20, Ex. A 2 15.50.100 3 15.52.045 2013 579 2013 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16.04 2013 580 Offenses related to marijuana 1       Added 9.30 2013 582 Penalty for failure to pay penalties 1 1.17.130 2013 585 Towing services 1       Added 5.34 2014 586 Home Rule Charter amendments 1 Chrt.  3.4, 12.1, 12.5 2014 589 Animal nuisance and vicious animal 1 6.04.010 2 6.04.140.A 3 6.01.180 2014 592 Processing or approval of license, permit or other authorization 1       Added 1.24.010, 1.24.020 2014 594 Non-potable water system 1 13.06.010 2014 596 Floodplain permit applications 1 16.04.170 2014 600 US 85 Overlay District Design Standards 1       Rpld 19.62.010- 
16.62.230       Added 16.62.010- 
16.62.390 2014 601 Districts established-Zoning map 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 19.10.010- 
19.10.050       Added 19.10.010- 
19.10.050 2014 602 Ch. 19.04, Definitions 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 19.04.010- 
19.04.990 2       Added 19.04.010- 
19.04.990 2014 603 Zoning 1       Rpld 19.11.010- 
19.11.040       Rpld 19.12.010- 
19.12.040       Rpld 19.14.010- 
19.14.040       Rpld 19.16.010- 
19.16.060       Rpld 19.18.010- 
19.18.040       Rpld 19.20.010- 
19.20.040       Rpld 19.24.010- 
19.24.040       Rpld 19.26.010- 
19.26.040       Rpld 19.28.010- 
19.28.040       Rpld 19.30.010- 
19.30.040       Rpld 19.32.010- 
19.32.040       Rpld 19.34.010- 
19.34.040       Rpld 19.36.010- 
19.36.040 2       Added 19.15.010- 
19.15.050 2014 605 Crematorium uses within zoning districts Exh. A,  1 16.28.060 Exh. A,  2 19.15.030 2014 608 Water rights dedication 1       Dltd 13.08.010- 
13.08.090       Added 13.08.010- 
13.08.100 2014 614 Violations of the Fire Code 1 15.48.090 2014 Home Rule Charter Ordinance       Added Chrt.  1.1-16.4 2015 620 Fireworks 1       Added 9.33.010- 
9.33.040 2015 622 Control of smoking 1       Rpld 8.18.010- 
8.18.060       Added 8.18.010- 
8.18.060 2015 623 Use of land for oil and gas related uses (Zoning) 1 19.15.030 2015 624 Electrical code 1       Rpld 15.20.010- 
15.20.250       Added 15.20.010- 
15.20.250 2015 627 Panhandling in public rights-of-way 1       Added 9.16.056 2015 628 Aggressive panhandling 1       Added 9.16.055 2015 630 Fire Code 1(Exh. 1) 2.18.010- 
2.18.030 2(Exh. 2) 15.48.010- 
15.48.090 2015 631 Flood damage prevention 1(Exh. 1) 16.04.010- 
16.04.260 2015 635 Civil emergencies 1(Exh. 1)       Added 7.04.010- 
7.04.038 2015 640 Parking; and truck routes 1 10.04.030.J 2 10.04.040 3       Added 10.05.010- 
10.05.070 2016 642 Impact fees 2(1.1)a       Dltd 15.50.010- 
15.50.110 (1.1)b       Dltd 15.52.010- 
15.52.110 (1.1)c       Dltd 12.20.010- 
12.20.120 (1.2) 1.04.010 (1.3)       Added 3.20.010- 
3.20.160 2016 643 Incentive programs 1a       Rpld 3.17.010- 
3.17.050 1b       Rpld 3.30.010- 
3.30.070 1c       Rpld 3.31.010- 
3.31.110 2016 644 Flood damage prevention 1 16.04.070 2016 645 Elections 1 1.14.010- 
1.14.030 2016 646 Home Rule Charter 1 Chrt.  3.14 2016 647 Home Rule Charter 1 Chrt.  7.10 2016 654 Subdivisions 1       Rpld 18.04.010-18.04.110, 18.08.010-18.08.400, 18.12.010-18.12.090, 18.16.010-18.16.050, 18.20.010-18.20.130, 18.24.010-18.24.250, 18.25.010-18.25.070, 18.26.010-18.26.030, 18.28.010-18.28.300, 18.30.010-18.30.140, 18.31.010-18.31.110, 18.32.010-18.32.240, 18.33.010-18.33.110, 18.34.010-18.34.030, 18.36.010-18.36.050, 18.38.010-18.38.090, 18.40.010-18.40.030, 18.48.010, Zoning 19.02.010, 19.02.020, 19.04.010-19.04.990, 19.06.010-19.06.040, 19.08.010-19.08.100, 19.10.010-19.10.050, 19.15.010-19.15.050, 19.22.010-19.22.110, 19.40.010, 19.40.020, 19.42.010-19.42.110, 19.44.010-19.44.060, 19.45.010-19.45.160 19.46.010-19.46.030, 19.47.010-19.47.230, 19.48.010-19.48.100, 19.50.010-19.50.020, 19.52.010-19.52.050, 19.56.010-19.56.070, 19.58.010-19.58.080, 19.60.010-19.60.080, 19.62.010-19.62.390, 19.64.010-19.64.060 Land Development Code       Added 18.01.010-18.01.100, 18.02.010-18.02.040, 18.03.010, 18.04.010-18.04.190, 18.05.010-18.05.070, 18.06.010-18.06.130, 18.07.010-18.07.090, 18.08.010-18.08.040, 18.09.010-18.09.060, 18.10.010 2016 656 Crime of arson 1       Added 9.24.190 2016 658 Penalties for violation of ordinances 1 1.16.010, 
1.16.020 2.28.110 3.12.050 5.10.140 6.04.340 9.24.150 9.26.030 9.28.040 10.04.040 12.10.050 12.24.100 13.05.020 13.20.100 13.24.030 15.10.130 15.36.070 19.22.030 2016 659 Impact fees 1 3.20.040 2       Added 3.20.102 2017 662 Feral cats 1       Added 6.04.025.C 2017 664 Water and Sewer Board 1 2.24.020 2017 665 Impact fees 1 3.20.030.A 2017 667 Building regulations 1       Rpld 15.08.010-15.08.130, 15.09.010-15.09.390, 15.12.010-15.12.070, 15.16.010-15.16.220, 15.18.010-15.18.120, 15.24.010-15.24.160, 15.28.010-15.28.050,       Added 15.08.010, 15.09.010, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.18.010, 15.24.010, 15.28.010, 15.34.010 2017 668 Council meetings 2.04.010 2017 670 Prairie dogs 1       Added 6.05.010-6.05.080 2017 671 Ward boundaries 1 1.12.010 2017 674 Elections 1 1.14.010-1.14.030 2018 677 Offenses against property 1 9.24.010 2 9.24.040 2018 678 Evans Police Department 1 2.12.030 2       Added 2.12.040, 2.12.050 3       Rpld 2.16.010-2.16.050 2018 682 Zoning 1(Exh. A) 18.03.010 18.04.040, 18.04.050 18.04.100 18.04.120 18.04.160 2018 682 Zoning 1(Exh. A) 18.03.010 18.04.040.D       Rpld 18.04.040.F 18.04.050.E 18.04.100(tit.) 18.04.100.A-I, L.1 18.04.120.H       Added 18.04.120.I       Rnbd 18.04.120.I-K       as 18.04.120.J-L       Added 18.04.160.C.2.k 2018 684-18 Sales and use tax 1 3.04.030 3.04.210.G 3.04.260.F., R       Added 3.04.260.X 2019 692-19 Liquor licensing revisions to Colorado Revised Statutes 1 5.08.010 2 5.08.020 3 5.08.075 4 5.08.100 5 5.08.110.A 6 5.08.125 7 5.08.150 8 5.08.180.A 9 5.08.190.A., F.5 10 5.08.205.A., B 11 5.08.230.A 12 5.08.280 13 5.08.290 14 5.08.420 2019 695-19 Adopting the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 15.48.010- 
15.48.090       Added 15.48.010- 
15.48.090  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 586-14  2- 4-2014 Omit 2 587-14  3- 4-2014 Omit 2 588-14  3- 4-2014 Omit 2 589-14  3-18-2014 Include 2 590-14  3- 4-2014 Omit 2 591-14  5- 6-2014 Omit 2 592-14  5- 6-2014 Include 2 593-14  6- 3-2014 Omit 2 594-14  7- 1-2014 Include 2 595-14  7-15-2014 Omit 2 596-14  7-15-2014 Include 2 597-14  8- 4-2014 Omit 2 598-14  8-19-2014 Omit 2 599-14  8-19-2014 Omit 2 600-14  9- 2-2014 Include 2 601-14  9- 2-2014 Include 2 602-14  9- 2-2014 Include 2 603-14  9- 2-2014 Include 2 604-14 10- 7-2014 Omit 2 605-14 10-21-2014 Include 2 607-14 10-21-2014 Omit 2 608-14 10-21-2014 Include 2 609-14 11- 4-2014 Omit 2 610-14 11-18-2014 Omit 2 614-14 12-16-2014 Include 2 Ord. of 11- 4-2014 Include 3 615-15  1-20-2015 Omit 3 616-16  3- 3-2015 Omit 3 617-15  3- 3-2015 Omit 3 618-15  3- 3-2015 Omit 3 619-15  3-17-2015 Omit 3 620-15  4-21-2015 Include 3 621-15  5- 5-2015 Omit 3 622-15  6-15-2015 Include 3 623-15  6- 2-2015 Include 3 624-15  6-15-2015 Include 3 625-15  7-21-2015 Omit 3 627-15  8-18-2015 Include 3 628-15  8-18-2015 Include 3 629-15  9-15-2015 Omit 3 630-15 10- 6-2015 Include 3 631-15 10- 6-2015 Include 3 632-15 10-20-2015 Omit 3 634-15 10-20-2015 Omit 3 635-15 11- 3-2015 Include 3 636-15 11-17-2015 Omit 3 637-15 11-17-2015 Omit 3 638-15 12- 1-2015 Omit 3 640-15 12-15-2015 Include 3 641-15 12-22-2015 Omit 3 642-16  1-19-2016 Include 3 643-16  1-19-2016 Include 3 644-16  1-19-2016 Include 3 645-16  1-19-2016 Include 3 646-16  2-16-2016 Include 3 > 647-16  2-16-2016 Include 3 648-16  3- 1-2016 Omit 3 649-16  4-19-2016 Omit 3 650-16  4-19-2015 Omit 3 651-16  4-19-2016 Omit 3 652-16  4-19-2016 Omit 3 653-16  7-19-2016 Omit 3 655-16 10-18-2016 Omit 3 656-16 10-18-2016 Include 3 657-16 11-15-2016 Omit 3 658-16 12- 6-2016 Include 3 659-16 12- 6-2016 Include 3 660-16 12-20-2016 Omit 3 661-16  1- 3-2017 Omit 3 586-14  2- 4-2014 Include 4 654-16  3-21-2017 Include 4 662-17  2-21-2017 Include 4 663-17  4- 4-2017 Omit 4 664-17  4-18-2017 Include 4 665-17  4-18-2017 Include 4 666-17  5- 2-2017 Omit 4 667-17  5-16-2017 Include 4 668-17  5- 2-2017 Include 4 669-17  6-19-2017 Omit 4 670-17  7-18-2017 Include 5 671-17  7-31-2017 Include 5 672-17  9- 5-2017 Omit 5 673-17 10-17-2017 Omit 5 674-17 11-21-2017 Include 5 675-17 12- 5-2017 Omit 5 433-08  3-18-2008 Include 6 677-18  4- 3-2018 Include 6 678-18  4-17-2018 Include 6 682-18  8-21-2018 Include 6 683-18  8-21-2018 Omit 6 684-18  9-18-2018 Include 6 686-18 10-16-2018 Omit 6 688-18 12- 4-2018 Omit 6 689-19  2-19-2019 Omit 7 692-19  3-19-2019 Include 7 695-19  5- 7-2019 Include 7  
