MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE TOWN OF GYPSUM, COLORADO 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council 
Republished in 2015 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
GYPSUM, COLORADO 
  
Steve Carver 
Mayor 
____________ 
Chris Huffman 
Tom Edwards 
Chris Estes 
Marisa Sato 
Dick Mayne 
Pam Schultz 
Town Council 
____________ 
Jeff Shroll 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Frances Barela 
Assistant Town Manager 
____________ 
Danette Schlegel 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Robert Cole 
Town Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
GYPSUM, COLORADO 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
  
Steve Carver 
Mayor 
____________ 
Beric Christiansen 
Tom Edwards 
Chris Estes 
Gary Lebo 
Dick Mayne 
Pam Schultz 
Town Council 
____________ 
Jeff Shroll 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Frances Barela 
Assistant Town Manager 
____________ 
Danette Schlegel 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Robert Cole 
Town Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Source material used in the preparation of the Code was the prior Code as published by Book Publishing Company. The title organization and section numbers are unchanged and are the same as in the prior Code. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any subsequent amendments to the Code. 
    The Code has been conveniently arranged in titles and chapters, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the first decimal refers to the title number. The figure after the first decimal is the chapter number. The figure after the second decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1.01.010. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 10.04.010 and 10.04.020 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 10.04.015. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 9.02 and 9.04, it will be designated as chapter 9.03. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume and the chapter number. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Carren Pastrana, Editor, and Becky Wallace, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Danette Schlegel, Town Clerk, and the other members of the town staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 2015. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 2014-16  1-13-15 Included 2014-17  1-13-15 Included 2015-01  1-27-15 Included 2015-02  1-27-15 Included 2015-03  1-27-15 Included 2015-04  2-10-15 Included 2015-05  4-28-15 Included 2015-06  6-23-15 Included Supp. No. 2 2013-13  9-24-13 Included 2015-14  1-12-16 Included 2015-16  1-12-16 Included 2016-01  1-26-16 Omitted Supp. No. 3 2016-02  2- 9-16 Included 2016-04  2- 9-16 Included 2016-07  5-10-16 Included 2016-09  7-26-16 Included Supp. No. 4 2016-11 11- 8-16 Included Supp. No. 5 2011-07  4-25-11 Included 2016-10 10-25-16 Included 2017-03  3-14-17 Included 2017-04  5- 9-17 Included 2017-05  5- 9-17 Included 2017-07  5-23-17 Included 2017-08  5-23-17 Included Supp. No. 6 2017-13 10-10-17 Included Supp. No. 7 2017-12  9-26-17 Included 2018-02  3-13-18 Included Supp. No. 8 2018-09  9-11-18 Included 2018-14  1- 8-19 Included  
GYPSUM TOWN CHARTER 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.1 - Name and boundaries. 
    The Municipal Corporation previously existing as the Town of Gypsum, in the County of Eagle, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue as a body politic and corporate and under this Charter with the same name and boundaries as presently established until changed in the manner authorized by law. 
1.2 - Form of government. 
    The Municipal government provided by this Charter shall be the Mayor-Council form of government. Pursuant to the provisions of this charter and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, all powers of the Town shall be vested in an elected Council. 
1.3 - Powers. 
    The Town shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a home rule municipality to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. 
1.4 - Rights and liabilities. 
    By the Name of the Town of Gypsum the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession, shall own, possess and hold all real and personal property and benefits previously owned, possessed and held by the Town and does assume and shall pay all obligations of the Town made in the name of the Town of Gypsum, sue and defend, purchase, receive, hold and enjoy or sell or dispose of real and personal property and shall have a common seal and alter the same at its pleasure. This enumeration of rights shall not act as a limitation on the rights enjoyed by the Town of Gypsum. 
1.5 - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one election. If provisions of two or more proposed amendments adopted or approved at the same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall become effective. 
1.6 - Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context hereof, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. The singular number shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and neuter, and the word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
1.7 - Definitions. 
a)  Appropriations - An authorized amount of money set aside for expenditures during a specified time for a specific purpose. 
b)  Board, Commission or Committee - A Board, Commission or Committee intended by the Council to be a part of the governmental structure of the Town of Gypsum as established by ordinance. 
c)  Clerk - The Town Clerk for the Town of Gypsum. 
d)  Constitution - Constitution of the State of Colorado. 
e)  Elector or Qualified Elector - A resident of the Town who is qualified to vote in general elections in the State of Colorado, whether registered or not. 
f)  Emergency - A condition actually arising from unforeseen contingencies which immediately endangers property, or the public health, peace or safety. 
g)  Employee - A person employed by the Town of Gypsum not including elective officers of the Town. 
h)  Franchise - A privilege granted by the Town to a public utility, permitting a specified use of public property for a specified length of time, involving the element of regulation. 
i)  Officer - Any person elected to office or appointed by the Council including appointees to Boards, Commissions and Committees. 
j)  Ordinance - A regulation adopted by legislative action of the Town Council pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Charter. 
k)  Regular Municipal Election - A municipal election held every two years at which candidates for elective offices of the Town are voted upon in accordance with this Charter. 
l)  Statutes - The applicable laws of the State of Colorado as they now exist or as they may be amended, changed, repealed, or otherwise modified by legislative procedure. 
m)  Town - Town of Gypsum, Colorado, a Municipal Corporation. 
n)  Public Utility - Any person, firm, or corporation operating systems for heat, power, light, communication, water, sewer, energy or scheduled transportation serving or supplying the public. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS 

2.1 - Laws governing elections. 
    All Town elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Elections laws as now existing or hereafter amended or modified except as otherwise provided in the Charter or by ordinance. 
2.2 - Municipal elections. 
    A general municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday of April of 1984 and in each even numbered year thereafter. Any special municipal election may be called by Resolution or Ordinance of the Council at least 60 days in advance of such election. The Resolution or ordinance calling a special municipal election shall set forth the purpose or purposes of such election. Polling places for all municipal elections shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Election Day. All municipal elections shall be nonpartisan. No candidate for any municipal office shall run under any party label. 
2.3 - Nominating petitions and required signatures. 
    Nominating petitions for each candidate for Mayor and Councilman shall be signed by not fewer than 20 registered voters; petitions shall be filed not earlier than 60 days and not later than 20 days before the regular Town Election. 
2.4 - Recall. 
    Any elected official of the Town may be recalled at any time after the completion of six months in office by the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such incumbent, as mandated in the Colorado Constitution, Article XXI. 
ARTICLE III. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

3.1 - Initiative. 
    The registered electors of the Town shall have the power to propose any ordinance to the Council in accordance with the provisions of this article of the Charter. In the event Council fails to adopt said proposed ordinance without any change in substance, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the registered electors at a Town election for their acceptance or rejection. 
3.2 - Referendum. 
    The registered electors of the Town shall have the power to require reconsiderations by the Council of any ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a Town election in accordance with the provisions of this article of this Charter. 
3.3 - Petitions. 
1.  Number of Signatures - Initiative petitions will require at least 15% and referendum petitions will require at least 10% respectively of the total number of electors registered to vote at the last municipal election. 
2.  Signatures, Form and Content - All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style, and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink and shall be followed by the street address of the person signing. Petitions for initiative or referendum shall contain or have attached, throughout their circulation, the full text of the ordinance proposed or to be reconsidered. In the case of a recall, the petition shall contain the name of the individual and the reasons for recall. There shall also be specified the name and mailing address of the party to whom notices should be sent which are directed to the petitioners. 
3.  Time for Filing Petitions - All signatures on the petitions shall be obtained within 30 days before the date of filing the petition with the Town Clerk. 
3.4 - Procedures. 
    The petitioners shall certify that the correct number of signatures are contained in the petition. Within ten days from the filing of any petition, the Clerk shall determine whether the petition is signed by the correct number of registered voters and if sufficient, shall attach a certificate of sufficiency. If the petition is insufficient, the Clerk shall immediately notify the petitioners by certified mail, at the address designated by the petitioners. The petition may then be amended within ten days of receipt of notification of the certificate of insufficiency. Upon filing of the amended petition, the Clerk shall, within five days, examine the amended petition, and shall attach a certificate. If still insufficient, the Clerk shall notify the petitioners of the insufficiency of the petitions and the proceeding shall terminate. Petitions shall be retained only for a period of one year. The termination of any proceeding due to insufficiency of petition shall preclude the initiation of any proceeding pertaining to the same subject matter or same elected town official for one year. 
3.5 - Council action on petitions. 
    When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Council shall, within not more than 60 days, either: 
a)  Adopt the ordinance without alteration and as submitted by the initiatory petition; 
b)  Repeal the ordinance or part thereof referred to by the referendum petition, or; 
c)  Submit the proposal provided for in the initiative or referendum petition, without alteration, to the registered electors of the Town as provided in this Charter. The vote of the registered electors on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held as provided in this Charter. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available to the public before the election and also at the polls at the time of the election. 
d)  An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the 30th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the Town by filing with the Town Clerk a request for withdrawal signed by a majority of the petitioners. With the consent of the majority of the Council and upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
3.6 - Results of elections. 
    Initiative: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
    Referendum: If a majority of the registered electors voting on a referred ordinance vote for repeal, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
    Amendment, Reenactment or Repeal: An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed by action of the Council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted by action of the Council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was repealed; provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiative procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this article or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNCIL 

4.1 - Council structure and powers. 
    The legislative affairs of the Town shall be vested in a Council consisting of six Councilmen and one Mayor, nominated and elected at large. The Council shall be the legislative and governing body of the Town and shall exercise, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all powers conferred upon or possessed by the Town and shall adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper. 
4.2 - Removal. 
    If the Mayor or a member of the Council misses more than three consecutive meetings, he may be removed from his position by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Council, after notice and hearing. 
4.3 - Qualifications. 
    Each councilman and mayor, when nominated, elected or appointed, shall be a registered elector of the Town, a citizen of the United States, and shall have resided in the Town for one year immediately preceding such election. No Councilman nor the Mayor shall be a salaried employee of the Town during his term of office. 
4.4 - Terms of office-Council. 
    The terms of office for Councilmen shall be four years as hereafter provided. The Council as constituted on the effective date of this Charter shall continue as follows: 
a)  The Councilmen previously elected shall continue throughout their elected terms; 
b)  In the regular municipal election to be held in 1984, the three candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for four-year terms; 
c)  In the regular municipal election to be held in 1986, the three candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for four-year terms. 
4.5 - Terms of office-Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall be elected at large from the entire Town for a term of four years. In the regular municipal election to be held in April 1986 and every four years thereafter, the mayoral candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected Mayor. 
4.6 - Terms of office-Mayor pro-tem. 
    Mayor Pro-Tem shall be elected from the Council, by a majority of the Council, at the first meeting to be held after the election, and shall serve for a two-year term. In the absence, or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall perform all of his duties and have all powers of the Mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro-Tem, the Council shall choose his successor. 
4.7 - Vacancies. 
    An elective office shall become vacant whenever an officer becomes incapacitated, is removed, dies, is convicted of a felony, resigns, or ceases to be a resident of the Town, during the officer's term of office. Vacancies shall be filled by a majority vote of the Council within 30 days after such vacancy occurs. An appointee designated by such vote shall serve out the unexpired term of the office to which the appointee has been appointed. If there are three or more vacancies in the Council at the same time, the remaining members of the Council or the Town Clerk shall call a special election to fill those vacancies, unless a regular election will occur within 60 days. 
4.8 - Powers of the mayor. 
    The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  The Mayor shall have all power and authority necessary for the efficient performance of his duties. 
2.  The Mayor shall be the head of the administrative branch of the Town government. He shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of affairs of the Town and to that end he shall: 
a)  Appoint, suspend, transfer and remove all employees of the Town, except as otherwise provided herein, subject to personnel regulations adopted by the Town. Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the Town solely through its Mayor, and neither the Council nor any member shall give orders to any subordinates of the mayor, either publicly or privately. 
b)  Prepare the budget annually, submit it to the Council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
c)  Prepare and submit to the Council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on all finances and administrative activities of the Town for the preceding year. 
d)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, or required of him by the Council not inconsistent with this Charter. 
e)  To recommend to the Council for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary, and to attend Council meetings with the right to vote and take part in discussions. 
f)  Emergencies: In case of riot, insurrection, or other extraordinary emergencies, the Mayor shall have the authority to execute any action reasonable or necessary for the protection of life and property. Such authority shall include, but not be limited to, establishing regulations governing conduct and activities related to diminishing the emergency and if the emergency continues, the Mayor shall convene the Council which may take such action as it deems necessary. 
4.9 - Delegation of duties. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, authorize by a vote of the majority of the entire Council, the appointment of a Town Manager or Administrative Assistant, who shall have such powers and duties as the Council shall deem necessary or advisable. Any such position shall be created and conducted so that the powers of the Mayor are not diminished, and so that the Town Clerk or Administrative Assistant acts under the direction of, and reports to, the Mayor. 
4.10 - Council meetings. 
    The Council shall meet regularly at least once each month, at a day and hour to be fixed by ordinance. The Council shall determine the rules of procedure governing meetings. 
    The first meeting following each regular municipal election shall be the organizational meeting. Special meetings may be held at any time the Mayor or Council may direct. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. For the purposes of a quorum, the Mayor shall count as a member of the Council. All meetings shall be open to the public, except that the Council may recess for the purpose of discussing in a closed session the following: 
a)  Any matter concerning town business which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or reputation of any person. 
b)  The purchase or sale of any property. 
c)  Personnel matters. 
d)  Matters subject to negotiations. 
e)  Attorney-Client communications. 
    Before a closed session, the Council shall state the subject of the closed session in a motion calling for the closed session. Voting on matters which have been discussed in a closed session shall occur in open session and shall be recorded publicly. 
4.11 - Compensation. 
    Members of the Council shall receive such compensation as the Council shall, be ordinance, prescribe; provided, however, it shall neither increase nor decrease the compensation of any member of the Council during his term. Council members may be paid their actual and necessary expenses incurred in performance of their duties of office. 
4.12 - Conflicts of interest. 
    No officer of the Town, during his term of office, shall be a compensated employee of the Town, nor shall he have any material or significant financial interest direct or indirect or any apparent conflict of interest with the Town. In the event that any officer has or could potentially be construed as having such interest, said officer shall declare such interest. If any officer fails to declare such interest, the remaining members of the Council shall determine by a majority vote whether said interest does, in fact, constitute a conflict of interest. When such conflict of interest is established, the Council shall take any action they deem to be in the best interest of the Town. 
4.13 - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office or position, every officer and town employee shall take, subscribe before, and file with the Town Clerk, an oath of affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Colorado, this Charter and the ordinances of the Town and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
4.14 - Council acts. 
    The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution, or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances. All other action, except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolution or motions. True copy of every resolution as hereafter adopted shall be numbered and recorded in the official records of the Town. 
4.15 - Voting. 
    Final approval of an ordinance shall be by affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum present, with the vote being recorded; except that the following shall require a vote of the majority of the entire Council: 
a)  All ordinances, resolutions and motions for the appropriation of money, as required by CRS, 1973, 31-16-103, and any subsequent Colorado statutes or Constitutional provisions which impose such a requirement on home rule municipalities; and 
b)  All ordinances, resolutions and motions effecting the expenditure of money, or the incurring of a debt by the 
    Town, in excess of five percent of the Town's general fund appropriation the year in which such ordinance, resolution or motion is adopted. 
    A Council member shall be excused from voting on matters involving his own conduct, or which involve his direct financial interest, or in cases in which the member declines to vote. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 

5.1 - Departments created. 
    The administrative functions of this Town shall be performed by the departments existing at the time this Charter is adopted, and such other departments as may be established by ordinance. The Council may, by ordinance, consolidate, abolish, rename or reorganize any department. 
5.2 - Bonding. 
    All Town officials and employees dealing directly with municipal funds, or substantial inventories of material and supplies, shall post bond in an amount and under such conditions as required by Council and at the expense of the Town. 
5.3 - Town clerk and town treasurer. 
    The Council shall appoint a Town Clerk, who may also serve as Town Treasurer, who shall be custodian of the Town seal and who shall keep a journal of Council proceedings and record in full all ordinances, motions and resolutions. The Town Clerk shall have power to administer oaths and take acknowledgements under the seal of the Town and shall perform such other duties as required by this Charter or the Council. 
    The Council shall appoint a Town Treasurer, who may also serve as Town Clerk, who shall have charge of the financial records of the Town and shall collect, receive and disburse all monies belonging to the Town and shall have all other duties required to administer properly the financial affairs of the Town. 
5.4 - Personnel policies. 
    The Council, within one year of the adoption of this Charter, shall approve, by ordinance or resolution, a personnel policies and regulations manual for the employees and officers of the Town of Gypsum. The personnel policies and regulations manual shall contain provisions for employee classification, pay administration, employment practices, employee conduct, disciplinary actions, employee leave and fringe benefits, and such other standard personnel provisions as may be adopted by the Council. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUDGET FINANCING AND MUNICIPAL FUNDING 

6.1 - Forms of borrowing. 
    The Town may borrow money for any municipal purpose provided in this Charter and may issue the following or other securities to evidence such indebtedness: 
a)  Short Term Notes 
b)  General Obligation Bonds 
c)  Revenue Bonds 
d)  Refunding Securities 
e)  Industrial Development Revenue Bonds 
f)  Tax Increment Financing 
g)  Local or Special Improvement District Bonds 
h)  Long Term Rentals or Leases 
i)  Investment of Public Funds 
j)  Sales and/or Use Tax Revenue Bonds 
k)  Real Estate Transfer Tax Bonds 
l)  Any other legally recognized form of indebtedness and secured interest, which Council may authorize by ordinance. 
6.2 - Short term notes. 
    The Town may borrow money without an election in anticipation of the collection of taxes, or other form of revenues, and issue short-term notes to evidence the amount so borrowed. 
6.3 - General obligation bonds. 
    All general obligation bonds to which the full faith and credit of the Town is pledged or which are payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general property taxes, shall be issued after approval at a regular or a special election. The maximum interest rate which the bonds will bear, the maximum term for which bond may be issued, and the maximum premium payable on prior redemption of any general. obligation bond may be specified in the bond question. 
    Prior to the issuance of any general obligation bond, the Council shall prepare a statement of the current assessed valuation and outstanding general obligation bonded indebtedness of the Town. General obligation bonds issued for the purpose of acquiring water and rights thereto, for the purpose of acquiring or improving the existing water system, or for any combination of such purposes may be issued by ordinance without an election, by majority vote of the entire Council. 
6.4 - Revenue bonds. 
    The Town, by ordinance, and without an election, may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for purchasing, constructing, condemning, or otherwise acquiring, extending or improving a municipal utility system or other public facility or income producing project, or for any other capital improvement; provided that the bonds or any other obligations shall be made wholly payable from the net revenues derived from the operation of such utility system or other such project or capital improvement, and provided further, that any two or more of such utility systems, projects, or capital improvements may be combined, operated and maintained as joint utility systems, projects or capital improvements, in which case such bonds or other obligations shall be made wholly payable out of the net revenues derived from the operation of such joint utility systems, projects, or capital improvements. 
6.5 - Industrial development revenue bonds. 
    The Town may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as from time to time amended; provided such bonds shall not be issued until a public hearing on the question of issuance of the same shall have been held. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least 30 days prior to the public hearing. 
6.6 - Tax Increment financing. 
    Any urban renewal plan approved by the Town pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes, As from time to time amended, may contain provision for tax increment financing. 
6.7 - Special or local improvement district bonds. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, contract for or construct special or local improvements within specified Districts of the Town; 
a)  provided no protest is filed within 30 days of final passage of the ordinance creating the District by more than 50 percent of the landowners, 
b)  on petition filed by more than 50 percent of the landowners in the proposed District, 
c)  whenever 80 percent of the principal amount of the outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and cancelled, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon, and there are not sufficient monies in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the Town shall pay said bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting unpaid assessments due said district. 
6.8 - Long term rentals or leaseholds. 
    In order to provide necessary land, buildings, equipment, and other property for governmental or proprietary purposes, the Town is hereby authorized to enter into long term rental or leasehold agreements. Such agreements may include an option or options to purchase or acquire title to such leased or rented property within a period not exceeding the useful life of such property. No election shall be necessary to authorize such lease, nor shall the obligation to pay such rentals be taken into consideration in determining debt limitation. 
6.9 - Limitations on indebtedness. 
    Taking into consideration the provisions of Section 6.3 of this Charter which require an election and disclosure of the current assessed valuation and outstanding general obligation bonded indebtedness of the Town prior to the issuance of general obligation bonds, there shall be no limitation on the amount of bonds or other securities the Town may issue except as may be stated in the ordinance pertaining thereto. All bonds or other securities issued pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall be sold at public or private sale to the best advantage of the Town at, above, or below par. Bonds may contain provisions for redemption prior to maturity with or without the payment of a premium. 
6.10 - Investment of public funds. 
    Funds not needed for current operation may be pooled and invested and/or reinvested by the Council. Such investments will take into account when funds will be needed. Such investments may include, but not be limited to, any U. S. Government obligation, Money Market Funds rated AA or better, Certificates of Deposit, and other secured investments offered by chartered and/or licensed institutions. 
6.11 - Sales and/or use tax revenue bonds. 
    The Town, by ordinance, and without an election may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for any municipal purpose provided in this Charter; the bonds or any other obligations shall be made wholly payable from the net revenues derived from a sales and/or use tax. Monies received by the Town from State and/or county sale and/or use taxes may be used for this purpose. Monies received from a Town sales and/or use tax may also be used for this purpose provided, however, a sales and/or use tax has been imposed in accordance with the Charter prior to the issuance of sales and/or use tax revenue bonds payable from a Town sales and/or use tax. 
6.12 - Real estate transfer tax bond. 
    The Town, by ordinance, and without an election may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for any municipal purpose provided in this Charter, the bonds or any other obligations shall be made wholly payable from the net revenues derived from a real estate transfer tax. Monies received by the Town from State and/or county real estate transfer taxes may be used for this purpose. Monies received from a Town real estate transfer tax may also be used for this purpose provided, however, a real estate transfer tax has been imposed in accordance with the Charter prior to the issuance of real estate transfer tax bonds payable from a Town real estate transfer tax. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUDGET CONTROL AND FINANCING 

7.1 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the Town of Gypsum shall commence on the first day of January or on such date each year as shall be fixed by the Council. 
7.2 - Provision for tax system. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, provide a system for the assessment, levy and collection of all town taxes, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
7.3 - Budget. 
    The Mayor shall annually prepare and submit to the Council a budget and accompanying message. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the Mayor deems desirable or the Council may require. In organizing the budget, the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. It shall begin with a clear statement showing comparative figures for income and expenditures the preceding fiscal year. The Mayor or other qualified persons appointed by the Council shall prepare and submit to the Council, on or before the first regularly scheduled Council meeting in October of each year, a recommended budget for the next fiscal year. 
7.4 - Capital program. 
    The Mayor, with such assistance as he may desire or the Council may direct, shall prepare and submit to the Council a long range capital program, two weeks prior to the submission of his recommended budget. The capital program shall include, but not be limited to: 
a)  a clear list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the following fiscal year with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for the improvement; 
b)  cost estimates, method of financing and recommended schedules for each such improvement; 
c)  the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
    This information may be revised or extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. The bonded and other indebtedness of the Town shall show the department authorized and the condition of special funds, if any. 
7.5 - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget and proposed capital program shall be held by the Council no later than 45 days prior to the close of the fiscal year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published one time at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
7.6 - Council amendments. 
    After the public hearing, the Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit. 
7.7 - Council adoption. 
    The Council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on or before the final day of the fiscal year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly until such time as the Council adopts the budget for the ensuing year. 
7.8 - Public record. 
    The budget, audit and the minutes of all Council meetings including motions, resolutions, ordinances and the vote thereon, shall be a public record in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be open to public inspection during normal business hours. 
7.9 - Amendments after adoption. 
a)  Supplemental appropriations - if during the fiscal year, the Mayor certifies that there are available for appropriation, revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget; the Council, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
b)  Emergency appropriations - To meet a public emergency affecting life, public health, property or peace; may be made by the Council. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with this Charter. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may, by emergency ordinance, authorize the issuance of emergency notes as provided in this Charter, Section 8.5. 
c)  Reduction of appropriations - if at any time during the fiscal year, should it appear probable to the Mayor that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the Council without delay indicating the estimated amount of deficit and action taken by him and his recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose by resolution, reduce one or more appropriations. 
d)  Surplus - any time during the fiscal year the Mayor may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation within a department, office or agency and, upon written request of the Mayor, the Council may, by resolution, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation from one department, office, or agency to another. 
    No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred. No appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental appropriations, emergency appropriations, and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
7.10 - Annual audit. 
    An audit shall be made annually by a certified public accountant or accounting firm, licensed to practice in the State of Colorado. The Council shall select the accountant and may call for more frequent or special audits. Audits shall be available for public inspection. There shall be a special audit by a party possessing the above qualifications, but which is not the then regular accountant for the Town, in intervals of not less than five years. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LEGISLATIVE 

8.1 - Ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
    The Council shall act by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
    All legislative enactments of a permanent nature shall be by ordinance; all other actions, except as provided in this Charter, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. All ordinances and resolutions shall be confined to the same subject, except in case of repealing ordinances. ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of said appropriation. 
8.2 - Action by ordinance required. 
    In addition to such acts of the Council as are required by other provisions of this Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property without the consent of the owner, shall be by ordinance. 
8.3 - Form of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinance[s] shall be: 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN OF GYPSUM, COLORADO. Every ordinance introduced shall be deemed to have a severability clause unless otherwise specified in the ordinance. 
8.4 - Procedure. 
    Except for emergency ordinances and ordinances making general codification of existing ordinances, the following procedure for enactment of ordinances shall be as followed: 
a)  The ordinance shall be introduced at any regular or special meeting of the Council by any member thereof. 
b)  The ordinance shall be read in full or in cases where copies of the ordinance are available to the public, said ordinance may be read by title only. 
c)  After the first reading of the ordinance, the same shall be approved with or without amendment, rejected, or tabled by vote of the Council. 
d)  If the ordinance is approved on first reading, within 60 days it shall be posted and published in full or by title, unless otherwise provided in this Charter. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the ordinance not earlier than four days after first publication, and notice of said public hearing, specifying the day, hour and place of the same, shall be included in the posting and first publication. 
e)  If the ordinance is tabled, it shall be reconsidered at a subsequent meeting, but not longer than 60 days after its first reading, at which time it shall be approved with or without amendment, or rejected, by vote of the Council. 
f)  The ordinance shall be introduced and read, in the manner provided in Section 8.4, a second time at the public hearing for final approval, rejection, or other action as may be taken by vote of the Council. 
g)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an ordinance shall be posted and published, in full or by title, after final passage and if amended subsequent to its last posting and publication, shall state the same has been amended and shall contain a summary of the subject matter of said amendment. 
h)  All ordinances shall take effect five days after publication following final passage, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
8.5 - Emergency ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, public health, property, or peace, the Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances. These ordinances may not regulate taxes or authorize the borrowing of money, except as otherwise provided by this Charter (Section 7.9). An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. The Council must, prior to the enactment of an emergency ordinance, receive evidence in support of the declaration that an emergency exists, and must make a specific finding of fact that a public emergency affecting life, public health, property, or peace exists. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. A summary of every emergency ordinance shall be published. It shall become effective upon adoption or at a specified time. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed on the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted. This shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 8.4 of this article. 
8.6 - Codification. 
    The Council shall cause the ordinances to be codified and thereafter maintained in current form. Each Council shall review the ordinances and examine them for current need. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, prescribe further requirements and procedures for enactment, publication and codification of ordinances, notices and similar matters. 
8.7 - Codes. 
    Standard codes promulgated by the Federal Government, the State of Colorado, or by recognized trade or professional organizations, including amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted with or without amendment by reference; provided the publication of the ordinance adopting any such code shall state that copies and any amendments are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk and further provided that any penalty clause in any code may be adopted only if it is set forth in full and published in the adopting ordinance. 
8.8 - Amendment or repeal. 
    No ordinance, section or subsection thereof shall be amended, superseded, or repealed except by an ordinance regularly adopted. No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only. The revised sections or subsections of the ordinance, as amended, shall be reenacted. However, an ordinance, section or subsection thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance and code number only. 
8.9 - Posting and publication by reference or title. 
    Whenever an ordinance shall be posted or published by reference or by title, the posting and publication shall contain a summary of the subject matter of said ordinance and shall contain a notice to the public that copies of the proposed ordinance are available at the office of the Town Clerk. 
    The posting and publication of any ordinance by reference or by title as provided herein must set forth in full any penalty clause contained in said ordinance. 
8.10 - Disposition of ordinances. 
    An ordinance as adopted shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and the Town Clerk. A true copy of every such authenticated ordinance shall be numbered and recorded in the official records of the Town. Attached to each ordinance and made a part thereof, shall be the certificate of publication or certification by the Town Clerk that the same has been posted. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL AND JUDICIARY 

9.1 - Town attorney. 
    The Council shall appoint for the Town an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado. He shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and perform duties determined by the Council. Compensation of the Town Attorney shall be fixed by the Council. 
9.2 - Municipal court system. 
    The Council may establish a municipal Court System and shall set forth its functions and duties by ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 

10.1 - General powers. 
    The Town shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises all municipal powers including, without limitation, all powers not existing and which may be hereafter provided by the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Colorado. The right of the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work, or way is expressly reserved. Except as otherwise provided by the Constitution or this Charter, all powers concerning the granting, amending, revoking or otherwise dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the Council. 
10.2 - Water rights. 
    The Town shall have the power to buy, exchange, lease, own, control or otherwise deal in water rights. 
10.3 - Utility rates and service areas. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, establish rates for services provided by municipality-owned utilities. All newly-annexed territory shall be served by municipal utilities within a reasonable period of time after service is requested. If the Council desires to extend the municipal utilities beyond Town boundaries, it shall do so by ordinance. 
10.4 - Granting of franchise. 
    The time for which a franchise is granted shall be determined by the Council, not to exceed 50 years. 
10.5 - Franchise review. 
    Each franchise granted under the provisions of this charter shall include a section specifying an annual review of said franchise. Prior to any rate increase by any franchise holder which is subject to rate regulation by the Town, a public meeting shall be held regarding justification of said increases at a regular or special meeting of the Council. 
10.6 - Franchise records. 
    The Town Clerk shall keep copies of all franchises heretofore and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the grantee and any assignees. The record shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual reports and such other matters of information and public interest as the Council may from time to time require. 
10.7 - Existing franchises. 
    All franchise ordinances of the Town in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or until modified by another franchise. 
10.8 - Sale of utilities. 
    No utility owned by the Town and no water rights owned by the Town shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the Town unless the question of such sale and the terms and consideration therefore shall first have been approved by a majority vote of the registered electors voting at a regular or special election. 
ARTICLE XI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 

11.1 - Existing boards, commissions and committees. 
    All existing boards, commissions and committees shall continue as established, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
11.2 - Boards and commissions. 
    Council shall have the power and authority to create Boards and Commissions: 
a)  as may be required by Statute; 
b)  advisory; 
c)  fact-finding; 
d)  appeal. 
    Advisory boards may be created by resolution and all other boards shall be created by ordinance. The ordinance shall set forth the powers and duties delegated. Boards and commissions created under this section which are not required by Statute, or otherwise provided for in this Charter, may be abolished as Council deems advisable. 
11.3 - Vacancies and establishment of boards. 
    Whenever a board, commission or committee is established or a vacancy occurs, the Council shall cause public notice of such vacancy to be made and encourage qualified volunteers to seek appointment. The Council shall then make said appointments. 
ARTICLE XII. - MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

12.1 - Continuity. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the form of government existing in the Town of Gypsum at the time of the adoption of this Charter, shall continue unaltered, and all officers and other persons in the service of the Town at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue to serve and their compensation shall not be modified by the adoption of this Charter. 
12.2 - Responsibility in transition. 
    It shall be the duty of the Council in office when the proposed charter takes effect to implement all the requirements of this Charter. 
12.3 - Present ordinances continued in force. 
    All laws, ordinances, resolutions, by-laws, orders, rules or regulations in force in the Town of Gypsum at the time this Charter takes effect which are not inconsistent with this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect until the Council otherwise provides. 
12.4 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected. If the application of this Charter, or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. Every ordinance introduced shall be deemed to contain a severability clause. 
12.5 - Saving clause. 
    The Charter shall not affect any suit pending in any court or any document heretofore executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this Charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the Town of Gypsum and individuals, corporations or public agencies. 
12.6 - Technical amendments. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, effect technical changes in this Charter which do not substantively change the provisions of this Charter, such as correction of spelling or grammatical errors, or to reflect the change in the Town's status to that of a City. 
12.7 - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become effective October 21st, 1982. 
THE TOWN OF GYPSUM, COLORADO CHARTER COMMISSION 
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL APPROVAL 
    We, the undersigned, present members of the Gypsum Charter Commission, duly elected by the people of Gypsum, Colorado at an election held on April 6, 1982, under the Authorization of Article XX, the Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the Town of Gypsum, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Commission on the third day of August, 1982, for submission to the people of Gypsum at a special election to be held on September 14, 1982. 
    Done in Gypsum, Colorado this third day of August 1982. 
John D. Coffey, 
Co-Chairman Josephine M. Morris, 
Co-Chairman Isabel D. Thompson 
Secretary John Vroman J. R. Nestor David Vroman Gary R. Houston Donald H. Ballenger James D. Keigley  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 

1.01.010 - Adoption of Gypsum Municipal Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 31-16-201 through 31-16-208 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted the "Gypsum Municipal Code," as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. I series 1985 SI) 
1.01.020 - Contents-Codification authority. 
    This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances, and certain of the administrative ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 31-16-208 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. I series 1985 S4) 
1.01.030 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This Code shall be known as the "Gypsum Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to such Code as the "Gypsum Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Gypsum Municipal Code, and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
(Ord. I series 1985 2) 
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to Code adoption. 
    The last ordinance included in the original Code is Ordinance 2, passed 1984. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 2, but prior to the adoption of this Code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code: Ordinances 3, 4 and 5, series of 1984. 
(Ord. 1 series 1985 3) 
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Gypsum Municipal Code," or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance or the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. I series 1985 5) 
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1 series 1985 6) 
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise, and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the Code. 
(Ord. I series 1985 7) 
1.01.080 - Effective date. 
    This Code shall be come effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter adopting this Code as the Gypsum Municipal Code shall become effective. 
(Ord. I series 1985 10) 
1.01.090 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the town shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. I series 1985 8) 
1.01.100 - Penalty sections of the Code. 
    Repealed (Ord. 21, Series 2007). 
1.01.105 - Enforcement of the Code. 
    The provisions of the Gypsum Municipal Code are enforceable in Gypsum Municipal Court. The town manager, town code enforcement officer, chief building official, every officer of the Gypsum Police Department, Eagle County Sheriff's Department, and the Colorado State Patrol, and any person authorized by specific provisions ("town enforcement officers") are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Gypsum Municipal Code, and make all determinations provided for herein. 
1.01.110 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional; then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. I series 1985 11) 
1.01.120 - Enactment authority. 
    The council finds, determines and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. I series 1985 12) 
1.01.130 - Amendments and corrections. 
    In codifying and maintaining the Code and all ordinances contained therein, the town clerk is authorized to correct errors in spelling and punctuation and obvious clerical and typographical errors and to assign and reassign title, chapter and section heading numbers, including subdivisions thereof, in all ordinances adopted by the town council, including ordinances amending the Code. All such corrections and changes may be made at any time the need therefore comes to the attention of the town clerk. The fact that a correction or change has been made, and the nature of the correction or change, shall set forth in a certificate, signed by the town clerk, describing the change. Such certificate shall be attached to the original ordinance. Any ordinance which has been codified prior to such a correction or change shall be recodified, with the correction or change, at the earliest opportunity thereafter. 
(Ord. 2011-09) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances, resolutions or motions of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases: 
    City and town each mean the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, and such territory outside of the town over which the town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    Council means the town council of the Town of Gypsum. All its members or all councilmen means the total number of councilmen holding office. If an ordinance enacted prior to adoption of home rule by the town speaks of the town's board of trustees or members of that board, it shall now mean the town council and the members of that council. 
    County means the County of Eagle. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Must and shall are each mandatory. 
    Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner, as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeo-graphed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 1 series 1984 1) 
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the town. 
(Ord. I series 1984 2) 
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. I series 1984 3) 
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction in intended: 
(1)  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 1 series 1984 4) 
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. I series 1984 5) 
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. I series 1984 6) 
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. I series 1984 7) 
1.04.080 - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the Town of Gypsum, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. I series 1984 8) 
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance, resolution or motion shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance, resolution or motion or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. I series 1984 9) 
Chapter 1.08 - MUNICIPAL ELECTION 

1.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the procedures for canceling a municipal election in addition to any procedures that may be available under state statute. 
(Ord. 11 series 1990 1). 
1.08.020 - Affidavit of intent for write-in candidate. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless as affidavit of intent has been filed with the clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to 20 days before the day of the election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Ord. 18 Series 2010) 
1.08.030 - Cancellation of election. 
    If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent, the clerk, if instructed by resolution of the governing body either before or after such date, shall cancel the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected. Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, in order to inform the electors of the municipality, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one other public place. 
(Ord. 18 Series 2010) 
1.08.040 - Commencement of terms of office. 
    The regular terms of office of the mayor and all council members elected at regular elections or declared elected at an election that is cancelled pursuant to section 1.08.030, shall commence at the next meeting of the town council following the date of the election or the scheduled date of the cancelled election, but no later than 30 days following the survey of returns and upon the signing of an oath. 
(Ord. 20 Series 2010) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
  
Chapter 2.01 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

2.01.010 - Municipal court created. 
    There is hereby created and established a qualified municipal court for the Town of Gypsum. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Municipal court shall mean a qualified municipal court of record as defined in Section 13-10-102, C.R.S. 
    Municipal judge shall mean and include the presiding municipal judge and all assistant and substitute municipal judges, unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.030 - Appointment of municipal judges. 
    The town council, by resolution, shall appoint the presiding municipal judge for a term of two years to preside over the municipal court, although the initial appointment shall be for a term of office which expires on the date of the next election of the town council. Assistant judges and substitute judges may be appointed by the town council for a term as necessary to transact the business of the court. Upon a vacancy in the position of the presiding municipal judge, the town council can appoint a new presiding municipal judge for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.040 - Qualifications of judges. 
    A municipal judge shall be admitted to, and currently licensed in, the practice of law in Colorado. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.050 - Compensation of judge. 
    The compensation of the municipal judge, except substitute judges, shall be an annual salary in a amount set by the town council in the appointing resolution, and payable monthly. Compensation of substitute judges shall be set by the appointing resolution and may be based upon the number of court sessions served. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.060 - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of office, a municipal judge shall take an oath of affirmation, given by the mayor or the mayor pro tem, that he or she will support the Constitution and laws of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, and the laws of the town, and will faithfully perform the duties of office. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.070 - Removal of judge. 
    A municipal judge may be removed during his or her term of office only for cause. A judge may be removed for cause for: 
(1)  Conviction of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Any disability which renders the judge unable to perform the essential job functions; 
(3)  Willful or persistent failure to perform his or her duties; 
(4)  Being a habitual intemperate. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.080 - Jurisdiction and venue. 
(a)  The municipal court has original jurisdiction of all civil and criminal cases arising under this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(b)  The municipal court shall be the proper venue to try all offenses of this Code and other ordinances of the town, and proof that the offense occurred within the town shall not constitute an element of any offense and need not be proven unless required by the ordinance defining the offense. Any defendant wishing to challenge the place of trial must do so by written motion no later than 20 days after arraignment, except for good cause shown. The municipal judge shall determine any such issue prior to the commencement of the trial and the selection of a jury. If the municipal judge finds that trial in the town is not proper, the case shall be transferred to a court of appropriate jurisdiction in the proper county or municipality. Failure to challenge the place of trial as provided in this section shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the place of trial. The town may file an interlocutory appeal of a decision transferring the case to another county. 
(Ordinance 2012-07) 
2.01.090 - Powers. 
    Unless otherwise limited by this chapter, the municipal judge shall have all legal and equitable powers necessary and appropriate to enforce the court's orders, judgments and decrees, and to the operation of the municipal court, including but not limited to the power: 
(1)  To enforce subpoenas issued by any board, commission, officer, or other body of the town authorized by law or ordinance to issue subpoenas, by imposing fines and penalties; 
(2)  To assess and collect civil penalties; 
(3)  To order and enforce by contempt the abatement of nuisances and violation of zoning regulations; 
(4)  To issue search warrants; 
(5)  To summon and compel the attendance of jurors; 
(6)  To punish violations of the Gypsum Municipal Code by a fine not to exceed $2,650.00 or by incarceration for a period not to exceed one year, or both, except that confinement of any child under the age of 18 shall be limited as provided by Section 13-10-113, C.R.S.; (Ord. 2013-18) 
(7)  To perform other responsibilities prescribed by this Code and ordinances of the town. (Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
(8)  To impose fines for contempt of the municipal court. 
(9)  To issue temporary and permanent injunctions and temporary and permanent restraining orders. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05,  1, 4-28-15) 
2.01.100 - Court sessions. 
    Regular sessions of the municipal court for the trial of cases shall be fixed by the presiding municipal judge as necessary to efficiently manage the court's docket. Special court sessions may be set at any time, including Sundays, holidays and nights. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.110 - Recording of sessions. 
    A verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence at trials shall be kept by either electric devices or stenographic means. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.120 - Rules of procedure. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the municipal court shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. The presiding municipal judge may issue local rules of procedure consistent with rules of procedure adopted by the Colorado Supreme Court and provisions of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.130 - Court clerk. 
    The town council shall appoint a municipal court clerk, whose duties shall be those assigned by the presiding municipal judge and local rules. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.140 - Monthly accounting by court clerk. 
    The court clerk shall file monthly reports with the town clerk of all moneys collected. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.150 - Bench warrants. 
    If a defendant fails to appear for arraignment or trial at the time or place required in the summons or other notice or otherwise fails to appear as required by statute, rule or ordinance or by the court, or fails to pay any fine or costs or obey any lawful order of the court, the court may issue a bench warrant directed to any law enforcement officer, commanding such officer to apprehend the defendant and bring the defendant forthwith before the court. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.160 - Contempt power. 
    When the court finds any person to be in contempt, the court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine and/or imprisonment as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.170 - Civil infractions. 
    Notwithstanding any provision contained in the Code, all violations of any provision of the charter or ordinances of the Town of Gypsum or its Municipal Code, including codes adopted by reference, for which a fine only or a fine and points pursuant to Section 42-2-127, C.R.S., is established as a penalty for the violation thereof, shall constitute civil infractions and not criminal violations. Civil infractions shall be tried only to the municipal judge. In such cases, defendants shall have no right to a jury trial as contemplated by Section 13-10-114, C.R.S., or Rule 223 of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court procedure. 
(Ord. 01, Series 2007) 
2.01.180 - Call for jury. 
    In all trials where the defendant has the right to, and has properly requested, a jury trial, the court clerk shall summon prospective jurors. 
(1)  Jurors shall be residents of the town, at least 21 years of age, and shall not have been convicted of a felony. 
(2)  Should a person fail to appear or be excused by the clerk after being summoned to appear as a juror, the municipal judge shall have the power to issue an attachment, directed to any law enforcement officer to bring the summoned juror before the court to show cause why he or she should not be punished by contempt. 
(3)  Jurors shall be paid the sum of $6.00 per day for actual jury service and $3.00 per day for service on the jury panel alone. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.190 - Plea agreements. 
(a)  In general. Where it appears that the efficient administration of criminal justice will be served, the city attorney may engage in plea discussions for the purpose of reaching a plea agreement. A plea agreement shall be discussed and reached in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. 16-7-301 et. seq., as amended. 
(b)  Deferred prosecution. The court may, prior to the entry of a plea of guilty and with the consent of the defendant, his attorney and the city attorney, order the prosecution of the offense to be deferred for a period not to exceed one year. During such time, the court may place the defendant on supervised or unsupervised probation on such reasonable terms and conditions as the defendant, his attorney and the city attorney may agree; however, no jail time may be imposed as a condition of such deferred prosecution. 
(c)  Deferred sentence. In any case in which the defendant has entered a plea of guilty, the court has the power, with the written consent of the defendant, his attorney and the city attorney, to continue the case for a period not to exceed one year from the date of entry of such plea for the purpose of entering judgment and sentence upon such plea of guilty. During such time, the court may place the defendant on supervised or unsupervised probation on such reasonable terms and conditions as the defendant, his attorney and the city attorney may agree; however, the court may, as an additional condition of such deferred sentence, commit the defendant to jail, during such deferred period of time, for a period of time not to exceed ten days. Such commitment, at the court's discretion, need to be served on consecutive days. 
(d)  Dismissal of action or revocation. Any charge(s) deferred pursuant to subsections 2.01.190(b) and (c) of this section shall be dismissed, with prejudice, upon the defendant's satisfactory completion of the period of probation. If the conditions imposed on the defendant pursuant to subsection 2.01.190(b) and (c) of this section are violated, the city attorney may file a motion to revoke the deferred prosecution or sentence. The determination of whether or not a violation has occurred shall be made by the court after a hearing held upon notice of the same of not less than five days, unless such notice is waived, to the defendant and his attorney of record. The motion to revoke the deferred prosecution shall be made during the period of probation or within 30 days thereafter. 
    The burden of proof at such hearing shall be by a preponderance of the evidence, and the defendant shall be granted procedural due process rights. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.200 - Imposition of court costs. 
    The municipal judge is empowered, in his discretion, to assess the following costs against any defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code or any of the ordinances of the town or against any defendant who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence: 
(1)  Court costs. Court costs of $35.00 may be assessed against every defendant who is found guilty or who has pled guilty or no contest to any ordinance or Charter violation, and for every court-scheduled appearance a defendant fails to attend without being excused by the municipal judge. (Ord. 01, Series 2007) 
(2)  Witness fees. Three dollars per day or part of a day in which the witness is actually in court plus mileage of $.015 per mile for each mile actually and necessarily traveled from the witness's residence to the court; 
(3)  Bench warrant fee. Fifteen dollars per warrant issued plus any costs incurred for transporting the defendant from his place of arrest to the Town of Gypsum; 
(4)  Probationary or other services. Actual costs incurred either by the town or the defendant for probationary or treatment services for the defendant or useful public service by the defendant as such may be ordered by the court; 
(5)  Letter fee. Five dollars per letter for any letter sent to a defendant where the defendant has failed to respond to a written notice of court or a summons. Such letter fee shall not limit the court's ability to fine or sentence a defendant for contempt for such failure to respond; and 
(6)  Jail costs. Actual per day cost charged to the town by the Eagle County Jail or Eagle County Sheriff for each day a defendant is sentenced to jail. (Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
(7)  Interpreter fee. If the court makes a foreign language interpreter available to assist the defendant, actual costs incurred by the town for the services of the interpreter. (Ord. 19, series 2004) 
2.01.210 - Restitution. 
    The municipal judge is empowered to order a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code or any of the ordinances of the town or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence to make restitution or reparation, or both, to the victim of the defendant's conduct for the damage or injury which was sustained. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.220 - Probation. 
    The municipal judge is empowered to place a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code or any of the ordinances of the town or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence on probation for a period not to exceed one year. Such probation may be supervised or unsupervised and may be made conditional upon the successful completion of reasonable terms and conditions. Revocation of probation shall occur in the same manner as revocation of a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence. The municipal judge is empowered to utilize such probationary services as are provided by the town council or with which the court may contract at no cost to the town. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.230 - Incarceration of certain offenders in Eagle County Jail. 
    Each person sentenced to jail by the municipal court shall serve the sentence in the Eagle County Jail pursuant to intergovernmental agreement between the town and the county, and shall be entitled to the same treatment as those prisoners in the Eagle County Jail sentenced for violations of criminal statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. 11 series 1994 2) 
2.01.240 - Penalties. 
    If a person receives a summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice for an offense defined by this Code as a civil infraction, and such person fails to pay the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due and fails to appear in person or by counsel before the municipal court for a first hearing, the municipal court shall enter a plea of not guilty pursuant to Rule 211(d) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure. If a person fails to appear before the municipal court for a final hearing when scheduled, the municipal court may: 
(1)  Enter a default judgment convicting the person of the infraction; 
(2)  Issue a bench warrant for the person's arrest pursuant to section 2.01.150 of the Gypsum Municipal Code and Rule 204(f) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure; 
(3)  Require upon arrest, pursuant to Rule 246 of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure, the deposit of bail or the posting of a bond to cover bail in the amount of one and one-quarter times the total fines, surcharges, court penalties and court costs contained in the default judgment entered against the person and compel the person's appearance at the next occurring municipal court trial date. Failure to appear before the municipal court when scheduled following arrest shall result in forfeiture of all or part of the bail amount to the municipal court in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. 01, Series 2007) 
2.01.250 - Parental responsibility. 
    Whenever a minor under the age of 18 years residing or living with his or her parents is convicted of a violation of a the Municipal Code or a municipal ordinance for which the court imposes a fine, restitution, or court fees or costs, the parents of the minor shall be jointly responsible for payment of such fine, restitution, or court costs or fees. It shall be an affirmative defense to the obligation created by this section if the parent demonstrates to the court that, at the time of the offense, either: 
(1)  The parent did not have lawful custody of the minor; 
(2)  The minor was not residing with the parent; or 
(3)  The minor is emancipated. For purposes of this section only, the term "emancipated minor" means a minor over 15 years and under 18 years of age who has, with real or apparent assent of his parents, demonstrated his or her independence from his or her parents in matters of care, custody, and earnings. The term may include but shall not be limited to any such minor who has the sole responsibility for his or her own support, who is married, or who is in the military. 
(Ord. 01, Series 2007) 
Chapter 2.02 - CODE OF ETHICS 

2.02.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The Town of Gypsum is committed to maintaining high ethical standards. Public servants have a special responsibility to carry out their duties with integrity. In order to preserve the confidence and trust of the public, this code of ethics provides uniform rules to guide the conduct of the town's officers and employees. 
2.02.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the following meanings: 
    Board and commission member shall mean a member of any appointive board or commission of the town. 
    Business shall mean any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, trust or foundation, or other individual or organization carrying on a business, whether or not operated for profit. 
    Confidential information or information received in confidence shall mean: 
(1)  Information contained in any writing that may properly be withheld from public inspection under the provisions of the Colorado Open Records Act and that is marked "confidential" when provided to the officer or employee; 
(2)  All information exchanged or discussed in any executive session, except to the extent that such information is also contained in a public record available to the general public under the provisions of the Colorado Open Records Act; or 
(3)  All communications between attorneys representing the town and officers or employees of the town that are subject to the attorney-client privilege, whether oral or written, unless the privilege has been waived. 
    Contract shall mean any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service, or other thing of value is to be furnished for valuable consideration or is to be sold or transferred. For the purposes of considering violations of this Code, "contract" shall not mean (i) contracts awarded to the lowest responsible bidder based on competitive bidding procedures; (ii) merchandise sold to the highest bidder at public auctions; (iii) investments or deposits in financial institutions which are in the business of loaning or receiving moneys; (iv) a contract with an interested party if, because of geographic restrictions, the town could not otherwise reasonably afford itself of the subject of the contract (it shall be presumed that the town could not otherwise reasonably afford itself of the subject of a contract if the additional cost to town is greater than ten percent of a contract with an interested party or if the contract is for services that must be performed within a limited time period and no other contractor can provide those services within that time period); (v) a contract with respect to which the officer or employee has disclosed a personal interest and has not voted thereon, or with respect to which he has voted thereon in accordance with Sections 24-18-109(3)(b) or 31-4-404 (3), C.R.S. (any such disclosure shall be made to the town council, or appointive board or commission). 
    Councilmember shall mean a member of the town council. 
    Financial interest shall mean a substantial interest held by an individual which is (i) an ownership interest in a business; (ii) a creditor interest in an insolvent business; (iii) an employment or a prospective employment for which negotiations have begun; (iv) an ownership interest in real or personal property; (v) a loan or any other debtor interest; or (vi) a directorship or officer-ship in a business. 
    Officer or employee shall mean any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the town, whether part-time or full-time, including any member of the town council and any member of any authority, board, committee or commission of the town. 
    Official act or o fficial action shall mean any vote, decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other action, including inaction, which involves the use of discretionary authority. 
2.02.030 - Rules of conduct. 
    An alleged violation of the provisions of this Code by a member of the town council or any appointive board or commission of the town shall be referred to the ethics review board for an advisory opinion and recommendation. 
(1)  Use and disclosure of confidential information. The following rules shall apply to the use and disclosure of confidential information by officers and employees of the town. In the event of any conflict among these provisions, the more specific provision shall take precedence over the more general provision. 
a.  Disclosure of confidential information, generally. No officer or employee shall knowingly disclose, for any reason, any confidential information to any person who is not an officer or employee or to an officer or employee whose official duties are unrelated to the subject matter of the confidential information or to maintaining an office record of such information on behalf of the town. 
b.  Disclosure of confidential information provided to the town council or appointed board or commission of town. All information received in confidence by the town council shall remain confidential, and no officer or employee shall knowingly disclose, for any reason, any such confidential information to any person to whom such information was not originally distributed by town staff, unless and until the body to whom such information was given has, by majority vote, consented to its release. 
c.  Disclosure of information discussed in executive session. No officer or employee shall knowingly disclose any confidential information discussed in an executive session, for any reason, to any person who was not present during such discussion without the prior knowledge and consent of the majority of the body holding such executive session. In the event that a matter discussed in executive session comes before the town council or a board or commission of the town for formal action at any open meeting, or if such formal action is anticipated, nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting a member of the body that will be taking such formal action from stating his or her position or opinion with regard to the matter, as long as such statements do not divulge confidential information received from others during the executive session. 
d.  Certain distribution and discussion by town manager and town attorney permitted. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs b. and c. above, the town manager and town attorney may further distribute confidential information provided to the town council or appointive boards or commissions of the town and may disclose confidential information discussed in any executive session of the town council, or of an appointed board or commission of the town, to such staff members and/or board and commission members as they may consider reasonably necessary to enable them to fully advise the town council or to implement any direction given by the town council or to advise other officers and employees of the town whose official duties are related to the subject matter of the confidential information or to maintaining a record of the same on behalf of the town. 
e.  No disclosure of confidential information to officer or employee having conflict or interest. No officer or employee who has been determined by the town council or appointive board or commission of the town under the provisions of subparagraph f. below to have a conflict of interest, shall knowingly elicit, accept or inspect any confidential information pertaining to the subject matter of such conflict of interest, nor shall any such officer or employee attend or participate in an executive session of the town council, or of a council committee or board or commission of the town, pertaining to said subject matter. 
f.  The town council or appointive board or commission may determine that a councilmember shall not receive confidential information or attend executive sessions on a particular topic if the town council first determines that said councilmember has a conflict of interest in the subject matter of such confidential information and/or executive session. Any such determination by the town council shall be made only after the town council has received an advisory opinion and recommendation from the ethics review board on the question. 
(2)  No councilmember or appointive board or commission shall represent any person or interest before the town council or any board or commission of the town during his term of office. 
(3)  All officers and employees shall refrain from accepting payment for any speeches, debates or other public events and shall further refrain from accepting any gift or favor which, in the judgment of a reasonably prudent person, would tend to impair the officer's or employee's independence of judgment in the performance of his or her official duties. The following shall not constitute prohibited gifts or favors under this section: 
a.  Campaign contributions and contributions in kind reported as required by  1-45-108, C.R.S.; 
b.  A nonpecuniary award publicly presented by a nonprofit organization in recognition of public service; 
c.  Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for travel and subsistence for attendance at a convention or other meeting; 
d.  Reimbursement for or acceptance of an opportunity to participate in a social function or meeting which is offered to an officer or employee which is not extraordinary when viewed in light of the position held by such office or employee; 
e.  Items of perishable or nonpermanent value that are insignificant in value, including but not limited to meals, lodging, travel expenses or tickets to sporting, recreational, educational or cultural events; and 
f.  Payment of salary from employment, including other employment in addition to that earned from being an officer or employee. 
(4)  All officers and employees shall refrain from engaging in a substantial financial transaction for his private business purposes with a person whom he inspects or supervises in the course of his official duties. 
(5)  All officers and employees shall not perform an official act directly or substantially affecting to its economic benefit a business or other undertaking in which he either has a substantial financial interest or is engaged as counsel, consultant, representative or agent. 
(6)  Council members and board and commission members who have a personal or private interest in any matter proposed or pending before them shall disclose such interest to the town council or board or commission upon which they serve and shall not vote thereon and shall refrain from attempting to influence the decisions of the other members of the governing body on which they serve in voting on the matter. Except that, he may vote if his participation is necessary to obtain a quorum or otherwise enable the body to act, and if he complies with the voluntary disclosure procedures under Section 24-18-110, C.R.S. 
(7)  No officer or employee shall be interested in any contract made by him in his official capacity or by any body or board of which he is a member or employee. A former employee may not, within six months following the termination of his employment, contract or be employed by an employer who contracts with the town involving matters with which he was directly involved during his employment. The term "be interested in" in this subparagraph does not include holding a minority interest in a corporation. 
(8)  No elected official or council member shall hold any employment position with the Town of Gypsum for a period of at least 12 months after leaving office. 
2.02.040 - Ethics review board. 
(a)  In order to assist the council members and board and commission members in interpreting and applying the definitions, rules and procedures pertaining to ethics established by this Code and by the applicable provisions of state statute, there is hereby created a board of the town to be known as the ethics review board, hereafter referred to as the "review board." 
(b)  The review board shall consist of three council members elected by the town council, one of whom shall be elected by the review board to serve as a chairperson. One alternate shall also be elected by the town council to serve in the event that a regular member of the review board is unavailable or in the event that a member of the review board is the subject of a particular complaint or inquiry. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the review board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To review and investigate complaints of unethical conduct filed against council members or board and commission members by any person; 
(2)  To review and investigate actual or hypothetical situations involving potential conflicts of interest presented by individual council members or board and commission members; 
(3)  After review and investigation, to render advisory opinions or interpretations pertaining to such complaints or inquiries under the relevant provisions of this Code and the applicable provisions of state law, if any, and to make written recommendations to the town council and any affected board or commission concerning the same; and 
(4)  To propose any revisions to the provisions of this Code or other regulations, rules or policies of the town pertaining to ethical conduct as the review board may deem necessary and appropriate to the best interests of the town. 
(d)  Complaints and inquiries shall be submitted to the review board according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Complaints. 
a.  Any person who believes that a councilmember or board and commission member has violated any provision of state law or this Code pertaining to ethical conduct may file a written, signed, complaint with the mayor, who shall immediately notify the chairperson of the review board. The complaint shall be placed on the agenda for the next special or regular town council meeting for review and possible action by the town council. 
b.  Upon receipt of any complaint, the town council shall decide by majority vote whether to submit the complaint to the review board for any advisory opinion as to whether the violation alleged in the complaint has occurred and, if so, the action, if any, that should be taken with regard to such violation. In the event that such complaint is not submitted to the review board, the town council may decide what, if any, other action pertaining to the same is appropriate. 
c.  In the event that a complaint is filed with the mayor under the provisions of this subsection which alleges a violation on the part of four or more council members, such complaint shall not be referred to the town council for review but shall instead be submitted to an alternate review board. Said board shall consist of any remaining council members who are not named in the complaint and as many members of town boards and commissions as are necessary to constitute a seven-member board. Said board and commission members shall be selected at random by the town clerk within ten working days of the date upon which the complaint is filed with the mayor. Any board and commission members selected by the town clerk who elect not to serve on the alternate review board shall immediately so notify the town clerk, who shall thereafter select as many additional board and commission members as are necessary to constitute the seven-member board. 
d.  A complaint of a violation of this chapter 2.02 by the mayor shall be filed with the mayor pro tem, who shall carry out the obligations of the mayor for purposes of processing the complaint. 
(2)  Town council inquiries. Any councilmember or board and commission member may present directly to the review board any inquiry or complaint regarding the application of ethical rules of conduct under state statue or this Code to any actual or hypothetical situation of a councilmember or board and commission member. 
(e)  In performing its review and investigation of any complaint or inquiry, the review board may request such additional materials or information from town staff or members of the public which it considers reasonably necessary or helpful to its deliberations. Officers and employees shall not disclose confidential information, including confidential information discussed in an executive session, to the review board, unless and until the town council has, by majority vote, consented to its release. The town attorney shall provide legal advice to the review board and shall prepare drafts of advisory opinions and recommendations to the review board. 
(f)  Upon completion of the investigation, the review board shall dismiss the complaint if it determines there was no violation of the Code. If the review board determines that a violation may have occurred, it shall, by motion, set a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held to hear and determine the complaint. The review board shall determine the procedural issues of the hearing so that the hearing provides fundamental fairness, although strict rules of procedure and evidence need not be followed. The review board shall afford all affected council members or board and commission members an opportunity to present their interpretations of the facts at issue and of the applicable provisions of law before rendering its opinion and recommendation. The ethics violation shall be proven by a preponderance of the evidence as determined by a majority vote of the review board. 
(g)  The review board may recommend disciplinary action if it finds that the Code was violated. Council members or board and commission members found to have violated the Code may be subject to a warning, training intended to prevent future violations, removal from an appointed position, or public censure. The review board's recommendation shall consider mitigating circumstances, and the seriousness, duration, and repeated nature of the violation. 
(h)  After the hearing, the review board shall issue a written advisory opinion and recommendation to the town council, which shall immediately thereafter be filed with the town clerk and be available for public inspection. The review board's opinion and recommendation shall be placed on the agenda for the next special or regular town council meeting. Except that the opinion and recommendation of an alternate review board formed in the event a complaint alleges a violation on the part of four or more council members, shall be final and shall not be submitted to the town council for review or adoption unless at least three council members are able to consider and take action on the opinion and recommendation without a conflict of interest. The town council reserves the right to accept, reject or modify the review board's recommendation. Any councilmember having a personal or financial interest in the opinion and recommendation shall refrain from participating in any deliberations of the town council regarding the same. 
(i)  Compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code and the provisions of state law, as well as decisions regarding the existence or nonexistence of conflicts of interest and the appropriate actions to be taken in relation thereto, shall be the responsibility of each individual councilmember or board and commission member. An opinion and recommendation of the review board adopted by the town council shall constitute an affirmative defense to any complaint against a councilmember or board and commission member acting in reliance thereon. 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
  
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL YEAR 

3.04.010 - Established. 
    The first day of January of each year is fixed and established as the beginning of the fiscal year for the town. 
(Ord. 41 I, 1933) 
Chapter 3.08 - SALES TAX 

3.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to impose a sales tax on the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail upon every retailer in the town. 
(Ord. I series 1976 I) 
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this ordinance and chapter 3.08 of the Gypsum Municipal Code, the words herein contained shall have the meanings set forth herein. 
    Agricultural producer means a person regularly engaged in the business of using land for the production of commercial crops or commercial livestock. The term includes farmers, market gardeners, commercial fruit growers, livestock breeders, dairymen, poultrymen, and other persons similarly engaged, but does not include a person who breeds or markets animals, birds, or fish for domestic pets nor a person who cultivates, grows, or harvests plants or plant products exclusively for that person's own consumption or casual sale. 
    Aircraft means a device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air. 
    Aircraft part means any tangible personal property that is intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
    Aircraft simulator means a flight simulator training device (FSTD) as defined in Part I of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations that is qualified in accordance with Part 60 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations for use in a Federal Aviation Administration Approved Flight Training Program. 
    Aircraft simulator part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft, and which will also function when it is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft simulator. 
    Airline company means any operator who engages in the carriage by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier for compensation or hire, or the carriage of mail, or any aircraft operator who operates regularly between two or more points and publishes a flight schedule. Airline company shall not include operators whose aircraft are all certified for a gross takeoff weight of 12,500 pounds or less and who do not engage in scheduled service or mail carriage service. 
    Auction means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
    Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Candy means a preparation of sugar, honey, or other natural or artificial sweeteners in combination with chocolate, fruit, nuts, or other ingredients or flavorings in the form of bars, drops, or pieces. Candy does not include any preparation containing flour, products that require refrigeration or marijuana infused products. 
    Carrier access services means the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: (1) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and (2) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    City or town means the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Coins means monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign nation. 
    Coin operated device means any device operated by coins or currency or any substitute therefor. 
    Collection costs shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, locksmith fees, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Commercial packaging materials means containers, labels, and/or cases, that become part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not returnable to said person for reuse. Commercial packaging materials does not include commercial shipping materials. 
    Commercial shipping materials means materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. Commercial shipping materials include but are not limited to containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
    Community organization means a nonprofit entity organized and operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, primarily engaged in promoting the common good and general welfare of the community, so long as: 
(1)  No part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 
(2)  No substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; and 
(3)  Which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
    Construction equipment means any equipment, including mobile machinery and mobile equipment, which is used to erect, install, alter, demolish, repair, remodel, or otherwise make improvements to any real property, building, structure or infrastructure. 
    Construction materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral and inseparable part of completed structure or project are not construction materials. 
    Consumer means any person in the town who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the town. 
    Contract auditor means a duly authorized agent designated by the taxing authority and qualified to conduct tax audits on behalf of and pursuant to an agreement with the town. 
    Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, contractor also includes subcontractor. 
    Cover charge means a charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages. 
    Data processing equipment means any equipment or system of equipment used in the storage, manipulation, management, display, reception or transmission of information. 
    Digital product means an electronic product including, but not limited to: 
(1)  "Digital images" which means works that include, but are not limited to, the following that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "photographs," "logos," "cartoons," or "drawings." 
(2)  "Digital audio-visual works" which means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any, 
(3)  "Digital audio works" which means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones. For purposes of the definition of "digital audio works", "ringtones" means digitized sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the customer with respect to a communication, and 
(4)  "Digital books" which means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "books". 
    Distribution means the act of distributing any article of tangible personal property for use or consumption, which may include, but not be limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers guides, catalogs, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services. 
    Dual residency means those situations including, but not limited to, where a person maintains a residence, place of business or business presence, both within and outside the town. A person shall be deemed to have established a legitimate residence, place of business or business presence outside of the town for purposes of dual residency if the person has a physical structure owned, leased or rented by such person which is designated by street number or road location outside of the town, has within it a telephone or telephones in the name of such person and conducts business operations on a regular basis at such location in a manner that includes the type of business activities for which the business (person), as defined in this Code, is organized. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or any portion of a building designed for occupancy as complete, independent living quarters for one or more persons, having direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall and having living, sleeping, kitchen and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Engaged in business in the town means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the town. Engaged in business in the town includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
    Factory built housing means a manufactured home or modular home. 
    Farm closeout sale means full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
    Farm equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least $1,000.00. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, farm equipment does not include: 
(1)  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
(2)  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
(3)  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
(1)  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Milk; 
(4)  Honey; and 
(5)  Poultry and eggs. 
    Finance director means the Finance Director of the Town of Gypsum or such other person designated by the town; finance director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Food for home consumption means food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 U.S.C. sec. 2012 (k) (2014), as amended, for purposes of the supplemental nutrition assistance program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 U.S.C. sec. 2012 (t), as amended; except that "food" does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow foods; prepared salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches; deli trays; and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin-collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
    Garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    Internet access services means services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the Internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing phone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of Internet access services. 
    Internet subscription service means software programs, systems, data and applications available online through rental, lease or subscription, that provide information and services including, but not limited to, data linking, data research, data analysis, data filtering or record compiling. 
    License means a Town of Gypsum sales and/or use tax license. 
    Linen services means services involving the provision and cleaning of linens, including but not limited to rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers. 
    Machinery means any apparatus consisting of interrelated parts used to produce an article of tangible personal property. The term includes both the basic unit and any adjunct or attachment necessary for the basic unit to accomplish its intended function. 
    Manufactured home means any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle. 
    Manufacturing means the operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition(s) under Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, and which person holds a valid "registry identification card" issued by the State of Colorado pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14. 
    Mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment means those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo but which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved over the public highways. This definition includes but is not limited to wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches. 
    Modular home means any structure that consists of multiple sections fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation and assembly at the building site, and is constructed to the building codes adopted by the State Division of Housing, created in Section 24-32-706, C.R.S., and is designed to be installed on a permanent foundation. 
    Motor fuel means gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Newspaper means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term newspaper does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Online garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring online, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by the seller or members of the seller's household. 
    Parent means a parent of a student. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Photovoltaic system means a power system designed to supply usable solar power by means of photovoltaics, a method of converting solar energy into direct current electricity using semiconducting materials that create voltage or electric current in a material upon exposure to light. It consists of an arrangement of several components, including solar panels to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter to change the electric current from DC to AC, as well as mounting, cabling, metering systems and other electrical accessories to set up a working system. 
    Precious metal bullion means any precious metal, including but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, that has been put through a process of refining and is in such a state or condition that its value depends upon its precious metal content and not its form. 
    Prepress preparation material means all materials used by those in the printing industry including, but not limited to, airbrush color photos, color keys, dies, engravings, light-sensitive film, light-sensitive paper, masking materials, Mylar, plates, proofing materials, tape, transparencies, and veloxes, which are used by printers in the preparation of customer specific layouts or in plates used to fill customers' printing orders, which are eventually sold to a customer, either in their original purchase form or in an altered form, and for which a sales or use tax is demonstrably collected from the printer's customer, if applicable, either separately from the printed materials or as part of the inclusive price therefor. Materials sold to a printer which are used by the printer for the printer's own purposes, and are not sold, either directly or in an altered form, to a customer, are not included within this definition. 
    Preprinted newspaper supplements shall mean inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: 
(1)  Are primarily devoted to advertising; and 
(2)  The distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
    Prescription drugs for animals means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol Rx Only, and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
(1)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or 
(2)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
    Price or purchase price includes: 
(1)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
(2)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(3)  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
(4)  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
(5)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
(6)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
(7)  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
(8)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Price or purchase price shall not include: 
(1)  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
(2)  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
(3)  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Private communications services means telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate inter-communications system for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic devices for animals means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for animal use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, or sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services. The utilization of coin operated devices, except coin-operated telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be considered short term rentals of tangible personal property; 
(3)  Performance of taxable services; or 
(4)  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
    The terms purchase and sale do not include: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(3)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(4)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(5)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(6)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(7)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(8)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(9)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this subsection shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this subsection, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80 percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Rail carrier means as defined in Section 10102 of Title 49 of the United States Code as of October 10, 2013, and as it may be amended hereafter. 
    Rail carrier part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of a locomotive or rail car used by a rail carrier. 
    Recreation services means all services relating to athletic or entertainment participation events and/or activities including but not limited to pool, golf, billiards, skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships, coin operated amusement devices, video games and video club memberships. 
    Renewable energy means any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a short time scale and derived directly from the sun (such as thermal, photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as wind, hydropower, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass), or from other natural movements and mechanisms of the environment (such as geothermal and tidal energy). Renewable energy does not include energy resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or waste products from inorganic sources. 
    Resident means a person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the town, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the town. 
    Retail sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: 
(1)  Auctioneer; 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; 
(4)  Retailer-Contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the town administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sale that benefits a Colorado school means a sale of a commodity or service from which all proceeds of the sale, less only the actual cost of the commodity or service to a person or entity as described in this Code, are donated to a school or a school-approved student organization. 
    Sales tax means the tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
    School means a public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through twelfth grade or any portion thereof. 
    Security system services means electronic alarm and/or monitoring services. Such term does not include non-electronic security services such as consulting or human or guard dog patrol services. 
    Soft drink means a nonalcoholic beverage that contains natural or artificial sweeteners. "Soft drink" does not include beverages that contain milk or milk products, soy, rice, or similar milk substitutes, or greater than 50 percent of vegetable or fruit juice by volume. 
    Software program means a sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g. a computer, tablets, smart phones) regardless of the means by which it is accessed or the medium of conveyance. Software program includes: 
(1)  Custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; 
(2)  Pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf ("COTS")," "mass produced" or "standardized;" 
(3)  Modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and 
(4)  The generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
    Software as a service means software that is rented, leased or subscribed to from a provider and used at the consumer's location, including but not limited to applications, systems or programs. 
    Software license fee means a fee charged for the right to use, access, or maintain software programs. 
    Software maintenance agreement means an agreement, typically with a software provider, that may include: 
(1)  Provisions to maintain the right to use the software; 
(2)  Provisions for software upgrades including code updates, version updates, code fix modifications, enhancements, and added or new functional capabilities loaded into existing software, or 
(3)  Technical support. 
    Solar thermal systems means a system whose primary purpose is to use energy from the sun to produce heat or cold for: 
(1)  Heating or cooling a residential or commercial building; 
(2)  Heating or cooling water; or 
(3)  Any industrial, commercial, or manufacturing process. 
    Sound system services means the provision of broadcast or pre-recorded audio programming to a building or portion thereof. Such term does not include installation of sound systems where the entire system becomes the property of the building owner or the sound system service is for presentation of live performances. 
    Special fuel means kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Special sales event means any sales event which includes more than three vendors taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed seven consecutive days. 
    Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the town from any person or vendor. 
    Student means any person enrolled in a school. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax deficiency or deficiency means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Code. 
    Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
    Taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
    Telecommunications service means the service of which the object is the transmission of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications including but not limited to voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. 
    Telecommunications service does not include separately stated non-transmission services which constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to be transmitted' to their exemption language. 
    Television and entertainment services means audio or visual content, that can be transmitted electronically by any means, for which a charge is imposed. 
    Therapeutic device means devices, appliances, or related accessories that correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
    Toll free telecommunications service means a Telecommunications Service that allows a caller to dial a number without incurring an additional charge for the call. 
    Total tax liability means the total of all tax, penalties and/or interest owed by a taxpayer and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax computed on total sales. 
    Transient/temporary sale means a sale by any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods within the Town for a period of no more than seven consecutive days. 
    Transient/temporary vendor means any person who engages in the business of transient/temporary sales. 
    Use means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the town of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the town from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the town whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
    Use tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the town. 
    Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 I) 
(Ord. No. 2016-07,  1(Exh. A), 5-10-16) 
3.08.030 - License-Required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail without first having obtained a license therefor. Such license shall be granted and issued by the town clerk and shall be in force and effect until the thirty-first day of December of the year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. 
(b)  In case business is transacted at one or more separate premises by one person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(c)  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the town, without having secured a license therefor, except as specifically provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. I series 1976 3 (a,d,e)) 
3.08.040 - Same-Application. 
    Such license shall be granted and renewed only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such business and the location and such other facts as the town clerk may require. 
(Ord. I series 1976 3 (b)) 
3.08.050 - Same-Renewal. 
    It shall be the duty of each licensee, on or before January 1 of each year during which this chapter remains in effect, to obtain a renewal thereof if the licensee remains in the retail business or liable to account for the tax provided in this chapter, but nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to empower the town clerk to refuse such renewal except revocation for cause of licensee's prior license. 
(Ord. I series 1976 3 (c)) 
3.08.060 - Same-Contents, posting and transferability. 
    Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(Ord. I series 1976 3 (f)) 
3.08.070 - Same-Exemption. 
    No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this chapter. 
(Ord. I series 1976 3 (g)) 
3.08.080 - Sales tax imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the Town's Home Rule Charter effective October 21, 1982, including section 1.3 and article VI of the Charter, there is hereby imposed on the sale of tangible personal property at retail, the furnishing of services, and sale of food items, a sales tax equal to four percent of the gross receipts ("sales tax"). The tangible personal property and services taxable under this chapter shall be the same as the tangible personal property, services, and food taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., and subject to the same exemptions as those specified in Section 39-26-114, C.R.S., provided that the exemption for sales of electricity, coal, wood, gas, fuel oil, or coke sold to occupants of residences pursuant to Section 39-26-114(1)(a)(XXI), C.R.S., shall apply to the sales tax and the sale of such items shall not be taxable, and provided further that the exemption for sales of machinery or machine tools pursuant to Section 39-26-114(11), C.R.S., and the exemption for sales of food specified in Section 39-26-114(1)(a)(XX), C.R.S., shall not apply to the sales tax, and the sale of such items is expressly made taxable under this chapter. The imposition of the sales tax on individual sales shall be in accordance with schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. If any vendor, during any reporting period, shall collect as the sales tax an amount in excess of the amount of the sales tax imposed by this chapter, he shall remit to the executive director the full amount of the sales tax herein imposed and also such excess. (Ord 15, Series 2004) 
(b)  Immediately following the payment of all costs of the recreation center ("recreation center") constructed by the town, including debt service on bonds or other obligations issued to finance the recreation center, the town manager shall certify to the town council that all such costs have been paid, satisfied or cancelled, as to be more fully set forth in the town ordinance authorizing the bonds described in Section 6 of Ordinance No. 15 (Series 2004). The one percent sales tax increase approved by the town's electors on November 2, 2004, shall terminate as soon as possible after such certification ("termination date"), consistent with the regulations and practices of the Colorado Department of Revenue for collection of an expiring sales tax, and on and after the termination date, the sales tax shall be imposed at the rate of three percent of gross receipts. Any revenues collected from the one percent sales tax increase prior to the termination date and not needed to pay costs of the recreation center may be used for any other capital improvement purposes designated by town resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord 15, Series 2004) 
3.08.090 - Place of sale. 
    For the purpose of the sales tax, all retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside the limits of the town or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the town. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., regardless of the place to which deliver is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the town, or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of the sales tax shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 2 (b)) 
3.08.100 - Excepted from sales amount. 
    The amount subject to the sales tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 2 (c)) 
3.08.110 - Specific ownership tax exemption. 
    All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from the sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(1)  The purchaser is a nonresident of, or has his principal place of business outside the limits of the town, and 
(2)  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the town under the laws of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 2 (d)) 
3.08.120 - Sales tax sales subject to other local sales or use taxes. 
    The applicability of the sales tax shall be subject to the provisions of Section 29-2-105 (2) and (4), C.R.S. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 2 (e)) 
3.08.130 - Vendor's fees. 
    The vendor shall be entitled as collection agent for the town to withhold an amount equal to three and one-third percent of the total amount to be remitted by the vendor to the executive director each month to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of the sales tax. If any vendor is delinquent in remitting the sales tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the executive director, the vendor shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his expense in collecting and remitting said sales tax, and an amount equivalent to the full amount of the sales tax imposed by this chapter shall be remitted to the executive director by any such delinquent vendor. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 6) 
3.08.140 - Sales tax collection. 
    Effective July 1, 2008, the collection, administration, and enforcement of sales tax shall be performed by the finance director for the town. Unless otherwise provided by the Gypsum Municipal Code or Article 2 of Title 29, C.R.S., the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., shall govern the collection, administration, and enforcement of the sales tax. The finance director may issue a distraint warrant in accordance with Section 39-21-114, C.R.S., except that such warrant may be directed to any duly authorized revenue collector, any agent of the town, or the sheriff of any county in the state. The finance director may, in his or her discretion, make a jeopardy assessment and pursue collection of the sales tax in accordance with Section 39-21-111, C.R.S. The finance director may prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this chapter 3.08 for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof, a copy of which forms, rules and regulations shall be made to the public. 
(Ord. 05 Series 2013) 
3.08.150 - Use tax imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed on the use and consumption within the town of any construction and building materials and supplies for residential construction only, as provided in Section 29-2-109 (1), C.R.S., a use tax equal to three percent of the gross receipts ("use tax"). 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 3 (a)) 
3.08.160 - Excepted from use tax. 
    The use tax shall not apply to: 
(1)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the town; 
(2)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the town either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business; 
(3)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the town by a nonresident thereof for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the town; however, this does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the state by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of a business in the state; 
(4)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government, or the state, or its institutions or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions; 
(5)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit, or use any article, substance, or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof; 
(6)  The storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the town and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency; 
(7)  The storage, use or consumption of a motor or other vehicle purchased at retail on which registration is required; 
(8)  The storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective date of the use tax; 
(9)  The storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building material required or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract bid, let, or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of this chapter; and 
(10)  Any construction and building materials used for nonresidential construction. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 3 (b)) 
3.08.170 - Use tax sales subject to other local sales or use taxes. 
    With respect to the use tax imposed upon the use or consumption of tangible personal property already subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county equal to or in excess of the use tax, a credit shall be granted against the use tax with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the town of tangible personal property purchased by him in a previous statutory or home rule town, city or city and county, which credit shall be equal to the sales or use tax previously paid by him, but shall not exceed the amount of the use tax imposed. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 3 (c)) 
3.08.180 - Three-year limit on use tax. 
    The use tax shall not be imposed as specified herein more than three years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the state for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 3 (d)) 
3.08.190 - Use tax collection. 
(a)  Deposit. Prior to the issuance of a building permit on any project, the town manager or his designated assistant shall collect the use tax in the amount of three percent of the sale value of the construction materials. For purposes of this subsection, 50 percent of the estimated general contract costs and/or 50 percent of the estimated mechanical contract costs shall be deemed to be the sale value of such construction materials. This amount collected shall be held by the town a deposit until the ultimate amount of use tax owed is finally determined by the town. 
(b)  Determination of actual use tax. The person using or consuming the construction or building materials shall, upon completion of the project, present to the town manager receipts or invoices showing the amount paid for construction materials. If the use tax deposited with the town exceeds three percent of the actual sales value of construction materials, as evidenced by the receipts or invoices, the town shall refund the excess. If the use tax deposited with the town is less than three percent of the actual sales value of construction materials, the person using or consuming the construction materials shall pay the town the shortfall within seven days. 
(c)  Final enforcement. Until paid in full, the town may at its discretion withhold any certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates of occupancy or inspections. For all construction and building materials subject to the use tax which are not used or consumed in a project subject to such certificates or inspection, the use tax shall be paid within seven days of such use or consumption. In addition, until paid the full use tax owing shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by such construction improvements, and the town manager is authorized to file a notice of such lien with county clerk and recorder. The unpaid tax may also be certified to the county assessor for collection with property taxes. 
(d)  Construction materials subject to other local sales or use taxes. If the taxpayer purchases construction materials which are subject to a legally imposed sales or use tax of Gypsum or another statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county, then he may submit invoices or statements, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, reflecting the payment of the tax and make application to the town for credit or refund of any amount paid as a valid sales or use tax. It shall be the duty of the person making such application to furnish all necessary bills and invoices evidencing the payment of the tax. If the town manager is satisfied that there has been such payment, then he shall refund or credit the amount as may be necessary. Purchases of construction materials from Gypsum vendors possessing a valid Gypsum retail sales tax license, and construction materials purchased outside of Gypsum and not delivered by the vendor or a common carrier may be subject to the credit provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 10 series 1995 3) 
3.08.200 - Use of revenues. 
(a)  2004 increase and authorization. Use of the revenues derived from the one percent sales tax increase approved by the town's electors on November 2, 2004, shall be restricted to capital improvement purposes, including deposit to a sales tax capital improvement fund that may be created by subsequent ordinance, relating to a recreation center, as more fully described in Section 4 of Ordinance No. 15 (Series 2004) and the ballot title for such election. 
(b)  1995 increase and authorization. Use of the revenues derived from the one percent sales tax and the three percent use tax approved by the town's electors on November 7, 1995, shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  Sales tax: Twenty percent to general administration, and 80 percent to law enforcement, town hall and recreation. 
(2)  Use tax: Twenty percent to general administration and engineering, and 80 percent to roads and road improvements. 
(c)  Other revenues. Except as restricted in subsections (a) or (b) of this section, all other revenues generated by sales and use taxes within the town may be used for any lawful purpose. 
Chapter 3.12 - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX 

3.12.010 - Short title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Gypsum real estate transfer tax." 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 1) 
3.12.020 - Applicability. 
    The property which is subject to this tax consists of all real property lying within the town limits as this time, or which is the subject of annexation into the town in the future. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 4) 
3.12.030 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the gross consideration paid for the real property affected by the transfer, and shall include cash paid, the money equivalent of real and personal property delivered or conveyed, in return for the transfer of ownership or interests in real property, and shall include the amount of any lien, mortgage, contract indebtedness, or other encumbrance or debt, either given to secure the purchase price, or any part thereof, or remaining unpaid on the property at the time of the transfer. The term does not include as an addition to gross consideration the amount of any outstanding lien or encumbrance in favor of the United States, the State of Colorado, or of a municipal or quasi-government corporation or district for taxes, special benefits or improvements. In the event the transaction or transfer is by lease agreement not specifically exempted in this chapter, the consideration shall be deemed to be the capitalized value of the average annual rental unit of the lease, computed as follows: the average annual rental over the entire term of the lease, including any renewal term, plus the actual consideration, other than rent, paid or to be paid shall be computed and the average annual rental shall be ten percent of the capitalized value. The payment of ad valorem real property taxes, insurance and the assumption of maintenance obligations shall not be included in the annual rent-capitalization computation; however, capital improvements required to be made shall be part of the consideration. When the average annual rental cannot be determined, the tax shall be based upon the fair market value of the property covered by the lease, or the capitalized value of the consideration in terms of the present worth of the stream of consideration under the lease and any other economic considerations to reflect the capitalized value of the transferred or leased property. 
    Real estate transfer tax means the tax imposed by this chapter on the transfer of real property. 
    Real property means real property as defined by and under the laws of the State of Colorado. 
    Taxable lease means any lease of real property with a term or initial term and all renewal terms which aggregate in length of 25 years or more; provided lessee has possession or the right to possession on payment of rents. Taxable lease also means any lease of real property for less than 25 years of term or initial term and all renewal terms aggregated if lessee has a clause which would permit lessee at its discretion to extend the lease beyond 25 years or if lessee has an option to purchase some or all of the real property leased. If lessee has a lease with such an option to purchase which option may be exercised only within three years after the date the lease and option is entered into, then the land transfer tax shall not be due and payable unless and until the exercise and consummation of such option. If any other lease with such an option to purchase is entered into, the real estate transfer tax shall be due and payable at the time of such transfer as transfer is defined in this section. 
    Transfer, whether or not the same is in writing or is recorded, means and includes: 
(1)  Any sale, grant, assignment, transfer, exchange, or conveyance of any ownership or title to real property in the town; 
(2)  The sale, leasing, letting, conveyance, assignment or transfer of a possessory interest in real property, subject to the exemptions provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 7) 
3.12.040 - Tax-Imposed. 
    There is imposed a tax upon transfers of ownership and possessory interests in real property, which is located within the town, in the amount and as further provided within this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 3) 
3.12.050 - Same-Amount. 
    The amount of this tax is one percent of the consideration given for the transfer of ownership or possessory interest, as further defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 5) 
3.12.060 - Same-Liability. 
    Unless otherwise agreed by the parties to a transfer which is subject to this tax, as between the parties to the transfer, the transferees shall be responsible for this tax; but both the transferors and the transferees are jointly and severally liable to the town for the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 6) 
3.12.070 - Same-Payment. 
    Payment of this tax is due at the time of the transfer of ownership or possessory interest involved. If payment of this tax is not received by the town within 15 days after the due date, interest shall thereafter accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month, compounded annually, with a minimum late payment charge of $50.00. Such late payment assessments are a part of the tax. The town shall also be entitled to recover as an addition to this tax, the reasonable expenses of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 10) 
3.12.080 - Same-Assessment and lien on property. 
    This tax shall be assessed against the real property whose transfer of ownership or possessory interest leads to imposition of this tax, and shall be a lien upon that property until paid. This lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as are real estate mortgages and similar liens. This lien shall attach to the subject property at the time of the transfer in question, and shall be superior to all interests in the subject property held by parties responsible for the tax, or who knew or had notice that this tax had not been paid, at the time they acquired such interest. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982) 
3.12.090 - Exemptions-Designated. 
(a)  The following transfers shall be exempt from this tax: 
(1)  Those in which the consideration involved is less than $500.00; 
(2)  Those in which any governmental entity of the United States, or the subdivisions thereof, is a party; 
(3)  Those in which the only consideration for the transfer is love, affection or other similar motives commonly associated with gifts; 
(4)  Those which arise from the partition of property owned in joint tenancy or tenancy in common, so long as no new consideration is paid or received concerning such partition; 
(5)  Those which arise from the operation of the laws of intestacy, or as distribution from a probate estate of a decedent to the parties who are the legatees or devisees of such estate, pursuant to the terms of the decedent's will; 
(6)  Those involved in business organizations or reorganizations, such as from individuals to a partnership or corporation, given in exchange for an interest in the partnership or corporation, or such as transfers from a partnership or corporation, as part of dissolution proceedings, to partners or shareholders; 
(7)  Those made to effect a distribution pursuant to a plan confirmed or ordered by a bankruptcy court; 
(8)  Those conveying interests in cemetery lots; 
(9)  Those commonly given only to secure payment of a debt, such as deeds of trust, mortgage deeds and mortgages; 
(10)  Those given incident to foreclosure proceedings, by the sheriff or public trustee, or deeds given in lieu of foreclosure for no additional consideration; 
(11)  Those involving possessory, but not ownership rights, where the entitlement to possession, including all options or other rights to extend the term of the possessory right do not exceed 25 years. 
(b)  If a transfer is effected in the form of one or more of the foregoing exempted transfers, but with the purpose of evading payment of this tax, such transfer shall be subject to this tax. In a transfer which is purportedly exempt from this tax, by virtue of subsection (a)(6) of this section, if transfer of a controlling interest in the transferee is made, agreed to be made, or intended to be made, within three years of the purportedly exempt transfer, it shall be presumed that the transfer was made with the purpose of evading payment of this tax. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 8) 
3.12.100 - Same-Certificate. 
(a)  A party desiring clarification as to whether a transaction is exempt from this tax shall be entitled to a written certificate from the town concerning that question. Upon payment of a five-dollar fee, and submission of an appropriately filled out form which substantially complies with the format given below, a party shall be entitled to receive the town's response in writing, in the manner indicated below: 
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX 
TOWN OF GYPSUM, COLORADO 
EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE 
The undersigned hereby requests that the town of Gypsum, Colorado declare that the following transaction be declared exempt from the Gypsum Real Estate Transfer Tax: 
(description of transaction - parties, property involved, circumstances which give rise to exemption from this tax) 
Done this ___ day of ___________, 19___/20___ 
The undersigned hereby certifies, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing is a true and complete description of the transaction which is the subject of this application. 
___________Name 
Address and Phone Number 
___________ 
___________ 
State of Colorado  )  
) ss. 
County of Eagle   ) 
    The foregoing was sworn to and subscribed before me this ___ day of ___________ 19___/20___, 
by ___________ 
Notary Public Address: 
My commission expires 
This is to certify that the transaction described above is exempt from the Gypsum Real Estate Transfer Tax. 
Done this ___ day of ___________, 19___/20___. 
THE TOWN OF GYPSUM, COLORADO 
ATTEST: By __________________________________________ 
Mayor 
___________ 
Town Clerk 
  
(SEAL) 
  
  
(b)  The town shall have the right to require the applicant to furnish such additional information and evidence as may reasonably be required to make a determination as to whether the subject transaction is exempt from this tax. The burden of proof concerning exemption shall lie with the party claiming exemption. The mayor and town clerk are authorized to execute such certificates where a transaction is clearly exempt from this tax. A party aggrieved by the failure of the mayor and town clerk to acknowledge that a transaction is exempt from this tax shall have the right to a hearing on the matter before the council, which shall have the power to order the mayor and town clerk to execute the acknowledgement of exemption if the council finds that the transaction is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 9) 
3.12.110 - Allocation of funds. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the council, the proceeds of this tax shall be deposited into the general fund of the town. 
(Ord. 7 series 1982 12) 
Chapter 3.16 - REIMBURSEMENT FOR CERTAIN TOWN SERVICES 

3.16.010 - Reimbursement of costs and expenses by applicants. 
    All costs and expenses incurred by the town in reviewing any applications or compliance with codes, including but not limited to zoning, rezoning, special uses, water taps, sewer service, subdivisions, and utility franchises shall be reimbursed by the applicant. This list is not inclusive and shall be used by way of illustration for any additional demands placed upon the town services. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 2) 
3.16.020 - Itemization of costs and expenses. 
    The applicant shall reimburse the town for 100 percent of its costs incident to review of the application, including but not limited to, surveying, plan check, engineering and legal fees. 
(Ord. 2, series 1986 2) 
3.16.030 - Fees supplemental to other code requirements. 
    This chapter provides a supplemental requirement to the requirements for zoning, rezoning, special use permits, water taps, sewer service and subdivision requirements of the town, and does not eliminate, modify or replace any requirements set forth in other statutes or ordinances. 
(Ord. 2, series 1986 3) 
3.16.040 - Payment prerequisite to town action-Penalty for late payment- Generally. 
(a)  Payment for reimbursement to the town for costs and expenses is due 30 days after the billing. 
(b)  Any outstanding balance still due and owing after 30 days from the date of the billing will be charged interest at the rate of 18 percent per year. 
(c)  All delinquent fees, costs and reimbursements, together with interest thereon, shall constitute a perpetual priority lien upon the property involved in or subject to the application for which the fees, costs or reimbursement is due. The town clerk may certify said delinquent debt to the Eagle County assessor, to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against the property. 
(d)  Except as provided for utility franchise applications in chapter 5.02 of this Code, final action on any application, including but not limited to recording of plats, grants and commencement of service, will not occur until after the town has been reimbursed for its costs and expenses incident to the application. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 2) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
  
Chapter 5.02 - UTILITY FRANCHISES 

5.02.010 - Power to grant franchises. 
    The town council of the Town of Gypsum has the specific and express power to grant and renew utility franchises and the power to approve transfers and sales of utility franchises to certain entities. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 SI) 
5.02.020 - Franchise requirements-Application. 
    Any entity proposing to utilize or continuing to utilize streets, alleys, easements and other public ways or places of the town through the construction, use, operation or placement of facilities, pipes wires, poles or other apparatus and objects of a fixed, permanent or long term nature, and any entity utilizing the same which proposes to transfer or sell its franchise, plant or system to or merge with another, or to transfer, lease or permit the use of any rights under a franchise to another (herein referred to as "transfer or sale" of a franchise), shall submit an application for franchise authority to the town clerk. The application for franchise authority shall set forth the applicant's request and shall be submitted to the town clerk not less than four months prior to the date by which the applicant desires the franchise be awarded, renewed, transferred or sold. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.030 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
    Each applicant shall reimburse the town for all costs and expenses incurred by the town in processing, reviewing, negotiating or considering any application for a franchise, or its renewal, sale or transfer, including but not limited to town staff time and expenses, expert and consulting fees and studies, legal fees, publication costs, public hearings and elections (the "town costs"). All applications shall be accompanied by a deposit of $1,000.00. All town costs shall be reimbursed by an applicant, regardless of whether an application is granted. See chapter 3.16 of this Code for additional provisions regarding reimbursement. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.040 - Delinquent reimbursement. 
    Any outstanding balance still due and owing after 30 days of the date of billing shall be charged interest at the rate of 18 percent per year. All delinquent town costs, together with interest thereon, shall constitute a perpetual priority lien upon any of applicant's real property used in connection with the franchise which is sought. The town clerk may certify the delinquent debt to the Eagle County assessor, to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property served in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against property. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.050 - Computation of town costs. 
    The town manager shall maintain an account of all town costs pertaining to an application for franchise authority. Periodically, the town shall provide the applicant with statements of the town costs, which shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of the statement. Once final action on the application is taken, the town shall provide the applicant with a final billing of town costs. Any application granted shall be automatically revoked if the applicant fails to reimburse 100 percent of the town costs within 30 days of the final billing. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.060 - Reasonableness of town costs. 
    If the applicant questions the reasonableness of the town costs, the applicant shall request a review; provided, however, the applicant's request for review shall not extend the time for reimbursement to the town as set forth in section 5.02.050. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.070 - Prohibition against surcharge. 
    Neither the applicant's costs nor the town costs shall be surcharged by the applicant against or otherwise charged solely to the town or customers of the applicant within the town. The applicant's costs and the town costs may not be deducted from a franchise fee or other obligation payable to the town by the applicant. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 I) 
5.02.080 - Franchise agreements. 
    All contracts, agreements or permits granting a utility franchise shall expressly incorporate, by reference or otherwise, the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be automatically incorporated in all contracts, agreements or permits granting a utility franchise, even though an express reference may be lacking. 
(Ord. 3, series 1996 l) 
5.02.090 - Franchise publication requirements. 
    Any person desiring to secure a franchise or license for any purpose from the Town of Gypsum shall cause a notice of the ordinance granting such franchise or license to be published in a newspaper of general circulation one time, by title only, immediately prior to the next regular meeting of the town council at which such ordinance will be introduced and considered on first reading. Such notice shall specify the day, hour and place of the regular meeting of the town council at which it is intended to apply for such franchise or license, the name of the applicant therefore, and the title of the ordinance. If the ordinance is approved on first reading, the ordinance shall be posted and published in full on the town's website for two weeks prior to passage of the ordinance on second reading. 
(Ord. 2013-10) 
Chapter 5.03 - BUSINESS LICENSE 

5.03.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "General Business Licensing Ordinance of the Town of Gypsum". 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 l) 
5.03.020 - Scope. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal or in any way impair any existing provisions of other laws or ordinances. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than imposed by existing provisions of laws or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    Applicant means a person who has filed an application for a business license. 
    Application means an application for a business license. 
    Business means all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, within the town. Mere delivery within the town of any property purchased or acquired from a regular place of business outside the town shall not be considered to be the conducting of business. 
    Insignia or its singular number "insignia", is any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker, or any other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any license. 
    License or business license means a license issued under this chapter. 
    Licensee means the holder of an unexpired business license. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Town license officer or license officer is the license officer of the Town of Gypsum as appointed by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.040 - Business license required. 
    No person shall conduct any business without a valid business license. Upon proper application, business licenses shall be issued or renewed for no more than a one-year term. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.050 - Agents of nonresident businesses. 
    The agents or other representatives of nonresident businesses who are doing business in this town are personally responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.060 - Separate locations and branch establishments. 
    A separate license is required for each branch establishment or separate location of business; provided, however, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a licensed business shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. Each rental real property shall be deemed a branch establishment or separate place of business when there is a regular employee or representative authorized to transact business for the owner on the premises. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 1) 
5.03.070 - Joint license. 
    A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.080 - Town license officer. 
    The town license officer shall collect all license fees, review applications, and shall issue licenses to all qualified applicants. The license officer shall: 
(1)  Recommend and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations adopted by the town council as necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Adopt, and from time to time amend, all forms and papers necessary for implementing this chapter. 
(3)  Submit all applications to interested town officials for their review and comments when appropriate for determining eligibility for a license and compliance with town regulations. 
(4)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license. 
(5)  Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Notify applicants of the approval or denial of their applications. 
(7)  Keep confidential names, addresses, electronic addresses, telephone numbers and personal financial information provided by the applicant or licensee, to the extent permitted by the Colorado Open Records Act, 24-72-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
5.03.090 - Qualifications of applicants. 
    The license officer shall approve an application and issue a license unless he determines that the business to be operated would violate the laws of the United States, the State of Colorado, or the town, or the applicant is in default of an obligation in any manner to the town except current taxes. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.100 - Procedure for issuance. 
    Every person conducting or desiring to conduct a business within Gypsum, excluding anyone who holds a valid Town of Gypsum contractor's license or who otherwise holds or qualifies for a Town of Gypsum transient business license, shall annually submit an application for a business license or renewal to the license officer. The application shall be upon forms provided by the license officer. The application shall require the disclosure of all information necessary to determine compliance with Gypsum's zoning requirements, any of the uniform codes adopted by Gypsum, and any laws or regulations applicable to the business. These disclosures include, but are not limited to, proof of required licenses from the State of Colorado and any other information which the license officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of the proposed license. 
(Ordinance 2011-1) 
5.03.110 - License fee. 
    Each application for a business license or a renewal shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee. Fees for new business licenses and the renewal of a business license shall be in the same amounts. The license fee for a whole year time period shall be $80.00. The fee amount shall be prorated for any partial year as follows: 100 percent of the license fee for applications received from January 1 to March 31; 75 percent of the license fee for applications received from April 1 to June 30; 50 percent of the license fee for applications received from July 1 to September 30; and 25 percent of the license fee for applications received from October 1 to December 31. These fees will pay for the cost of review of the application and administration of the license. (Ord. 27 series 2008) 
5.03.120 - Renewal applications. 
(a)  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Initial and renewed licenses shall be issued on January 1 of each year. 
(b)  An application for the renewal of a license shall require the disclosure of such information required by section 5.03.100 and any information concerning the conduct and operation of applicant's business during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary for determining the applicants' eligibility for a renewal license. 
(Ord. 27 series 2008) 
5.03.130 - Duplicate licenses. 
    A duplicate license, valid for the remainder of the license period, shall be issued by the license officer to replace any license previously issued, which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the paying to the license officer of a duplicate license fee in the amount of $20.00. 
(Ord. 27 series 2008) 
5.03.140 - Supplemental information. 
    A license shall report in writing any change in information contained in its last application within 30 days of such change and a supplemental license shall be issued where appropriate. 
(Ord. 16 series 1990) 
5.03.150 - Denial of license. 
    The license officer shall approve or deny in writing an application for business license within 30 days of denial and information outlining the appeals process shall be mailed to the applicant's address as specified in the application. Upon denying any application, all fees paid in advance shall be refunded the applicant provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the town. 
(Ord. 16 series 1990) 
5.03.160 - Contents of license. 
    Each license issued shall state upon its face the following: 
(1)  The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business is to be conducted. 
(2)  The kind and address of each business so licensed. 
(3)  The amount of license fee paid. 
(4)  The dates of issuance and expiration thereof. 
(5)  Such other information as the license officer shall determine as necessary. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.170 - Duties of licensee. 
    Every licensee under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Permit all reasonable inspections of his business and examinations of his records as necessary for determining compliance with his business license. 
(2)  Comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed business and avoid all practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare. 
(3)  Refrain from operating the licensed businesses upon expiration of his license, unless renewed, and during the period his license is revoked or suspended. 
(4)  Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a place where it may be seen at all times. If a licensee has no business premises, he shall carry such license on his person when conducting business. 
(5)  Affix any insignia delivered by the license officer for use in connection with licensed business premises on the inside glass part of the window of said establishment, facing the public way or in the inside glass part of the door opening on the public way so as to be plainly visible from the public way, or in such other prominent place in proximity to the principal public entrance to such establishment so as to be plainly visible from such public entrance. The license officer may also provide an insignia to be placed on the inside of any vehicle used in a licensed business. Any insignia shall indicate the expiration date of the business license it is issued under. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.180 - Change of business locations. 
    Upon changing the location of the licensed business, a licensee shall file a written application for change with the license officer and pay a relocation fee which is dependent upon the number of employees employed by the applicant and are as follows: businesses that are owner operated will be charged $20.00; businesses with one to five employees will be charged $30.00; businesses with six to 25 employees [will be charged] $40.00; and businesses with 25+ employees will be charged $50.00. No business shall be conducted at the new location until a new license is issued. 
(Ord. 02, series 1999) 
5.03.190 - Nontransferable. 
    Business license shall be nontransferable. Upon transferring a business, the new owner shall not conduct business until a new business license is issued. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.200 - Inspections. 
    The license officer, town officials charged with enforcing the Municipal Code, and police officers may conduct inspections and examine businesses to enforce compliance with this chapter. Such persons may enter premises of licensees and business during normal business hours, with or without a search warrant, to conduct inspections. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.210 - Compliance orders. 
    If the license officer determines, in his/her sole discretion, that a business violated the Municipal Code or any law, including the failure to obtain all relevant licenses required by the State of Colorado, the license officer shall personally service the affected person with a written compliance order apprising the person affected of his specific violations and ordering him to comply. As an alternative to personal service, a copy of the compliance order shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on the premises and mailed first class U.S. certified mail to the licensee or business owner. The compliance order shall require compliance within 30 days of the date of the personal service or the posting and mailing of the order. 
(Ord. 27 series 2008) 
5.03.220 - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a verified written complaint of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure of a licensee to comply with a compliance order issued pursuant to section 5.03.210, the license officer shall have the power to suspend or revoke any business license if the license officer finds, in its sole discretion, that the licensee has committed any of the following acts or omissions: 
(1)  Failed to comply with any zoning requirements of the town. 
(2)  Willfully and/or deliberately disregarded any provision of this chapter or relevant sections of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Misrepresented a material fact, or committed fraud or deceit in order to obtain a license. 
(4)  Engaged in any willful, fraudulent act by which another in injured. 
(5)  Carelessly or negligently failed to provide reasonable safety measures or failed to follow all required practices for the protection of employees and the public health, morals or welfare. 
(6)  Failed or refused to obtain a license prior to operating a business for which a license is required by this chapter. 
(7)  Failed to obtain all relevant licenses required by the State of Colorado. 
(8)  Violated any laws or regulations applicable to such business. 
(b)  Emergency suspension. The license officer may make an emergency suspension of any license should the actions of the licensee or business involved pose an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Gypsum. Such emergency suspension shall not continue longer than 60 days without a hearing before the license officer. 
(c)  Length of suspension or revocation. The license officer, in his sole discretion, may suspend a license for up to six months and may revoke a license for up to one year during which period the licensee may not operate any related business in the town. In determining the length of suspension or revocation, the license officer shall take into consideration the severity of the licensee's violation of this chapter, the licensee's past performance, any attempt by the licensee to remedy the violation(s), and any verified written complaints received against the business or applicant. 
(d)  Reapplication. At the end of the period of revocation or suspension, any applicant whose license has been suspended or revoked may reapply for a new business license. Such license will only be granted if the applicant has served the full suspension or revocation term and sufficiently shows, to the satisfaction of the license officer, that the violations of this chapter or other reason(s) for suspension or revocation of the license have been remedied. 
(Ord. 27 Series 2008) 
5.03.230 - License hearing. 
    Upon written request to the license officer within 30 days of any decision by the license officer, including but not limited to compliance orders or the denial suspension, or revocation of a license, the license officer shall hold a license haring and issue a written decision. Notice of such hearing, to be held within 30 days of receipt of the hearing request, shall be given the affected person. Upon written application or on his own motion, the license officer shall have the authority, in a proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.240 - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license officer after a license hearing, including but not limited to a license, shall have the right to appeal to the town council upon filing with the town clerk a written appeal and request for hearing within 30 days following issuance of a written hearing decision by the license officer. Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts in support of the appeal. A copy of the appeal shall be forwarded to the license officer. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.250 - Appeals hearing. 
    The town council shall hold a hearing on any appeal of a decision of the license officer at its next regularly scheduled meeting scheduled at least seven days after filing the appeal and shall give notice to the appellant of the time and place of such hearing, and shall also notify the license officer who may appear and defend such order. After hearing evidence from the applicant and the license officer, the town council may issue a verbal decision and shall issue written findings which shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.260 - License register. 
    The town clerk shall keep a register listing every license issued under this chapter and listing the name of the licensee, the name of the business, the type of business and the date of issuance and expiration. 
(Ord. 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.270 - Fines. 
    Any person who violates the requirements of this chapter may be fined no more than $300.00 per violation. Separate violations will be deemed to occur for each day a person is in violation. 
(Ord 16, series 1990 I) 
5.03.280 - Exemptions. 
    The town council may by resolution, exempt from the requirements of this chapter any business conducted in conjunction with a town sponsored or town supported special event, but such exemption shall not extend to operations of the same business which are not conducted in conjunction with an exempted special event. 
(Ord. 6, series 1991 I) 
5.03.290 - Updating information. 
    Licensees shall keep information on their licenses up to date. If information changes from what was submitted in the application, including but not limited to the licensee's address, the address of the business, the owner of the business or the type of business conducted, the licensee shall notify the license officer in writing no more than 14 days after such change. 
(Ord. 27 Series 2008) 
Chapter 5.04 - LIQUOR LICENSES 

5.04.010 - Liquor license fees. 
    The amount of license fees for liquor licenses and fermented malt beverage licenses issued by Gypsum be as set forth in Sections 12-47-505(l) and 12-46-107(2), C.R.S., or any successor statutes, as amended from time to time. 
5.04.020 - Authorization to adopt application fee schedule. 
    The town council, sitting as the local liquor licensing authority, is hereby authorized, pursuant to Section 12-47-505, C.R.S., to adopt by resolution, and from time to time amend, application fees to cover actual and necessary expenses incurred by the local liquor licensing authority to process applications for and related to liquor licenses. 
5.04.030 - Optional disciplinary fine procedures. 
(a)  Whenever a decision of the local liquor licensing authority suspending a license for 14 days or less becomes final, whether by failure of the licensee to appeal the decision or by exhaustion of all appeals and judicial review, the licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having the license suspended for all or part of the suspension period. Upon the receipt of the petition, the local liquor licensing authority may, in its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition if it is satisfied: 
(1)  That the public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(2)  That the books and records of the licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcohol beverages that the licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(3)  That the licensee has not had his or her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two, years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the license. 
(b)  The fine adopted shall be the equivalent to 20 percent of the licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of alcohol beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)  Payment of any fine pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be in the form of cash or in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the local liquor licensing authority. 
(d)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the local liquor licensing authority shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. Such moneys shall be paid into the general fund of the town. 
(e)  In connection with any petition pursuant to this section, the authority of the local liquor licensing authority is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(f)  If the local liquor licensing authority does not make the findings required in subsection (a) of this section and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the local liquor licensing authority. 
5.04.040 - Distance requirement. 
    Licenses for the sale of alcohol beverages described in 12-47-309(1), C.R.S., may not be granted within 500 [feet] of any public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college, except that beer and wine licenses pursuant to 12-47-309(1)(c), C.R.S. may not be granted within 200 feet of any public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college. 
Chapter 5.05 - CONTRACTOR LICENSES 

5.05.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Contractor Licensing Ordinance of the Town of Gypsum." 
5.05.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or any combination thereof who has filed an application for a contractor license. 
    Application means an application for a contractor license. 
    Construction work shall include building, constructing, altering, repairing, adding to, wrecking, or moving any building or structure, or any portion thereof, or doing any construction or demolition work or supervising any such work for a fixed sum, price, fee percentage, trade in kind, or other compensation including the cost of the materials or labor or any combination thereof. 
    Contractor shall include any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or organization, or any combination thereof, who undertakes for himself, or with or for another, any construction work. Such definition shall include those persons normally designated in the building industry as subcontractors. 
    Contractor licensing official shall mean the Gypsum Town Manager and his/her designees, including the sales tax auditor, building inspector, town engineer, public works director, public works inspector, and others as may be designated by the town manager to administer and enforce the contractor licenses as further designated in this chapter. 
    License or contractor license means a license issued under this chapter. 
    Licensee means the holder of an unexpired contractor license. 
    Revocation shall mean that any legally issued contractor license shall become null and void and the authority to perform any construction work is revoked for a period of time not to exceed one year from the date of revocation. 
    Suspension shall mean that the authority to perform any construction work authorized by any legally issued contractor license is temporarily withdrawn for a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of suspension. 
    Verified written complaint means a written complaint containing a statement signed by a person indicating he or she has personal knowledge of the allegations of the complaint and knows them to be true. 
5.05.030 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all contractors, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any utility franchise for which a license registration is otherwise required under the provisions of this title 5. 
(2)  Any electrical contractor or master electrician who is properly licensed or registered with the Colorado State Electrical Board. 
(3)  Licensing of plumbers is governed by the International Plumbers Code as adopted and amended in chapter 15.05 of the Municipal Code and plumbers shall not be required to also apply for a contractor license under this chapter. 
(4)  Any homeowner desiring to build, construct, alter, repair, add to, demolish, or improve a home for his/her own residence if he/she does the work by himself/herself or obtains assistance from not more than one person at a given time who: 
a.  During the period of such employment for a homeowner or within the previous 12 months, is not otherwise engaged in or receiving benefits from a person or company defined in this chapter as a contractor; 
b.  Works for hourly wages or receives no compensation, and 
c.  Is not now or has not been for the previous 12 months licensed as a contractor. 
d.  Any person assisting more than two homeowners during any consecutive 24-month period shall be presumed to be a contractor and said person must be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
5.05.040 - Contractor license required. 
    No contractor shall perform construction work within the Town of Gypsum without a valid contractor license. Upon proper application, contractor licenses shall be issued or renewed for no more than a one-year term. Anyone who holds a valid Town of Gypsum contractor license shall not be required to obtain a separate business license from the town. 
5.05.050 - Contractor licensing official. 
    The contractor licensing official shall collect all license fees, review applications, shall issue licenses to all qualified applicants, and shall: 
(1)  Recommend and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations adopted by the town council as necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Adopt, and from time to time amend, all forms and papers necessary for implementing this chapter. 
(3)  Submit all applications to interested town officials for their review and comments when appropriate for determining eligibility for a license and compliance with town regulations. 
(4)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any new applicant for a license. 
(5)  Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Notify applicants of the approval or denial of their applications. 
(7)  Upon request, confirm whether a contractor holds a current license. 
5.05.060 - Qualifications of applicants. 
    The contractor licensing official shall approve an application and issue a license unless he determines that the contractor would violate the laws of the United States, the State of Colorado, or the town, or the applicant is in default of an obligation in any manner to the town except current taxes. 
5.05.070 - Procedure for issuance. 
    Every contractor shall annually submit an application for a contractor license or renewal to the contractor licensing official. The application shall be upon forms provided by the contractor licensing official. The application shall require the disclosure of all information necessary to determine compliance with any uniform codes adopted by Gypsum, the requirements imposed by section 5.05.060 and 5.05.100, and any other information which the contractor licensing official shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of the proposed license. 
5.05.080 - License fee. 
    Each applicant for a contractor license or a renewal shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee. Fees for new contractor licenses and the renewal of a contractor license shall be in the same amounts. The license fee for a whole year time period shall be $80.00. The fee amount shall be prorated for any partial year as follows: 100 percent of the license fee for applications received from January 1 to March 31; 75 percent of the license fee for applications received from April 1 to June 30; 50 percent of the license fee for applications received from July 1 to September 30; and 25 percent of the license fee for applications received from October 1 to December 31. These fees will pay for the cost of review of the application and administration of the license. 
5.05.090 - Renewal applications. 
(a)  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Initial and renewed licenses shall be issued on January 1 of each year. 
(b)  An application for the renewal of a license shall require the disclosure of such information concerning the conduct and operation of the applicant during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary for determining the applicants' eligibility for a renewal license. 
5.05.100 - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Liability insurance required. Every contractor granted a license under the terms of this chapter shall be required to maintain at all times workers' compensation insurance in the statutorily required amounts, employees' liability and public liability insurance with minimum limits of not less than $100,000.00 for one person and $300,000.00 for any one accident, and property damage insurance with a minimum limit of not less than $25,000.00 for any one accident. 
(b)  Certificate of insurance. At the time application is made, and before a license or registration can be issued, the contractor shall file with the contractor licensing official a certificate, naming the town as certificate holder, signed by a qualified agent of an insurance company. The certificate shall contain the following items, together with a statement and a copy of an endorsement placed on each policy requiring ten days' written notice by certified mail to the contractor licensing official if it becomes necessary to cancel the policy for any reason: 
(1)  The policies required by this section have been issued to the licensee for employees' liability insurance or workers' compensation insurance, public liability insurance and public property damage insurance; 
(2)  The minimum limits of each policy; 
(3)  The policy numbers; 
(4)  The name of the company; 
(5)  The effective dates of the policies; and 
(6)  The expiration dates of the policies. 
(c)  Cancellation. In the event of a cancellation of a policy, the licensee shall be required to furnish a new certificate in full compliance with the terms of this section within ten days; otherwise the license shall be automatically revoked without a hearing before the contractor licensing official. The license shall be reinstated when the licensee has furnished a certificate of insurance in compliance with this section, unless such license is suspended for reasons other than the failure to file a proper certificate of insurance. 
5.05.110 - Duplicate licenses. 
    A duplicate license, valid for the remainder of the license period, shall be issued by the contractor licensing official to replace a license previously issued, which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the paying to the contractor licensing official of a duplicate license fee of $20.00. 
5.05.120 - Updating information. 
    Licensees shall keep information on their license up to date. If information changes from what was submitted in the application, including but not limited to the licensee's address or type of construction work, the licensee shall notify the contractor licensing official in writing no more than 14 days after such change. 
5.05.130 - Compliance orders. 
    If the contractor licensing official, or if a designee of the contractor licensing official, with approval from the contractor licensing official, determines in their sole discretions, that a contractor violated the Municipal Code or any law, including the failure to obtain all relevant licenses required by the State of Colorado, the contractor licensing official must personally serve the contractor with a written compliance order apprising the contractor of his specific violations and ordering him to comply. As an alternative to personal service, a copy of the compliance order shall be mailed first class U.S. certified mail to the contractor. The compliance order shall require compliance within 30 days of the date of the personal service or the posting and mailing of the order. 
5.05.140 - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a verified written complaint of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure of a licensee to comply with a compliance order issued pursuant to section 5.05.130, the contractor licensing official shall have the power to suspend or revoke any contractor license if the contractor licensing official finds, in his sole discretion, that the licensee has committed any of the following acts or omissions: 
(1)  Abandoned any contract for construction work without legal cause. 
(2)  Diverted funds or property received for performance of a specific contract and applied such funds for any other purposes, or failed to use such funds for the performance of said contract with the intent to defraud or deceive creditors or the owner. 
(3)  Fraudulently departed from or disregarded approved plans and/or specifications during the performance of any construction work without the consent of the owner or the owner's duly authorized representative. 
(4)  Willfully and/or deliberately disregarded any provision of this chapter or relevant sections of the Municipal Code. 
(5)  Misrepresented a material fact, or committed fraud or deceit in order to obtain a license. 
(6)  Engaged in any willful, fraudulent act as a contractor by which another is injured. 
(7)  Committed fraud or deceit in obtaining any required building permits in which the contractor lends his/her name and license to another and fails to assume the obligations and responsibilities of a contractor thereunder. 
(8)  Carelessly or negligently failed to provide reasonable safety measures for the protection of workmen and the public. 
(9)  Failed or refused to obtain a license prior to starting construction work for which a license is required by this chapter. 
(10)  Failed to obtain all relevant licenses required by the State of Colorado. 
(b)  Emergency suspension. The contractor licensing official may make an emergency suspension of any license should the actions of the contractor involved pose an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Gypsum. Such emergency suspension shall not continue longer than 60 days without a hearing before the contractor licensing official. 
(c)  Length of suspension or revocation. The contractor licensing official may suspend a License for up to six months and may revoke a license for up to one year during which period the contractor may not perform any contracting work in the town. In determining the length of suspension or revocation, the contractor licensing official shall take into consideration the severity of the contractor's violation of this chapter, the contractor's past performance, any attempt by the contractor to remedy the violation(s), and any verified written complaints received against the contractor. 
(d)  Reapplication. At the end of the period of revocation or suspension, a contractor may reapply for a new license. Such license will only be granted if the contractor has served the full suspension or revocation term and the contractor sufficiently shows, to the satisfaction of the contractor licensing official in his sole discretion, that the violations of this chapter or other reason(s) for suspension or revocation of the license have been remedied. 
5.05.150 - License hearing. 
    Upon written request to the contractor licensing official within thirty (30) days of any decision by the contractor licensing official, including but not limited to compliance orders or the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the contractor licensing official shall hold a license hearing and issue a written decision. Notice of such hearing, to be held within 30 days of receipt of the hearing request, shall be given the affected person. Upon written application or on his own motion, the contractor licensing official shall have the authority, in a proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
5.05.160 - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the contractor licensing official after a license hearing shall have the right to appeal to the town council upon filing with the town clerk a written appeal and request for hearing within 30 days following issuance of a written hearing decision by the contractor licensing official. Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts in support of the appeal. A copy of the appeal shall be forwarded to the contractor licensing official. 
5.05.170 - Appeals hearing. 
    The town council shall hold a hearing on any appeal of a decision of the contractor licensing official at its next regularly scheduled meeting scheduled at least seven days after filing the appeal and shall give notice to the appellant of the time and place of such hearing, and shall also notify the contractor licensing official who may appear and defend such order. After hearing evidence from the applicant and the contractor licensing official, the town council may issue a verbal decision and shall issue written findings which shall be final and conclusive. 
5.05.180 - License register. 
    The town clerk shall keep a register listing every license issued under this chapter and listing the name of the licensee, the name of the licensee's business, the type of contractor work and the date of issuance and expiration. 
5.05.190 - Fines. 
    Any person who violates the requirements of this chapter may be fined no more than $300.00 per violation. Separate violations will be deemed to occur for each day a person is in violation. 
5.05.200 - Exemptions. 
    The town council may by resolution, exempt from the requirements of this chapter any construction work conducted in conjunction with a town sponsored or town supported special event, but such exemption shall not extend to operations of the same construction work which are not conducted in conjunction with an exempted special event. 
Chapter 5.06 - TRANSIENT BUSINESS LICENSE 

5.06.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Transient Business Licensing Ordinance of the Town of Gypsum." 
(Ord. 2011-1) 
5.06.020 - Scope. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to repeal or in any way impair any existing provisions of other laws or ordinance. Where this chapter imposes a greater restrictions than imposed by existing provisions of laws or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
5.06.030 - Definitions. 
    Words used in this chapter shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
    Application means an application for a transient business license. 
    License or transient business license means a license issued under this chapter. 
    Peddler is an individual who engages in the itinerant or transient sale or bartering of any goods, merchandise or services directly to the consuming public, whether or not the goods, merchandise, or services are actually delivered at the time of sale. A peddler engages in such activities as selling from door-to-door, hawking of items at public events, and selling or canvassing by means of carrying goods or samples around from place to place in order to encounter consumers who will purchase or order the goods. 
    Peddling includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler, but does not include the following: 
(1)  Any sales efforts by telephone or mail, where there is no face-to-face encounter with the purchaser at the time of sale, delivery or provision of goods, merchandise or services; 
(2)  Any sales by itinerant salespersons selling goods or merchandise or providing services exclusively to commercial, industrial or business accounts; 
(3)  Any sale by a person who has or represents a permanent business location within the town which has obtained a valid business license pursuant to chapter 5.03 of the Town of Gypsum Municipal Code. 
    Town license officer or license officer is the license officer of the Town of Gypsum as appointed by resolution of the town council. 
5.06.040 - Prohibited activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To go in or upon the private property of any residence within the town for the purpose of peddling without first obtaining a valid transient business license issued by the Town of Gypsum license officer and without having the permission of the owner or occupant of the private residence; 
(2)  To make any false statement or misrepresentation of fact, or otherwise to engage in fraud, in the course of carrying on the activities permitted under this chapter, or to fail to fulfill the obligations and representations which the peddler makes to a purchaser; 
(3)  In peddling any goods, merchandise or services to be delivered or provided at a future date, to refuse or fail to give to a purchaser at the time of sale a written and signed receipt which shall accurately set forth the name, address and telephone number of the peddler; a brief description of the goods, merchandise or services to be delivered or provided; the anticipated date and manner of delivery or provision; the amount paid by the purchaser; the balance due on the purchase; and the terms of payment; 
(4)  To fail or refuse to leave peacefully private property immediately when told to do so by the landowner, the landowner's agent or representative, or the occupant of the premises; 
(5)  To engage in door-to-door sales at residences from one-half hour after sunset until 8:00 a.m. the next day; or 
(6)  To obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the public's use of public streets, ways or places, other than as authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
5.06.050 - Exempt organizations and individuals. 
    The following types of organizations and individuals selling goods, merchandise or services on their behalf are not required to obtain a transient business license under this chapter but shall otherwise comply with all other applicable laws and requirements, including section 5.06.040 of this chapter: 
(1)  State and local governmental departments, agencies and subdivisions, including public schools and school groups; 
(2)  State-accredited private schools and academies and school groups; 
(3)  Charitable, civic, patriotic, religious, educational, recreational, fraternal or cultural organizations which are tax exempt pursuant to Section 501(c) of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and 
(4)  Political candidates canvassing for public office, their workers or representatives from a political parties. 
5.06.060 - Town license officer. 
    The town license officer shall collect all license fees, review applications, and shall issue licenses to all qualified applicants. The license officer shall: 
(1)  Recommend and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations adopted by the town council as necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Adopt, and from time to time amend, all forms and papers necessary for implementing this chapter. 
(3)  Submit all applications to interested town officials for their review and comments when appropriate for determining eligibility for a license and compliance with town regulations. 
(4)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license. 
(5)  Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Notify applicants of the approval or denial of their applications. 
(7)  Keep confidential names, addresses, electronic addresses, telephone numbers and personal financial information provided by the applicant or licensee, to the extent permitted by the Colorado Open Records Act, 24-72-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
5.06.070 - Application required. 
    At least seven business days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires to begin peddling within the town, an applicant for a transient business license shall file with the town manager or license officer a sworn application in writing on a form provided by the license officer that contains the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant. 
(2)  Description of the applicant. 
(3)  Permanent home address and temporary local address of the applicant. 
(4)  A description of the nature of the business and/or goods for sale or for future delivery. 
(5)  If employed, the name, address, telephone number together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and employee. 
(6)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(7)  A statement taken by the town manager or business license officer as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, or if the applicant has been so convicted, a statement as to the nature of the offense and conviction. 
(8)  Two identical photographs of the applicant that reasonably identify the applicant, and which measure two inches by two inches. 
(9)  The fingerprints of the applicant. 
5.06.080 - Application fee. 
    At the time of filing of the application, the applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 to the town manager or license officer to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated in the application and associated administrative costs. 
5.06.090 - Application review, denial, and approval. 
    The license officer shall approve or deny in writing an application for a transient business license within 30 [days] of the date the application is received by the town based on the applicant's character and business responsibility. 
    If the application is found unsatisfactory, the town manager or business license officer shall so endorse upon the application and set forth the reasons for the denial, and thereupon shall notify the application of the denial of such application and that no license will be issued thereunder. The application fee shall not be refunded if an application is denied. 
    An applicant denied a license may request a hearing pursuant to the procedures in section 5.03.230 of the Municipal Code. A person aggrieved by a decision of the license officer after a license hearing may appeal the decision to the town council pursuant to the procedures outlined in sections 5.03.240 and 5.03.250 of the Municipal Code. 
    If, as a result of the town's investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the town manager or town license officer shall endorse the same on the application and upon receipt of the fees required by section 5.06.100 set forth hereafter, shall execute and deliver to the applicant a license to carry on such business within the corporate limits of the town. 
5.06.100 - License fee. 
    Upon approval of an application and at the time of issuance of a license under this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee to the business license officer of $50.00. 
5.06.110 - Contents of license. 
    The license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer, the type of license issued, the kinds of goods to be sold, the date of issuance, the expiration date and a two-inch by two-inch photograph of the applicant. 
    A license may not be issued for more than 30 consecutive days. Each license shall expire on the date specified on the license. Upon the expiration of a license, the original applicant may apply to renew the license a total of four times within a 360-day period. 
5.06.120 - Nonsolicitation list. 
    The business license officer shall maintain a list of persons within the town who restrict visits to their residence by peddlers. A copy of the nonsolicitation list shall be provided to each licensed peddler. 
    No peddler shall enter upon private property where the occupant has listed the property on the town's nonsolicitation list, or who has posted a clearly visible "no solicitation" or similar sign or notice which indicates that solicitation of business is either not desired or is prohibited on the property. 
5.06.130 - License register. 
    The town clerk shall keep a registered listing of every current license issued under this chapter and listing the name of the licensee, the name of the business (if any), the type of goods sold and the date of issuance and expiration of the license. 
5.06.140 - Fines. 
    Any person who violates the requirements of this chapter may be fined up to $300.00 per violation. Separate violations will be deemed to occur for each day a person is in violation. 
Title 6 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
  
Chapter 6.01 - INTENT 

6.01.010 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the town council in adopting these animal control and licensing regulations to declare that owners of pet animals and working dogs provide reasonable care for and assume full responsibility and strict liability for the actions of any pet animal or working dog. 
(Ord. 2011-06) 
Chapter 6.02 - DEFINITIONS 

6.02.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title 6, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Abandon means (a) to fail to provide necessary care to a pet animal for a period of 24 hours or longer; or (b) to deposit, leave, drop off or otherwise dispose of any pet animal on public or private property without providing necessary care. For the purposes of this resolution, any pet animal is presumed to be abandoned if, after the posting or personal service of written notice describing deficiencies of necessary care for a pet animal, the deficiencies are not corrected within 24 hours of such notice by any person other than an animal control officer. 
    Animal means nonhuman mammals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds and reptiles. 
    Animal control officer means any person empowered by the Town of Gypsum to enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-15-105, C.R.S., Eagle County Sheriff Department personnel and other peace officers as defined in 18-1-901, C.R.S. 
    Animal services department means the Eagle County Department of Animal Services. 
    Animal shelter means all facilities and premises authorized by the Town of Gypsum to care for animals impounded or quarantined pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such facilities and premises shall also be considered public animal shelters for the purpose of impounding dangerous dogs pursuant to the provisions of 18-9-204.5, C.R.S. 
    Attack means aggressive behavior such as biting, injuring or chasing a person or animal that may result in bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or the death of a person or animal. 
    Bite means the severe bruising, piercing, laceration, or breaking of the skin of a person or another animal by the teeth or jaws of any animal. 
    Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears, or skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment, or the fracture of any bone, or any physical injury that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
    Cat means any animal of the species felis domesticus or any hybrid thereof. 
    Control means supervision of, and influence over, any pet animal sufficient to prevent the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Control shall be by physical control or immediate control, as defined herein. 
    Court means the Gypsum Municipal Court. 
    Dangerous animal means any pet animal or working dog that has, without provocation, inflicted serious bodily injury to a person, or has caused the death of a human being; or has, while off the premises of its owner, killed a domestic animal without provocation; or has been previously classified as potentially dangerous and is found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Dog means any animal of the canine species or any animal related to the wolf, fox, coyote or jackal. 
    Dog park means an area posted by any agency of the federal government, the State of Colorado, or any political subdivision of the state for dogs to exercise and play off-leash in a controlled environment under immediate control of their owners. 
    Habitual offender means any pet animal or working dog owner who has pled guilty to, or been found guilty of, violating any provision of this chapter three times within any 18-month period. For the purposes of this chapter, after the effective date of this chapter any disposition of charges involving probation or deferred judgment and sentencing shall be considered to be convictions. 
    Immediate control means control of a pet animal by the physical presence of the owner or responsible person so that it is at heel beside or otherwise controlled by and obedient to a person competent to restrain the animal by command. 
    Impound means to place an animal in public or protective custody in the interest of the safety of the animal and/or the safety of the community. 
    Livestock means cattle, horses, mules, burros, sheep, poultry, swine, llama, goats, and any other animal, when used for working purposes or raised for food or fiber production. 
    Mistreatment means every act or omission which causes, or unreasonably permits the continuation of, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering of an animal. 
    Necessary care for a pet animal includes, but is not limited to, providing food, water, protection from the weather and removal of waste from the animal's enclosure. 
    Neglect means failure to provide food, water, protection from the weather, opportunity for exercise, socialization, or other care consistent with the needs of the species of the animal in question. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, or organization owning, possessing, keeping, having a financial or property interest in, or who has temporary control or custody of, any pet animal; or any person, firm, corporation or organization owning or having a financial or property interest in a working dog. 
    Pet animal means dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, ferrets, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates, or any species of wild or domestic or hybrid animal sold, transferred, or retained for the purpose of being kept as a household pet, and includes any other animal specified in 35-80-102 (10), C.R.S., as may be amended from time to time. "Pet animal" does not include livestock or a working dog in the process of being worked. 
    Pet animal facility means any facility licensed as such pursuant to the provisions of Part 1 of Article 80 of Title 35, C.R.S. 
    Physical control means control of a pet animal by means of a tether or a leash attached to the animal, and held by the owner, or control by confinement in a secure animal enclosure. 
    Potentially dangerous animal means any pet animal or working dog that, without provocation, threatens to attack, or bites a human being, pet animal, or livestock of another, causing bodily injury or death; or approaches a person upon the streets, highways, sidewalks, or other areas open to the public in a menacing fashion; or, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without provocation, or to cause physical injury or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or other pet animals; or, is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting, or is trained for fighting. 
    Premises means property owned, leased, or expressly permitted to be used by an owner, including any confined area or locality such as a residence, business, room, shop, building, or motor vehicle, including the open space bed of a truck. 
    Protective custody means the taking of an animal into custody by an animal control officer to prevent the mistreatment, neglect, or abandonment of such animal; or, impoundment of an animal because of the owner's inability to care for the animal due to incarceration, incapacitation, or transport to a medical treatment facility. 
    Provocation means harassment, teasing, threatening, striking, or attacking an animal or its owner in the animal's presence, by either a person or another animal. Provocation may also include the intrusion onto the physical property of the pet animal's or working dog's owner, without the owner's consent and/or interference with a working dog's performance of its job while it is actually working. 
    Public custody means the impoundment and/or confinement of an animal in the animal shelter, or in the physical control of an animal by an animal control officer performing duties pursuant to the provisions of the resolution. 
    Quarantine means the confinement of an animal for a specific period of time, as determined by the director of animal services, during which the animal will be observed in order to detect symptoms of disease. At the discretion of the animal services director, the animal may either be quarantined by being (i) taken into public custody; or (ii) kept in a secure animal enclosure and/or within the physical control of the owner during the entire quarantine period. 
    Rabies registration means the vaccination of an animal with an anti-rabies vaccine administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, and the retention of a certificate of rabies vaccination by the animal owner. 
    Secure animal enclosure means a structure which is suitable to prevent the escape of the animal and prevents the entry of young children, having a top, bottom, all sides, and is locked. 
    Serious bodily injury means such injury which involves a substantial risk of permanent physical disability, impairment or disfigurement; or a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part of, or organ in the body. 
    Tether means to securely tie, chain or leash a pet animal to an inanimate object. 
    Trespass means the entry by a pet animal or working dog upon any private property other than that of the pet animal's owner, or upon public property which is posted as not permitting animals or such animals. 
    Wildlife means wild vertebrates, mollusks, and crustaceans, whether alive or dead, including any part, product, egg, or off-spring thereof, that exists as a species in a natural wild state in their place of origin, presently or historically, except those species determined to be domestic animals by rule or regulation by the Colorado Wildlife Commission and the state agricultural commission. 
    Working dog means a dog which is currently engaged in the act of working livestock, guarding livestock from predators, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a licensed hunter, assisting law enforcement officers, assisting in rescue efforts, or being trained for any of these purposes. 
Chapter 6.03 - VACCINATION, REGISTRATION AND LICENSING 

6.03.010 - Rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  Owners of pet animals and working dogs that are harbored, kept, or maintained in the town and for which the United States Department of Agriculture has licensed a rabies vaccine, shall (i) vaccinate such animals, (ii) maintain the efficacy of the vaccination, and (iii) maintain proof of current, efficacious rabies vaccination for their pet animals and working dogs. 
(b)  Such pet animals and working dogs shall be vaccinated when the animal reaches the age of four months, or is licensed (if applicable), whichever occurs first, and the vaccination shall be repeated as necessary in accordance with recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture or vaccine manufacturer to maintain the efficacy of the vaccination. 
(c)  The rabies vaccine shall not be required for a pet animal or working dog whose veterinarian, in accordance with C.R.S.  25-4-607, has issued a written waiver based on the veterinarian's professional opinion that the rabies inoculation is contraindicated due to the pet animal's medical condition. 
6.03.020 - Dog licensing required. 
(a)  All dogs, including working dogs, harbored, kept, or maintained in the town shall be licensed, except dogs kept as part of the operation of a pet animal facility. 
(b)  All dogs over the age of four months shall have a valid Eagle County dog license after the dog has been kept, maintained, or harbored in the town for any consecutive 30-day period or immediately upon citation for any violation of this title. 
(c)  All dog licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the license is issued. 
(d)  A dog license shall be comprised of and evidenced by a written license form and a dog license tag. 
(e)  The Eagle County Animal Services Department and/or any agency or person designated by the town council will issue a dog license upon the receipt of the executed application, payment of the license fee and evidence of a current rabies vaccination with efficacy extending past the date of license issuance. 
6.03.030 - Attachment of dog license tag to collar or harness. 
    A valid dog license tag shall be attached to a collar or harness and shall be worn by the dog at all times. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the owner can produce a certification by a veterinarian that the dog cannot wear a collar or harness because of a permanent medical condition or the dog was, at the time of notice, working in a capacity that made the wearing of a collar or harness hazardous to the dog. Working dogs that cannot wear a dog license tag shall be microchipped or tattooed, at the owner's expense, and registered with the department of animal services. 
6.03.040 - Voluntary cat identification. 
    Owners of cats harbored, kept or maintained in the town are entitled, but not required, to obtain an identification tag suitable to be worn on a collar or harness. Cat identification tags will be available from the animal services department, and/or any agency or person designated by the town council, upon the receipt of the executed application, payment of the identification tag fee and evidence of a current rabies vaccination with efficacy extending past the date of tag issuance. 
Chapter 6.04 - CONTROL OF ANIMAL 

6.04.010 - Failure to control a working dog or pet animal. 
    It shall be unlawful and considered a failure to control a pet animal or working dog, when: 
(a)  A pet animal is off the owner's premises without the presence of a person having control as defined in this title; 
(b)  A pet animal or working dog is allowed to cause bodily injury to a human being, or another pet animal, or is allowed to cause damage to the property of another; 
(c)  A pet animal or working dog is tethered upon any public or private property without the permission of the person owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling the property in question; 
(d)  Any pet animal or working dog reaches past the perimeter of the owner's premises with its teeth or claws causing bodily injury or property damage to another; 
(e)  A pet animal is allowed to defecate on public or private property and the owner does not remove the waste in a timely manner; 
(f)  A female cat or dog, during estrus, is not under the owner's physical control, confined indoors, or confined within a secure animal enclosure; 
(g)  A pet animal is not under physical control in areas posted by any agency of the federal government, the State of Colorado, or any political subdivision of the state as requiring the animal to be on a leash; 
(h)  Any pet animal or working dog is mistreated or is left in circumstances which constitute abandonment; or 
(i)  A pet animal or working dog is allowed to enter private property not that of the owner's without the property owner's permission, or allowed to enter public property which is posted as not permitting such animals. 
6.04.020 - Interference with an owner's control of a pet animal or working dog. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any act which interferes with, prevents, or hinders the efforts of an owner to control any of the owner's pet animals or working dogs. 
6.04.030 - Interference with an animal control officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to interfere with, hinder, prevent, or obstruct an animal control officer in her/her performance of duty. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to remove any animal from the public custody or protective custody without the consent of an animal control officer. 
Chapter 6.05 - ANIMAL BITES 

6.05.010 - Duty to report bites. 
    Any medical professional who provides treatment to a person for any animal bite that has pierced the skin shall report to the animal service department any information known concerning the animal bite. The report shall be made within 24 hours after such information is received by the medical professional, and shall include the name, address and telephone number of the person making the report. The report may be made by telephone to the animal services department via voice mail. 
6.05.020 - Owner's duty to produce biting animal for inspection or quarantine. 
(a)  Upon the request of an animal control officer, an owner shall make available for inspection and/or quarantine, any pet animal or working dog when probable cause exists to believe that the animal has bitten any person or other pet animal or working dog. 
(b)  If the quarantine of a pet animal or a working dog is deemed necessary, the place and terms of quarantine shall be determined by the director of animal services, or his or her designee. During quarantine, the pet animal or working dog shall, for a period of ten days, be caused to be (i) isolated and confined to a secure enclosure and/or under the physical control of the owner; or (ii) confined at the animal shelter in a manner deemed appropriate by the director of the animal services department. 
(c)  All costs incurred as a result of the quarantine shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
6.05.030 - Hot pursuit. 
    An animal control officer in hot pursuit of an animal that is suspected of inflicting bodily or serious bodily injury to a human being or other animal may enter onto private property for the purposes of enforcing this title, including for the purpose of effecting an impoundment and/or quarantine and, removing the animal from the property, ascertaining the identity of the animal, it's owner, and/or the currency or existence of dog tags, or issuing a citation. This section, however, does not grant any animal control officer authority to enter into any dwelling. 
Chapter 6.06 - DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

6.06.010 - Designation of dangerous and potentially dangerous animal. 
(a)  In addition to determining whether immediate quarantine or impoundment of an animal who has inflicted bodily injury or serious bodily injury to a person, pet animal, or working dog is appropriate, the director of the animal services department or his/her designee shall have the authority to determine, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that a pet animal or working dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous. 
(b)  Upon a determination by the director of the animal services department that an animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous, the director shall send written notice of the classification to the owner of the animal at that owner's last known address. The notice shall describe the animal and state the grounds for its classification and applicability to such pet animal or working dog by reason of its classification. 
(c)  The notice required in section 6.06.010(b) shall be given either by personal delivery to the owner, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the person's last known address. Notice by personal delivery shall be complete upon delivery and the receipt or upon return of the notice as undeliverable, refused, or unclaimed. 
(d)  Designation of a pet animal or working dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall require a mandatory appearance by the owner in Gypsum Municipal Court, and a summons and complaint shall be issued to the owner. 
(e)  The municipal judge shall also have the authority to declare any animal dangerous or potentially dangerous. 
6.06.020 - Affirmative defenses to dangerous or potentially dangerous classification. 
(a)  If an animal is classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous based on biting or causing injury to another animal, an affirmative defense to the classification of an animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be that: 
(1)  The other animal was trespassing upon the premises of the offending animal's owner, and the attack began, but did not necessary end upon such premises; or 
(2)  The other animal was biting or otherwise threatening or attacking the offending animal's owner or the offending animal itself. 
(b)  If an animal is classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous based on biting or causing injury to a person, an affirmative defense to the classification of an animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be that: 
(1)  The person attacked was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against the offending animals' owner and the attack did not occur upon the owner's premises; or 
(2)  The person attacked was committing a criminal offense against a person on the owner's premises or against the premises itself and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such premises; or 
(3)  The person attacked had tormented, provoked, abused, or inflicted injury upon the animal. 
Chapter 6.07 - RESTRICTIONS ON POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

6.07.010 - Secure confinement. 
    While on the owner's property, a potentially dangerous animal must, at all times, be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable for preventing the entry of young children and designed to prevent the potentially dangerous animal from escaping by climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The potentially dangerous animal must be securely confined indoors at all times until such enclosure has secure sides and a secure top. If the enclosure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground to a depth of not less than one foot. The enclosure must also provide adequate protection from the elements and be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
6.07.020 - Leash restrictions. 
    A potentially dangerous animal may be off the owner's premises only when restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding four feet in length. The leash and potentially dangerous animal shall be under the actual physical control of a person capable of controlling the potentially dangerous animal at all times. Such potentially dangerous animal shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 
6.07.030 - Notification of change in status. 
    The owner shall immediately notify the animal services department if a potentially dangerous animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal or human being, or has died, been sold, been given away, lost, or is otherwise no longer in the possession or custody of the owner. If the potentially dangerous animal has been sold or given away the owner shall provide the animal services department with the new owner's name, address and telephone number. If the new owner maintains the potentially dangerous animal within the town, the new owner shall comply with the requirements previously applied to such animal and the requirements of this chapter. 
6.07.040 - Signs; display required. 
(a)  The owner shall display a sign or signs in such form as required by the town on the property where the animal designated as potentially dangerous is kept, warning that there is a potentially dangerous animal on the premises. Such sign or signs shall be visible and capable of being read from any public right-of-way abutting the premises. Such sign shall also be posted on the enclosure for the potentially dangerous animal. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for obtaining the required sign at its own cost and expense. Signs may be obtained from animal services department. 
6.07.050 - Special license and identification tags. 
    The owner of any potentially dangerous animal shall obtain an annual special license and identification tag for such animal, which license shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the license is issued. An application for a special license and identification tag shall be made to the animal services department and shall include the information required by chapter 6.03 of the Town Code. The potentially dangerous animal shall also be issued a special license identification tag which shall be worn by the potentially dangerous animal at all times. 
6.07.060 - Spay or neuter requirement. 
    Within 14 calendar days after an animal is classified as potentially dangerous, the owner shall have the animal spayed or neutered, at the owner's own cost, and present proof of the spay/neuter to the animal services department and Gypsum Town Clerk. 
6.07.070 - Requirements during pendency of hearing. 
    The owner of any animal that has been designated as potentially dangerous in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of sections 6.07.010, 6.07.020 and 6.07.030 pending the outcome of any hearing challenging such designation. 
6.07.080 - Failure to comply. 
    Any animal that has been classified as potentially dangerous and is found in violation of the restrictions concerning potentially dangerous animals may be classified as a "dangerous animal" by the director of the animal services department or Gypsum Municipal Court. 
Chapter 6.08 - DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

6.08.010 - Dangerous animals unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful to own, house, or keep a dangerous animal within the town. 
6.08.020 - Euthanization of dangerous animals required. 
    Any pet animal or working dog that is classified as dangerous shall be humanely euthanized after being quarantined for the period provided by law. 
Chapter 6.09 - IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS 

6.09.010 - Impoundment of stray or abandoned animals. 
    An animal control officer may impound any animal that is not under control as required by this chapter, or upon established probable cause that the animal and/or its owner are in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
6.09.020 - Notification of owner. 
    The animal control officer may impound an animal prior to notifying the owner if such owner is not immediately present to exercise control of such animal. As soon as practical after the impoundment of any animal, an animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal's location by telephone, posting of a notice at the owner's residence, or by written notice mailed to the owner's last known address, if the identity of the owner is known. If needed to establish the identity of the owner, information contained on any identification, rabies, or license tag found attached to the animal, or microchip, shall be used. 
6.09.030 - Impoundment of an animal that has bitten a person. 
    Upon established probable cause to believe that an animal that has inflected either bodily injury or serious bodily injury to a person other than its owner or poses an immediate threat to the safety of the community, the animal control officer may impound the animal. The following factors shall be considered in determining whether impoundment is appropriate in order to ensure the safety of the community: 
(1)  The nature of the behavior giving rise to the determination that the animal caused bodily injury to serious bodily injury; 
(2)  The extent of the injury or injuries; 
(3)  Circumstances surrounding the complaint, including but not limited to the time of day that the injury occurred, whether the animal was on/off the owner's private property, whether there are any indications that the animal was provoked; 
(4)  Circumstances surrounding the result and complaint including, but not limited to, identification of the animal and credibility of complainants and witnesses; 
(5)  The size of the lot where the animal resides and the number and proximity of neighbors; 
(6)  The existing control factors, including but not limited to the number of animals at the owner's residence, existence of fencing, caging, runs and staking locations; 
(7)  The animal's behavior post-incident as observed by animal control officers and/or the director of the animal services department; 
(8)  Whether there have been previous incidents or complaints involving the animal; and 
(9)  Mitigating circumstances, including but not limited to an owner's willingness and ability to take adequate measures to prevent future incidents. 
6.09.040 - Mandatory impoundment of dangerous animals pending hearing. 
    During the pendency of any hearing on the classification of a pet animal or working dog as dangerous, the pet animal or working dog shall be impounded at the animal shelter at the owner's expense. 
6.09.050 - Impoundment costs. 
    Should the court determine that the animal was properly designed by the director of the animal services department as dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner shall be responsible for paying the costs and expense of the hearing and of the impoundment of the animal. Should the court determine that the pet animal or working dog is neither dangerous nor potentially dangerous, no costs shall be charged for the impoundment of the pet animal or working dog during the pendency of the hearing. 
6.09.060 - No liability for impoundment. 
    The town, its employees, agents and persons authorized herein to enforce the provisions of this title 6, shall not be held responsible for any accident, injury, or subsequent disease which may be suffered by an animal as a result of the administration or implementation of this title. 
Chapter 6.10 - OWNER'S DUTY TO REDEEM ANIMAL AND PAY FEES 

6.10.010 - Owner responsible for costs of impoundment. 
    The owner of any impounded animal shall be held responsible for all the costs of impoundment, including medical treatment and boarding, and such costs shall be fully paid prior to the release of the animal. 
6.10.020 - Rabies inoculation required upon release. 
    Prior to the release of an animal from impoundment, the owner shall pay for a rabies inoculation for the animal, or provide proof of efficacious rabies vaccination. 
6.10.030 - Dog license required upon release. 
    Prior to release of any impounded dog, the owner shall pay for an Eagle County dog license or provide proof of current licensure in Eagle County or the place the animal regularly is kept if outside of Eagle County. 
6.10.040 - Failure to redeem or surrender unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to make arrangements for the redemption or surrender of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or to fail to pay any fees associated with the redemption or surrender of such animal. 
Chapter 6.11 - DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS 

6.11.010 - Five-day holding period. 
    Except for impoundment of an animal awaiting determination by the court of a potentially dangerous or dangerous classification, any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become the property of the Eagle County Animal Control after five days of impoundment, after which time the animal services department may humanely euthanize the animal, make the animal available for adoption, or release the animal to a rescue organization pursuant to section 6.11.030. For purposes of this section, a "day" means a 24-hour period beginning at the time of the day at, and on the date on, which the animal was taken into public custody. 
6.11.020 - Humane euthanization of certain animals. 
    The department of animal services may humanely euthanize any animal at any time prior to the expiration of the five-day impoundment period upon a reasonable belief that the animal is seriously injured or ill, or that the animal poses a risk to the health of any person, as determined by the director of the animal services department or his/her designee. 
6.11.030 - Release of animals to rescue organizations. 
    After the required time period, in lieu of having an animal destroyed, the animal services department may release an animal which is not diseased to a bona fide animal welfare organization or to a person having no previous interest in the animal. Upon release of the animal, the recipient shall pay a fee as established by the animal services department, including but not limited to fees for adoption, rabies inoculations, dog license, and sterilization costs. 
Chapter 6.12 - THREATENING OF LIVESTOCK OR WILDLIFE 

6.12.010 - Failure to prevent animal from threatening livestock or wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful to fail to control any pet animal or working dog so as to prevent such animal from running after, chasing, pursuing, biting, attacking, or in any other way threatening livestock or wildlife. 
6.12.020 - Destruction or impoundment of animal threatening wildlife. 
    Any pet animal or working dog threatening livestock or wildlife may be immediately destroyed at the discretion of any animal control officer. If not destroyed, the Animal may be immediately impounded and/or designated dangerous or potentially dangerous in accordance with this chapter. 
6.12.030 - Court appearance. 
    A violation of this chapter shall require a mandatory court appearance by the owner in Gypsum Municipal Court. Upon conviction, if the animal was not destroyed at the time of the incident, the court may order it destroyed under the supervision of the animal services department. If the court does not order the animal destroyed, the court may deem the animal a potentially dangerous animal and possession shall be returned to the owner subject to the regulations applicable to potentially dangerous animals under this title, any applicable state law, and any other restrictions established by the municipal judge. Upon a second conviction of a violation of this chapter with respect to a specific animal, the court may order the animal to be classified as dangerous and the animal destroyed under the supervision of the animal services department. 
6.12.040 - Restitution required. 
    Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the owner shall be required by the court to pay restitution for any livestock or wildlife injured or killed by the owner's animal. 
Chapter 6.13 - NUISANCE ANIMAL NOISE AND FECES 

6.13.010 - Persistent barking unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any owner to fail to prevent his pet animal or working dog from disturbing the peace of any other person by habitual or persistent barking, howling, yelping, or whining, or any other unprovoked noise, whether the animal is on or off the owner's property. 
6.13.020 - Accumulation of feces unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any owner to permit the accumulation of a pet animal's or working dog's feces on the property on which the animal is kept, such that it is detectable visually or odorously by neighbors. 
6.13.030 - Failure to confine feces unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any owner to fail to confine a pet animal's or working dog's feces, and any part thereof, within the perimeters of the property on which the animal is kept, regardless whether such failure to confine is the result of natural causes, such as surface water flow, or other causes. 
6.13.040 - Warning required. 
    No person shall be charged with a violation of this chapter 6.13 unless a written warning for a separate violation has been given at least 72 hours prior to the issuance of the citation. The name and address of the complainant shall appear on the written warning. 
Chapter 6.14 - ADOPTION 

6.14.010 - Failure to comply with terms of a sales or adoption contract. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to comply with any of the terms of an adoption or fostering contract for an animal obtained from the Eagle County Animal Shelter pursuant to such contract. 
Chapter 6.15 - ENFORCEMENT 

6.15.010 - Habitual offender. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to become a habitual offender as defined in this title and any person may be charged as a habitual offender in addition to any other charges brought pursuant to the provisions of this title. Upon the conviction of an owner as a habitual offender, the owner's offending animal(s) may be ordered removed from the Town of Gypsum and/or surrendered to the animal services department, along with other such remedies and penalties imposed by the court. 
6.15.020 - Enforcement. 
    Animal control officers have the authority to issue a summons and complaint or penalty assessment to any alleged violator of this title. All cited violations and penalty assessments shall be set and enforced by the municipal court for the Town of Gypsum, within the maximum penalties set forth in this chapter. 
6.15.030 - Complaints. 
    When a summons and complaint or penalty assessment is issued based on a complaint made by a person other than an animal control officer, the complainant shall sign a statement alleging the facts that led to the complaint and when subpoenaed, shall appear in municipal court as a witness to the events. No summons and complaint or penalty assessment may be issued when a complainant refuses or fails to sign the statement required by this section. A complainant who is subpoenaed and fails to appear in municipal court to testify will be presumed to have violated chapter 9.06 of the Municipal Code. 
6.15.040 - Penalties. 
    The following schedule shall apply to offenses charged pursuant to the penalty assessment procedure: 
(1)  For all violations not involving a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal: 
First offense: $100.00 
Second offense within one year: $250.00 
Each subsequent offense within one year: $375.00 
(2)  For all violations involving a potentially dangerous animal: 
First offense: $187.50 
Second offense: $375.00 
Each subsequent offense within one year: Mandatory court appearance 
(3)  For all violations involving a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal at large, an habitual offender charge, poisoning, trapping, failing to redeem an animal, failing to pay any fines or fees required, or threatening of wildlife or livestock: 
All offenses: mandatory court appearance and mandatory fine upon conviction of $300.00 plus all associated costs and restitution 
(4)  An additional court fine of $150.00 shall be issued for the following violations of this chapter committed by any dog or cat that is not spayed or neutered: 
a.  Persistent barking in violation of section 6.13.010; 
b.  Failure to control a working dog or pet animal in violation of section 6.04.010; and 
c.  Biting a person or other pet animal or working dog so as to cause bodily injury or serious bodily injury in violation of section 6.06.010. 
Such court fine shall be waived or refunded if, within 21 calendar days after the date scheduled for the owner's appearance in court for a first hearing, the owner presents proof to the Gypsum Town Clerk that the dog or cat that committed the violation has been spayed or neutered. 
(5)  If a person received a summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice pursuant to this chapter for an offense defined by this Code as a civil infraction and such person fails to pay the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due and fails to appear in person or by counsel before the municipal court for a first hearing, the municipal court shall enter a plea of not guilty pursuant to Rule 211(d) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedures. If a person fails to appear before the municipal court for a final hearing when scheduled, the municipal court may: 
a.  Enter a default judgment convicting the person of the animal control infraction; 
b.  Issue a bench warrant for the person's arrest pursuant to section 2.01.150 of the Gypsum Municipal Code and Rule 204(f) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure; 
c.  Require upon arrest, pursuant to Rule 246 of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court procedure, the deposit of bail or the posting of a bond to cover bail in the amount of 1.25 times the total fines, surcharges, court penalties and court costs contained in the default judgment entered against the person and compel the person's appearance at the next occurring municipal court trial date. Failure to appear before the municipal court when scheduled following arrest shall result in forfeiture of all or part of the bail amount to the municipal court in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(6)  All fines listed in this chapter are minimum penalties and all violations are subject to the maximum fine provisions as set forth in section 2.01.090(6) of the G.M.C., and/or up to 180 days in jail. 
6.15.050 - Power of the municipal court. 
    In addition to any penalties which may be provided for in this title, the municipal judge shall have the authority, upon making a finding that an animal constitutes a nuisance, or that an animal constitutes a real or present danger to the citizens of the town, to order that the animal be destroyed in a humane fashion or removed from the Town of Gypsum permanently. 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
  
Chapter 8.04 - GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION 

8.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. (Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or association of any kind. (Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, solid wastes, and market, commercial and industrial wastes. (Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
    Residential unit means any single-family home, accessory dwelling unit, and separately each unit of a multi-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04,  1, 5-9-17) 
8.04.020 - Preparation of refuse for collection. 
(a)  Normal pick-up. All refuse to be collected by the town during its regular refuse collection program must be placed in containers supplied by the town, which are to be placed in a location designated by the town on designated dates and times. The public works director may provide for additional pick-up of regular refuse placed in containers, based on demand and availability of vehicles and personnel. All other refuse that cannot be placed in containers, to be collected by the town, shall be subject to the special refuse collection program. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
(b)  Special collection. The public works director shall provide a program of special pick-up of refuse which cannot be placed in containers approved by the town. Refuse subject to the special collection program shall include items such as furniture, appliances, automobile tires, and similar items which are able to be collected by the public works department and are accepted by the Eagle County landfill. Such program shall require, prior to collection, notification of and approval by the public works director of the special refuse to be collected, and payment of special collection fees or a sufficient deposit to ensure payment of fees. Special refuse collection shall be scheduled upon request. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
8.04.030 - Containers. 
(a)  Residential containers. All refuse for collection and disposal by the town shall be placed in containers supplied by the town. Such containers shall be kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times. Residential units occupied subsequent to September 15, 1997, must pay a user fee for the container. If any container is damaged, lost, or rendered unusable, a user fee must be paid to the town for a replacement container. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
(b)  Nonresidential containers. All refuse for collection and disposal by the town shall be placed in containers supplied by the town. Such containers shall be kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times. Nonresidential customers must pay a user fee based on the size of the container. If any container is damaged, lost, or rendered unusable, a user fee must be paid to the town for a replacement container. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
(c)  Multifamily residential containers. The town, at its sole option, may choose to require for multifamily residential units, dumpsters or containers other than those utilized for single family residential units, but each unit will be charged the appropriate user fee and monthly rate for a residential use, regardless of the type of container or dumpster. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
8.04.040 - Storage of refuse. 
(a)  No person shall place refuse in any street, alley or other public place, including recycling containers or recycling facility locations, or upon private property whether owned by such person or not, within the town, except in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the public works director, nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(b)  Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the town any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the town. 
(d)  No person shall place refuse in a container supplied by the town for refuse generated by another property. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of violating subsections (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, plus the costs of abating the violation. 
(Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2014-17,  1, 1-13-15) 
8.04.050 - Collection-Generally. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the town shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the town, unless alternate arrangements for regular collection and disposal are approved in writing by the public works director. In the event alternate arrangements are approved, the fees for collection and disposal of refuse by the town shall be waived, and the container returned to the town. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
(b)  This chapter shall not prohibit the actual producer of refuse, or the owner of the premises upon which the refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse; provided, that such refuse is of a nature not normally collectible by the town or it is additional to the amount normally collected from the producer under the rates and schedules established by the public works director for the particular producer and the public works director has authorized the disposal of such excess; and provided further, that such producer or owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing law or ordinance. Such hauling shall not affect the obligation of such producer or owner to pay charges set forth in accordance with section 8.04.070. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
8.04.060 - Collection-Supervision. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated within the town shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the town under the supervision of the public works director. The public works director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a regulation of, or fee charged by, the public works director shall have the right to appeal the determination to the town council, which shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee, or the application of the same. (Ord. 32 2, 1997) 
8.04.070 - Fees. 
(a)  Refuse collection and disposal fees shall be as follows: 
Residential User Fee (per residential unit) $80.00 One pick-up per week $18.00 per month {2x week pick-up = $36.00/mo.} Each additional pick-up $18.00 per pick-up {3x week pick-up = $54.00/mo.} Nonresidential 200 gallon dumpster User Fee $90.00 One pick-up per week $36.00 per month {2x week pick-up = $72.00/mo.} Each additional pick up $36.00 per pick-up {3x week pick-up = $108.00/mo.} 300 gallon dumpster User Fee $120.00 One pick-up per week $58.00 per month {2x week pick-up = $116.00/mo.} Each additional pick-up $58.00 per pick-up {3x week pick-up = $174.00/mo.} 450 gallon dumpster User Fee $150.00 One pick-up per week $90.00 per month {2x week pick-up = $180.00/mo.} Each additional pick-up $90.00 per pick-up {3x week pick-up = $270.00/mo.} Special Refuse $30.00 minimum per pick-up Couch, Mattress, Box Springs, Chairs, Cabinets, etc. $20.00 per item Hideaway Beds, Appliances $32.00 per item Refrigerators, Freezers 
(Must have documents confirming freon removal) $65.00 per item Tires $11.00 per item Senior Rate-Sixty-five or older $7.50 All other items Fees to be determined by public works director  
(b)  The owners or tenants of all occupied properties, residential and nonresidential, shall pay regular collection and disposal fees established by the town council, unless alternate arrangements for regular collection and disposal have been approved in writing, by the public works director. Such fees shall apply so long as property is occupied, regardless of the amount of refuse collected and disposed of by the town, or the frequency with which the property owner or tenant places refuse for collection by the town. In the event alternate arrangements are approved, the fees for collection and disposal of refuse by the town shall be waived, and the container returned to the town. 
(c)  A current schedule of all fees for collection and disposal of refuse established pursuant to ruling of the town council shall be available for public inspection in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06,  1, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2017-04,  2, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-06,  1, adopted June 23, 2015, repealed the former  8.04.070, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  8.04.070 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 19, adopted in 2003; and Ord. 07, Series 2006. 
8.04.080 - Delinquent accounts. 
(a)  All fees for refuse collection by the town shall be paid no later than the 25 th day of the month of the billing. Late charges will be added at a rate of one percent of the unpaid balance at the time of the next billing. All fees for collection and disposal of refuse by the town shall constitute a perpetual priority lien on the property for which the service is provided. If such fees are not paid when due, the town clerk may certify such charges to the County Treasurer of Eagle County, Colorado, to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property served in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against the property. The town may utilize all other methods legally available to enforce payment including judicial enforcement. The property owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the town, including attorneys' fees, to enforce the payment of delinquent fees. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
(b)  The town may discontinue collection and disposal of refuse from property for which payment of fees is delinquent. Prior to discontinuing service, the town shall mail a written notice to the property owner and/or person named on the service account, of the town's intent to discontinue service. Such notice shall be mailed seven days prior to the date which service is to be discontinued. If the delinquent fees have not been paid or a hearing before the town council requested prior to the date identified by the town for the service to be discontinued, refuse, collection, and disposal by the town will be discontinued. (Ord. 19, 2003) 
8.04.090 - Special refuse problems. 
    No person shall place in containers for regular collection by the town any hazardous materials, flammable or explosive materials, tires, refrigerator or other cooling devises without appropriate freon removal certification, or any other material not accepted by the Eagle County landfill. (Ord. 32 2. 1997) 
8.04.100 - Individual and outside collectors. 
(a)  Requirements for vehicles. All persons who collect or transport waste material of any nature within the town, shall use watertight vehicles provided with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. (Ord. 32 2 1997) 
(b)  Disposal. Disposal of refuse shall be made outside the town limits, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the public works director. (Ord. 32 2 1997) 
(c)  Rules and regulations. The public works director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning collection and transportation of refuse within the town as necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in section 8.04.060(b). (Ord. 32 2 1997) 
Chapter 8.05 - NUISANCES 

8.05.010 - Title for citation. 
    The ordinance codified in this title shall be known and may be cited as the "Town Nuisance Ordinance." 
(Ord. 3 I, 1985) 
8.05.020 - Purpose of provisions. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to discourage, prohibit, outlaw and abate certain conditions affecting the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town, particularly children, which pose a danger because of broken glass, sharp protrusions, insecure objects, or further create habitat for rodents, insects and other pests, or further constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located, which cause a loss in property value to surrounding property. 
(b)  This chapter identifies certain types of nuisances but is not intended to be exclusive or to limit circumstances or conditions of nuisance to those delineated herein, it being the intent of this chapter to provide a framework for dealing with, curing and prohibiting nuisance after such circumstances are found to exist by the town council. (Ord. 3 2, 1985) 
(c)  It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the Colorado Noxious Weed Act, Article 5.5, Title 35, C.R.S., by declaring certain undesirable plant species and noxious weeds to be a nuisance. For the purposes of this chapter, "noxious weed" shall have the meaning provided in Section 35-5.5-103, C.R.S. (Ord. 14 I, 1997) 
8.05.021 - Right to farm and ranch policy. 
(a)  Ranching, farming, and all manner of agricultural activities and operations within and adjacent to the Town of Gypsum are integral elements of and necessary for the continued vitality of the town's history, economy, landscape, lifestyle, and culture. Given their importance to the town, western Colorado, and the state, agricultural lands and operations are worthy of recognition and protection. 
(b)  Colorado is a "right-to-farm" state pursuant to C.R.S. 35-3.5-101, et seq. Landowners, residents and visitors must be prepared to accept the activities, sights, sounds, and smells of agricultural operations within and adjacent to the town as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a town with a strong rural character and a healthy ranching sector. Those with an urban sensitivity may perceive such activities, sights, sounds, and smells only as inconvenience, eyesore, noise, and odor. However, state law and town policy provide that ranching, farming, or other agricultural activities and operations within and adjacent to the town shall not be considered to be nuisances so long as operated in conformance with the law and in a nonnegligent manner. Therefore, all persons must be prepared to encounter noises, odors, lights, mud, dust, smoke, chemicals, machinery on public roads, livestock on public roads, storage and disposal of manure, and the application by spraying or otherwise of chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides, and pesticides, any one or more of which may occur as a part of legal and nonnegligent agricultural operations. 
(c)  All owners of land, whether agricultural or non agricultural, have obligations under state law and town ordinances with regard to the maintenance of fences and irrigation ditches, controlling weeds, keeping livestock and pets under control, using property in accordance with zoning, and other aspects of using and maintaining property. Residents and landowners are encouraged to learn about these rights and responsibilities and act as good neighbors. (Ord 11, I, 1998) 
8.05.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Abandon means to leave a thing with the intention not to retain possession of or assert ownership over it. The intent need not coincide with the act of leaving. It is prima facie evidence of intent that: 
(1)  If it is a motor vehicle, such vehicle has been left for more than seven days unattended or unmoved; or 
(2)  If it is a motor vehicle, valid license plates or other identifying marks have been removed from the vehicle; or 
(3)  if it is an appliance, such as an icebox, refrigerator or other appliance, such thing is left outside for more than seven days; or 
(4)  Personal property is left unattended or unmoved outside of a completely enclosed building and the last owner or person in possession of such things does not retain land ownership, possessory rights to land, a business presence in the town, or residency in the town for a period of six months. 
    Dangerous substances means those substances which, if exposed to a human, are toxic, corrosive, mutagenic, carcinogenic, or substances known to cause chromosomal or genetic damage or other epidermal or internal disease or damage. A substance is not considered dangerous if under the operation, control or possession, secured from public contact, of a licensed medical, pharmaceutical or chemical dealer or practitioner. 
    Graffiti means any writing, word, symbol, figure, design or other inscribed material written, sprayed, painted, etched or otherwise applied to any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, tree, sidewalk, curb or other object without the authority or consent of the owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of the property.(Ord. 2011-15) 
    Graffiti material means material used to create graffiti, including: (Ord. 2011-15) 
(1)  Broad tipped markers: Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, is similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth [of one inch], containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
(2)  Etching equipment: Any tool, device, or substance that is intended to be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface. 
(3)  Paint stick: Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth inch in width. 
(4)  Spray paint container: Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
    Junk means any old, used or secondhand materials of any kind, including but not limited to cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, tires, brass, copper or other metal, furniture, toys, implements, refrigerators, freezers, all other appliances, the parts of used motor vehicles, machines, apparatuses and contrivances, and parts thereof, which are no longer in use, any used building materials, boards or other lumber, cement blocks, bricks, brickbats, rebar or other secondhand building material, or any discarded machinery, tractors, trucks or automobiles, or any other article or thing commonly known and classified as junk. An item is not considered junk if the same is kept, stored or collected in completely enclosed buildings or where a licensed automobile dealer or farm implement dealer conducts a bona fide business enterprise within allowable zoning. 
    Noxious odors means smells, vapors, scents or other airborne matter which offends the olfactory senses of reasonable men. Examples, but not by way of limitation, of circumstances or conditions which may cause noxious odors are tannery plants, feedlots, open and unaerated sewage lagoons or septic tanks without proper percolation, and rendering plants. 
    Nuisance means, in addition to those conditions, acts or circumstances specifically described in this chapter, an act, substance, occupation, condition or use of property which is of such a nature and shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life, health, or in the use of property; or 
(3)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway or other public way. 
    Person means any individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, association, trust, or any other entity recognized at law. 
    Storage means the collection, assembly or warehousing of things, fungible goods or any other item of personal property, without distribution from a site or location for a period of seven days. (Ord. series 1985 3) 
    Uncut weeds and vegetation means any nonagricultural vegetation which, because of improper attendance or neglect, exceeds ten inches in height, is not compatible with the landscaping and vegetative character of the adjoining lots and neighborhood, causes neighborhood blight, poses a fire hazard, or creates a health hazard as a habitat for rodents or insects. (Ord. 4 series 1987 1) 
    Undesirable plants means leafy spurge, also known by the scientific name of Euphorbia esula; and the knapweed plants known as diffuse, Russian, and spotted knapweeds, also known by the scientific names of Centaurea diffusa, Centaurea repenst Centaurea maculosa. (Ord. 12 series 1993 2). 
    Unsafe structure means any man-made structure which fails to meet proper building, plumbing, fire and electrical codes to such a degree that habitation, use or entry, in the opinion of either the relevant fire inspector or building inspector, poses an immediate danger to persons or property. (Ord. 12 series 1993 2) 
8.05.040 - Keeping of junk, maintaining a nuisance and dangerous conditions prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to keep, store or provide for the collection of junk within the town, and the keeping of junk within the town is declared to be a nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(b)  It is unlawful to keep, maintain perpetuate, store, operate, own or control dangerous substances, unsafe structures or uncut weeds and vegetation within the town, and the' keeping, maintaining, perpetuation, storage, operation, ownership or controlling of such dangerous substances, unsafe structures or uncut weeds and vegetation is declared to be a nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(c)  It is unlawful to create, perpetuate, vent or disburse noxious odors within the town, and the creation perpetuation, venting or disbursement of noxious odors within the town is declared to be a nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(d)  It is unlawful to maintain, store, possess on one's premises, perpetuate, own or control inoperable appliances, vehicles or machinery, or to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling building or other structure, or within any public area or public highway or street, any inoperable vehicle, abandoned vehicle or junk, and the same is declared to be a nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to leave, or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling accessible to children, under his control, any unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snap-lock, or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing such door or lid, snap-lock or other locking device, and the maintaining, discarding, ownership or control of such device is declared to be a nuisance and is detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the town, particularly children. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  All undesirable plants, dead and or dying vegetation and noxious weeds, at any and all stages of growth or development, their carriers, and any and all premises, plants, and things infested or exposed to infestation therewith are hereby declared a public nuisance. Undesirable plants, invasive weeds and noxious weeds shall be abated pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedures of the Gypsum Municipal Code, or pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Noxious Weed Act, Sections 35-5.5- 101, et seq., C.R.S. (Ord. 14 2, 1997) (Ord. 2010-12) 
8.05.045 - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  Defacement. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to deface any public or private property with graffiti vandalism. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, or advise another to deface any public or private property with graffiti vandalism. 
(b)  Purchase and possession of graffiti materials. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, procure or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure or possess any prohibited graffiti material with the intent to use such material in the commission of graffiti vandalism. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, except when under the direct supervision of the minor's parent, legal guardian, a school teacher, or a law enforcement officer in the performance of a duty, to purchase, procure, or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure or possess, any graffiti material. 
(3)  It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this section that the person or minor is: 
a.  Within their home; 
b.  At their place of employment and within the scope of that employment; 
c.  Upon the property with express permission from the owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of the property, to possess the materials on the property; 
d.  Attending school, or traveling between a lawful location and a school, at which the person is enrolled if the person is participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of the materials; or 
e.  Transporting materials between lawful locations while going about one's business or activity while so transporting. Transporting shall not include loitering or aimlessly driving, riding, or walking. 
(c)  Removal of graffiti required. Any owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of the property on which graffiti has been applied in violation of this section is required to remove such graffiti within seven calendar days of the application of such graffiti and if not removed, the town may take action to remove the graffiti and collect the costs of abatement pursuant to the abatement provisions of section 8.05.050 of the G.M.C. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who enters a plea of guilty or no contest, or is convicted of violating this section, will be ordered to pay a fine of at least the following amount, in addition to any restitution and abatement charges: 
First offense: $300.00 
Second offense within one year: $600.00 
Subsequent offenses within one year: $900.00 
(Ord. 2011-15) 
8.05.050 - Violations; investigation; notice; and abatement. 
(a)  Violations. Any person, persons, firm, association, or corporation in violation of any provision of this chapter, or any employee, assistant, agent, or other person participating or taking part in, joining or aiding in violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted to the municipal court. Each day, or any portion of a day, a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Investigation. 
(1)  Right of entry. The town manager or his designee may inspect property whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in or upon such property any condition which violates this chapter. The town manager or his designee shall request entry from the owner, occupant, lessee, or agent of the premises (the "responsible party") either in person or by leaving at the building or premises a written notice of intent to inspect not sooner than 24 hours after the time specified in the notice of intention to inspect. Any written notice shall state that the responsible party may refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by the Gypsum Municipal Court. 
(2)  Search warrants. In addition to, or in lieu of, the procedures described in section 8.05.050(b)(1), the town manager, code enforcement officer, or peace officer, may apply to the judge of the Gypsum Municipal Court by presentation of an affidavit showing probable cause to obtain a search warrant entitling an authorized representatives of the town to enter the property described in said warrant, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry, and to inspect and search for and/or seize property located upon the premises. The person applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises at issue in order to obtain a search warrant, but must show some factual or practical circumstances that would cause an ordinary prudent person to believe that there is a fair probability or substantial chance that evidence of a violation will be found. In determining whether probable cause exists for issuance of the search warrant, the municipal court judge shall consider the totality of the facts and circumstances known to the affiant, and due consideration shall be given to the affiant's experience and training in evaluating the existence or probable existence of a violation of this chapter, and may issue the warrant if there is a fair probability or substantial chance that evidence of a violation will be found in a particular place. It shall be unlawful for any responsible party to deny entry or to resist reasonable force used by any officer or town employee acting pursuant to a search warrant. 
(3)  Emergencies. Whenever an emergency situation exists, the town manager or his designee may immediately enter into any building or upon any premises within the town, using such reasonable force as may be necessary. An emergency situation shall include, but not be limited to, any situation of imminent danger or loss of, or injury or damage to, life, limb, property, or threat to public safety. It is unlawful for any responsible party to deny entry to the town manager, code enforcement officer, or peace officer, or to resist reasonable force used by such officer acting pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  Notice. 
(1)  The town may, but is not required, to provide an opportunity to correct a violation by providing a written notice of violation. For any violation which does not threaten imminent danger of damage or injury, the reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed seven days, unless it appears from the facts and circumstances that compliance could not reasonably be made within seven days, or that a good faith attempt at compliance is being made. 
(2)  If a written notice of a violation is given, it shall be served by: 
a.  Posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property upon which said nuisance exists; and 
b.  Mailing a copy of the notice, by first-class United States mail, to the last known address of the owner or other person exercising control over the property as reflected in the county real estate or tax assessment records. At the time of mailing of said notice, the town shall obtain a certificate of mailing from the U.S. Post Office. 
(d)  Abatement. 
(1)  Notice to abate. Upon the discovery of any violation of this chapter on public or private property, the town manager or his designees may notify the responsible party in writing, requiring the responsible party to remove and abate the violation(s) from the property. Service of a notice of violation pursuant to subsection 8.05.050(c) shall be considered service of a notice to abate. 
(2)  Abatement order. Anyone who neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and the town attorney may apply to the municipal court for an abatement order as follows: 
a.  The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit establishing to the satisfaction of the municipal court, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation exists on the subject property, and that the Town has complied with the notice requirements of section 8.05.050(d), and that the named responsible party has failed to abate the identified nuisance upon the property. 
b.  The Town shall give notice to the named responsible party of its application for the abatement order in the manner provided in subsection 8.05.050(c)(2). The notice shall include a copy of the town's application and its affidavit in support of its application, as well as the time, date and place at which the town will appear before the municipal court to request entry of the abatement order. 
c.  At the stated time, date and place, the municipal court judge shall hold a hearing to review the application for abatement order, the affidavit and any testimony or other evidence offered by the town in support of the application, as well as any testimony or other evidence presented by the named responsible party, if present. Thereafter, the municipal court is authorized to enter an order authorizing the town to enter upon such property, abate the nuisance and recover its costs as provided in section 8.05.050(d). 
d.  Upon the municipal court's issuance of an order authorizing the abatement of a nuisance, the code enforcement officer or other authorized representative of the town shall abate said nuisance or cause the same to be abated, employing such forces and persons as may be necessary to abate said nuisance, or cause the same to be abated, including the employees of the town, either by contract or otherwise. All other town officials and employees are authorized and directed to render such assistance to the town manager or other authorized representative of the town as may be required for the abatement of such nuisance. 
e.  Any officer or employee of the town who shall be authorized herein to abate any nuisance specified in this chapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and incur the necessary expenses thereof. The town or any of its representatives shall proceed in all abatement cases with due care and without any unnecessary destruction of property. 
(3)  Noxious weeds. 
a.  The town council hereby implements the Colorado Noxious Weed Act, Article 5.5, Title 35, C.R.S., by declaring certain undesirable plant species and noxious weeds to be a nuisance. "Noxious weed" shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 35-5.5-103, C.R.S. 
b.  Noxious weeds grow and spread rapidly and must be eradicated quickly in order to prevent them from spreading to adjacent and nearby properties. As such, the town employs a modified abatement procedure for noxious weeds. The town shall provide a notice to abate pursuant to section 8.05.050(d)(1) and if such violations have not been abated within seven days, the town may summarily abate the noxious weeds without seeking an abatement order from the municipal court. The town may collect its costs of abatement pursuant to section 8.05.050(d)(6), plus an additional charge of $150.00. Such fine shall be in lieu of the ten-percent charge for inspection and incidentals permitted pursuant to section 8.05.050(d)(5), herein. 
(4)  Abatement without notice or court order. 
a.  Public right-of-way and property. Any violation located or found in or upon any street, avenue, alley, public sidewalk, highway, public right-of-way, public grounds, park, recreation facility, or public property in the town may be abated pursuant to chapter 8.08 of the Town Code. 
b.  Emergency abatement. If, in the judgment of the town manager or his designee, a violation is a cause of imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, any such violation may be summarily abated by the town and the costs of abatement shall be charged and recovered as provided by section 8.05.050(d)(5). 
(5)  Costs of abatement. 
a.  The actual costs of abatement, plus ten percent of such abatement costs for inspection and incidental costs occurred in the abating the violation, shall be assessed upon the lot, lots or tracts of land upon which such violation is abated. Such costs shall be paid to the Town within 30 days after the town has mailed notice of the assessment by certified mail to the owner of the property; provided, however, that if town has knowledge that the property is occupied by someone other than the owner, the town shall mail such notice of assessment by certified mail to both the owner and occupant. Service shall be complete upon depositing the notice with the U.S. Postal Service, postage prepaid for certified mail. Every such assessment shall be a lien in the amounts assessed against such lot, lots, or tract of land until paid. 
b.  Failure to pay such assessment within such thirty-day period shall cause such assessment to become a lien against such lot, block or parcel of land and the lien shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments, and the same may be certified at any time after such failure to so pay by the Town to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes, along with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection. 
(e)  Effect of property conveyance. When title to a parcel is conveyed from one person to another, any separate violation existing prior to the time of the conveyance may be used to prove that a violation exists with respect to such parcel, if the reason for the conveyance was to avoid the parcel being declared a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a reason for the conveyance of the parcel was to avoid the parcel from being declared a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if: a) the parcel was conveyed for less than fair market value; b) the parcel was conveyed to an entity or entities controlled directly or indirectly by the person, entity, or entities conveying the parcel; or c) the parcel was conveyed to a relative of the person conveying the parcel. 
(f)  Civil action. The town, by the town manager or his or her designee, may bring a civil action in the municipal court to have a violation declared as such by the court and for an order enjoining the violation or authorizing its restraint, removal, termination or abatement by the responsible party. 
(g)  Other remedies. The remedies set forth herein are cumulative. The initiation of any action or the imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the town from instituting any other proceeding to require compliance with the provision of this chapter and with any administrative order and determinations made hereunder. No provision herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to bring a private action to abate a private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02,  2(Exh. A), 1-27-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-02,  1, adopted Jan. 27, 2015, repealed the former  8.05.050, and  2(Exh. A) of the same ordinance enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  8.05.050 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2011-16. 
8.05.080 - Post-storage hearings for owners of impounded vehicles. 
(a)  As to any vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter by or at the request of the town, its agents or employees, a person who has a legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle has a right to a post-seizure administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, if such person files a written demand, on forms so provided for such a hearing, with the town within ten days after such person has learned such vehicle has been impounded, or within ten days after the mailing, of the date set in the notice of stored vehicle, whichever occurs first. The notice of stored vehicle shall be sent in the mail to the legal and registered owner or their agent, and to the garage where the vehicle is stored, within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after impounding and storage of the vehicle. 
(b)  (1)  A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the town manager within 48 hours of receipt of a written demand therefore from the person seeking the hearing, unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays and town holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the 48-hour period. The hearing officer shall be someone other than the person who directed the impounding and storage of the vehicle. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. 
(2)  "Probable cause to impound" means such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of local, state or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
(3)  The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The town shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle (if not the person requesting the hearing). The hearing officer's decision in no way affects any criminal proceeding in connection with the impound in question, and any criminal charges involved in such proceeding may only be challenged in the appropriate court. The decision of the hearing officer is final. Failure of the registered or legal owner, or their agent, to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall only determine that as to the vehicle in issue either (1) there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, or (2) there was no such probable cause. In the event that the hearing officer determines that there was no probable cause, the hearing officer shall prepare and date a certificate of no probable cause, copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and the town. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the garage having custody of the vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the town in accordance with arrangements made between the town and the garage. If the possessor fails to present the certificate to the garage having custody of the vehicle within 24 hours of its receipt, excluding the days when the garage is not open for business, the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificate shall advise the possessor of such requirement. 
(Ord. 3, 1986: Ord. 3 8, 1985) 
8.05.090 - Right to farm and ranch. 
(a)  Ranching, farming, and all manner of agricultural activities and operations within and adjacent to the Town of Gypsum are not, and shall not become private or public nuisances because of any changed conditions in or about the locality of such operation after it has been in operation for more than one year, provided it was not a nuisance when begun. 
(b)  The protections of subsection (a) shall not apply in the case of operations otherwise not in conformance with the law or conducted in a negligent manner, or when a change in operation would result in a private or public nuisance, or when a substantial increase in the size of operations occurs. 
(Ord 11, 2, 1998) 
8.05.091 - Mediation panel. 
    Mediation panel shall be appointed for the purpose of hearing grievances regarding agricultural conflicts between landowners or residents within and adjacent to the town, and making recommendations for the resolution of such conflicts. The panel shall be made up of three residents of the town or areas adjacent to the town, appointed by the town council. Each member shall serve a term of two years, except that one member of the initial panel shall be appointed for a one year term only so as to stagger the terms of the panel. Priority in appointment shall be given to individuals with mediation, arbitration, and other dispute resolution skills, however, experience in ranching or farming shall be mandatory for at least one member of the panel. Members of the panel shall receive no compensation, but may receive reasonable expenses incurred in the carrying out of their duties, and the town shall make reasonable staff time and other in kind resources available to the panel, as needed. (Ord 11, 2, 1998) 
8.05.092 - Procedure and rules. 
    The initial mediation panel shall draft and recommend rules or procedures for the hearing of grievances by the panel. Such rules or procedures shall be presented to the town council for its approval and adoption. Any amendments to such rules and procedures shall be made in the same manner. The rules or procedures recommended by the panel and adopted by the town council shall conform in the minimum to the following: 
(1)  Hearing of grievances shall be informal and appearances before the panel shall be by the parties themselves without representation by an attorney; a party may be represented by counsel to receive general advice on how to proceed or whether to accept a resolution recommended by the panel, but such counsel may not make an appearance, in person, in writing, or otherwise, before the panel; and 
(2)  Hearing of grievances and acceptance of any recommendation of the panel shall be voluntary; the procedure is not mandatory and the results are not binding on either party, unless the parties by mutual written agreement agree that they shall be bound by the decision of the mediation panel. 
(Ord. 11, 2, 1998) 
Chapter 8.06 - EMERGENCY RESPONSE AUTHORITIES 

8.06.010 - Emergency response authority. 
    In accordance with Section 29-22-102(3)(a), the emergency response authority for hazardous substance incidents occurring within the corporate limits of the Town of Gypsum shall be the Gypsum Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. 2 I, 1987) 
8.06.020 - Mutual aid agreement. 
    The mutual aid agreement between the municipalities located within the County of Eagle, the Sheriff of Eagle County, the Colorado State Highway Patrol and the Eagle County Environmental Health Department attached as Exhibit A is hereby approved and the mayor is hereby authorized and directed to sign the mutual aid agreement for the Town of Gypsum. 
(Ord. 2 2, 1987) 
Chapter 8.07 - CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

8.07.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Tobacco products means cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. 
(Ord. 4  I, 1998) 
8.07.020 - Furnishing to, purchase by, and possession by minors of cigarettes and tobacco products. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly furnish to any person who is under 18 years of age, by gift, sale, or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(b)  No person who is under 18 years of age shall purchase, or obtain by any means, any cigarettes or tobacco products. (Ord. 4 SI, 1998) 
(c)  No person who is under 18 years of age shall possess or have within their control or person, or shall consume by any means, any cigarettes or tobacco products in a public place, public facility, public accommodation, or motor vehicle at any of the above locations or public right-of-way. (Ord. 12, I, 1998) 
(d)  It shall not be a violation of this section for a person under the age of 18 years to: 
(1)  Sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products in the course of his or her employment. (Ord. 4 I, 1998) 
8.07.030 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter 8.07 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. (Ord. 12, 2, 1998) 
(b)  The penalty may, in the discretion of the municipal court judge, be deferred upon successful completion of useful community service and/or attendance at a program designed to assist participants in stopping their personal use of tobacco products. (Ord. 12, 2, 1998) 
(c)  This chapter may be enforced by the town manager, town code enforcement officer, and every officer of the Gypsum Police Department and Eagle County Sheriff's Department ("town enforcement officers"). Town enforcement officers may issue a summons and complaint to appear in the Gypsum Municipal Court for violations of this chapter, or, a penalty assessment notice consistent with a penalty assessment schedule adopted by the municipal judge consistent with the Colorado Rules of Municipal Procedure Rule 210(b) (4) and Part 17 of the Model Traffic Code. (Ord. 12, 2, 1998) 
Chapter 8.08 - MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AREAS 

8.08.010 - Planting and maintenance of public right-of-way areas. 
(a)  Plantings made adjacent too or on public right-of-way area are a privilege allowed by the town to owners of the abutting property, with the provision that the property owner, any resident(s)of the property, and subsequent owner(s) will be responsible for acceptable maintenance and removal of such growth in accordance with municipal ordinance and regulation. 
(b)  Effective June 1, 2013, all new conifer trees shall be located a minimum of ten feet away from onsite and adjacent driveways, roadways, sidewalks, and pedestrian trails to avoid overgrowth of vegetation and to improve visibility and reduce damage to public infrastructure. Measurement shall be from the center of the tree to the edge of the driveway, road, sidewalk or trail. 
(c)  Trees, or other plant growth when permitted to grow upon or adjacent to public streets or public right-of-way, shall be kept and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger, interfere, or otherwise conflict with requirements of safe public use thereon or conflict with the safety of vehicles or pedestrians from entering onto the public right-of-way from private driveways. 
(d)  Any time that such plants or trees established under this privilege interfere with or jeopardize necessary public passage on public right-of-way, or obstruct any improvements made thereon for public benefit or vehicular or pedestrian lines of sight, the town may order the owner and/or resident of abutting property enjoying such privilege to modify or eliminate such growth. 
(e)  The town reserves the right at all times to undertake trimming, removing or otherwise treating any such trees or plant growth, as the town may deem necessary for the public interest. 
(f)  Property owners shall also be responsible for any public infrastructure caused by vegetation growth (Ord. 2013-08) 
8.08.020 - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  A town official, or authorized agent thereof, is authorized and directed to give notice to any owner, owner's agent, occupant, or lessee whose property or adjacent public right-of-way is being kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such notice may be personally served upon such person or, if not personally, may be posted upon the property or deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the owner's agent, occupant, lessee or owner of record at the address on the assessment roll of the county assessor or at such other, more recent address as may be available to the town, or with respect to occupants, at the address of the property so occupied. If service of mailing of the notice is to any party other than the owner, or if the property is posted, a copy of the notice shall be mailed via United States mail to the owner of record. 
(b)  The notice shall state that, if the offending trees, shrubs, or bushes are not cut or eradicated (as applicable), and/or removed from such property, on or before seven days from the date of such notice, the removal may be done by the town and all cost of abatement, including the cost of inspection, the cost of any grading or sloping necessary to protect the public safety and all other incidental cost in connection therewith, including administrative cost, will be charged against the property of the responsible party in addition to any other penalty and costs or orders that may be imposed. 
(c)  If the property has not been brought into compliance with this article with in seven days from the date of the notice, the abatement may be done by the town, either by town personnel, or by private contractors. In the event of such abatement by the town, the cost, including inspection, removal of obstructions, if any, the cost of grading or sloping necessary to protect the public safety, and all other incidental costs in connection therewith, including administrative costs shall be assessed against the property of the responsible party. 
(Ord. 2011-12) 
8.08.030 - Recover of expenses-Lien. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incurred by the town in abatement shall be paid by the property owner to the town in full within thirty (30) days after mailing by the property owner, by certified mail, a notice of and the assessment of such cost. Such notice shall include a statement of the work performed to abate the nuisance, the date of performance and the cost and expenses. 
(b)  Failure to pay the assessment within 30 days shall cause the assessment to become a lien with penalty and interest upon the real property that was subject to the abatement by the town. The penalty and interest shall be assessed at a rate equivalent to that which is assessed by the state law upon delinquent general property taxes. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and shall, upon the town's certification and filing with Eagle County, be collected and paid to the town by the county treasurer in the same manner as delinquent general property taxes. 
(Ord. 2011-12) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
  
Chapter 9.03 - NOISE CONTROL 

9.03.010 - Purpose. 
    The town council finds and determines that the making and creating of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the town that are prolonged, unusual or unreasonable in their time, place and use are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the residents of the town and may cause damage to property or businesses. The town council finds and determines that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this chapter are necessary for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Ord. 2009-11) 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
9.03.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this section, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Construction activities means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereof, including land clearing, grading, excavation and filling. 
    Continuous noise means steady or fluctuating noise that exists essentially without interruption during the period of observation. For the purposes of this chapter, that period shall be 30 minutes. 
    Device means any mechanism that is intended to, or that actually produces, audible sound when operated or handled. 
    Dynamic braking device means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
    Emergency work or emergency vehicle means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following an emergency incident or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. An emergency vehicle is a vehicle used in response to an emergency incident or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, racing vehicles, and other devices propelled by mechanical power. 
    Muffler means any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers, or acoustical absorbing material whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids or gases while causing a reduction in sound emission at one end. 
    Noise disturbance means any excessive or unusually loud sound, or any sound which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, endangers the safety, welfare, or health of any person, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitives, or causes damage to any property or business. 
    Noise level violation means any sound which is plainly audible from a certain distance in accordance with section 9.03.030 herein. 
    Person means any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or employees. 
    Plainly audible means any sound produced by a live performance, radio, phonograph, television, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker or any other mechanical or electronic sound making or sound amplifying device, or instrument, that can be clearly heard by a person using his or her normal hearing faculties. 
    Planning commission means the planning and zoning commission established pursuant to section 18.16.005 of this Code. 
    Property boundary means an imaginary line at the ground surface that separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, and its vertical extension. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, premises, or public place owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
    Sound amplification system means any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, loud speakers, sound amplifier or other similar machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
9.03.030 - Noise violation. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful except when (i) excepted from compliance in accordance with section 9.03.040 herein; or (ii) made under and in compliance with a noise permit issued pursuant to section 9.03.050 or a special events permit issued in accordance with chapter 18.18 of the Gypsum Municipal Code, for any person to make, create, continue, or cause to be made or continued a noise disturbance that is plainly audible under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Emitted from a noise source located within the public right-of way that is plainly audible at least 50 feet away from the noise source; 
(2)  Emitted from a noise source located on private property, or property other than public right-of-way, that is plainly audible at least 25 feet from the property line of the property on which the noise source is located; 
(3)  Emitted from a noise source located within an apartment, condominium, town house or duplex that is plainly audible through a party wall, ceiling or floor; 
(4)  Emitted from a sound amplification system in a motor vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle, that is plainly audible (i) within other motor vehicles on the road with the windows closed; or (ii) within 25 feet of the noise source; or 
(5)  Emitted from a motor vehicle without an adequate muffler in good working order that is plainly audible (i) from within other motor vehicles on the road with the windows closed; or (ii) within 25 feet of the noise source. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
9.03.040 - Exceptions. 
    The following activities are excepted from compliance with section 9.03.030 herein: 
(1)  Construction activities conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  Emergency work of public service utilities. 
(3)  The performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health, or welfare of the community or individuals of the community or to restore property to a safe condition following an emergency incident. 
(4)  The performance of activities by the town, including contractors employed by the town. 
(5)  The operation of aircraft and helicopters. 
(6)  The operation of snowplows or street sweepers on public roads and streets. 
(7)  Organized school athletic events (including both games and practices) and performances of school bands; and other organized outdoor school events. 
(8)  Activities authorized at specific dates and times by a special events permit issued in accordance with chapter 18.18 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(9)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle as a warning signal to imminent danger. 
(10)  The engagement of a dynamic braking device to avoid imminent danger. 
(11)  The operation of any electronically operated signal from any church, governmental entity, or school bell or chime for five minutes or less, or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(12)  The loading of any garbage, trash or compactor truck, or the loading or unloading of any boxes, crates, equipment, or other objects, within a residential area between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(13)  The discharge of firearms in response to immediate danger or in a shooting range. 
(14)  Noises associated with activities authorized at specific dates and times by a noise permit issued in accordance section 9.03.050. 
(15)  Noise from domestic power tools and lawn and garden equipment operated between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(16)  Noise generated from golf course maintenance equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
9.03.050 - Noise permits. 
(a)  Any person subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter may make an application to the senior planner or his or her duly authorized representative for a noise permit for relief from the provisions of section 9.03.030, except that organizers of events occurring on or in town parks, recreational properties, or other properties and facilities owned or operated by the town that will create a noise disturbance shall apply for a special event permit in accordance with chapter 18.18 of the Gypsum Municipal Code and comply with any conditions of such special events permit. 
(b)  Within ten business days of receiving an application for a noise permit, the senior planner or his or her duly authorized representative shall approve, deny, or request additional information required to evaluate an application for a noise permit 
(c)  Noise permits will be valid for the locations and times stated in the permit, and may contain any limitations and conditions determined necessary by the senior planner or authorized representative to limit or mitigate any impacts of the noise or surrounding properties, the neighborhood, or those who may come into contact with the noise. 
(d)  Noise permits that are not date-specific or which do not include a specific time period shall expire on December 31 of each year. Any request for a renewal of a noise permit shall require the disclosure of such information required by section 9.03.050(e) and any information concerning the conduct under the preceding noise permit period as is reasonably necessary for determining the applicant's eligibility for a renewal permit. 
(e)  In determining whether to grant a noise permit pursuant to this section, the senior planner or his or her duly authorized representative shall balance the interests of the applicant and those who are likely to be affected by the noise if a noise permit were granted, and may proscribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. In considering an application for a noise permit the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  The time of day that the noise is created; 
(2)  The duration of the noise; 
(3)  The loudness of the noise relative to the required limits; 
(4)  Whether the noise is continuous or interrupted; 
(5)  Whether the noise is monotonous or irregular in occurrence; 
(6)  The extensiveness of the noise; 
(7)  The technical and economic feasibility of bringing such noise source into conformance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(8)  Whether prohibiting the noise would cause undue hardship to the applicant or the public; and 
(9)  The use, zoning and character of the property, the surrounding properties and the neighborhood. 
(f)  Suspension of permits. The senior planner or town manager, and their designees shall have authority to suspend a noise permit issued pursuant to this section 9.03.050 for violations of the terms of this chapter or the terms or conditions of the permit for up to 60 days. At the end of the suspension period, the noise permit will either be reinstated upon a finding that the permit conditions have been met and any violations of this chapter have been corrected, or revoked upon a finding that the permit conditions have not been met and/or all violations of this chapter have not been corrected, as determined by the senior planner or town manager or their designees. 
(g)  Appeals to planning commission. Applicants and permit holders may appeal to the planning commission any decision under this chapter to suspend or revoke a noise permit, or to deny an application for a noise permit. Such appeal must be in writing, submitted to the town clerk within seven days of the decision, and must state the reasons why such noise permit should not be suspended, revoked, or the application denied. Within 45 days of the submittal of the appeal, the planning commission will hold an administrative hearing to determine whether to uphold or overturn the decision. The town clerk will provide the applicant or permit holder with notice of the time and place of such hearing. After hearing evidence from the applicant or permit holder and the senior planner, town manager or designee, the planning commission may issue a verbal decision and may thereafter issue written findings which shall be final and conclusive. The planning commission may promulgate additional rules and regulations or procedures to govern any such hearing and/or review. 
(h)  Appeals to municipal court. The decision of the planning commission shall be subject to review by the municipal court by filing a complaint that includes the specific allegations of error no more than 14 days after the final decision by the planning commission. The municipal court's review shall be limited to a determination of whether the planning commission exceeded his or her jurisdiction or abused his or her discretion, based on the evidence in the record before the planning commission. Any appeal of the decision of the municipal court shall be brought in district court as a civil matter pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
9.03.060 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The senior planner, town manager, code enforcement officer, peace officers and their designees are authorized to initiate and take all reasonable actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including: 
(1)  To make inspections of all noise sources and to take any measurements and tests whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise. If any person refuses or restricts entry and free access to any part of a premises, or refuses inspection, testing, or sound level measurement of any activity, device, facility, motor vehicle, or process where inspection is sought, the enforcing town official may seek a warrant from the Gypsum Municipal Court for inspection requiring that such person permit entry and free access without interference, restriction or obstruction, at a reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection, testing, or measuring sound levels. 
(2)  To issue a summons and complaint to appear or pay a fine in the Gypsum Municipal Court. This shall include the authority for any peace officer to initiate a traffic stop of any motor vehicle making, creating, or permitting a noise level violation, and to issue a summons and complaint to appear or pay a fine in the Gypsum Municipal Court. 
(b)  Municipal court. The Gypsum Municipal Court shall have all powers and jurisdiction granted to the Municipal Court pursuant to chapter 2.01 of this Code to enforce violations of this chapter, including the power to levy fines and penalties and to order and enforce compliance through injunction, restraining and contempt orders, and to suspend or revoke any noise permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 3-14-17) 
Chapter 9.04 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

9.04.010 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment which conducts as a principal use of the premises or as a significant or substantial adjunct to another use of the premises, the sale, rental, display or other offering of live entertainment, dancing, or material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on depicting, exhibiting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and including, but not limited to: 
    Adult bookstore means any establishment which sells or rents adult materials including, but not limited to: books, magazines, newspapers, movie films, slides or other photographic or written material, or any visual representation, video tapes and/or devices. 
    Adult cabaret, restaurant or place of business means a cabaret, restaurant or place of business which features topless and/or bottomless waitresses, waiters, dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
    Adult hotel or motel means any hotel or motel in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means any fully enclosed theater with a capacity of less than 50 persons in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any establishment in which the primary or principal attraction is the presentation of adult material by image-producing devices, typically limited to viewing by five or fewer persons per device. 
    Adult motion picture theater means any fully enclosed theatre with a capacity of 50 or more persons in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
    Adult novelty store means any establishment which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade sells or rents adult materials including, but not limited to: apparel, bakery products, novelties, gifts, or any visual representation, and/or devices. 
    Adult material means any material including, but not limited to: books, magazines, newspapers, movie films, slide or other photographic or written material, video tapes and/or devices, or any visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals and pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; and 
c.  The human female breast or breasts to a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(3)  Touching, caressing or fondling of the human breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
9.04.020 - License required-Existing establishments. 
    No adult entertainment establishment, as defined herein, shall be permitted within the town except as herein provided. Not later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all adult entertainment establishments lawfully operating within the town on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply for an adult entertainment license, and all managers of such establishments shall apply for a managers license. Thereafter, the town manager or the manager's designee shall have 45 days to approve or deny the license, during which period of time operation is permitted. No adult entertainment establishment in operation on or before the effective date hereof shall change its business location, cause expansion of its operation, or modify any other activity regulated by this chapter without first complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Applicants for a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment and all managers of such an establishment shall submit a written application to the town manager on forms which shall be prepared and furnished by the town clerk and shall contain the information required for new applicants and managers: 
9.04.030 - Adult entertainment establishment license-Required. 
(a)  Any person or persons, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other entity which desires to operate an adult entertainment establishment, including managers of such establishments, shall prior to such operation, obtain a license from the town. Applicants for said license shall submit a written application to the town manager or the manager's designee on forms which shall be prepared and furnished by the town clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
a.  If a partnership, the name and address of each partner; 
b.  If a corporation, association or other organization, the names and addresses of the president, vice-president, secretary, managing officer and each director and shareholder. 
(2)  The trade name of the applicant. 
(3)  The business telephone number of the applicant. 
(4)  The address of the place to be licensed. 
(5)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises. If leased, a copy of the lease must accompany the application. 
(6)  The age and date of birth of the applicant; of any partners; or of any and all officers, stockholders or directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, any partner(s) or any of the officers, stockholders or directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, has ever been convicted of any crime and if so, a complete description of said crime, including the date, jurisdiction and any disposition, including a description of any sentence or fine imposed, and if the individual is under continuing supervision. 
(8)  Whether the applicant, partners or any officer, director stockholder of the applicant, if the application is a corporation, has: 
a.  Ever been denied a license for an adult entertainment establishment license, liquor license or other form of business license in any other jurisdiction in the state or elsewhere and if so, a description as to the grounds of said action, the date and the jurisdiction; 
b.  Ever had a license for an adult entertainment establishment, liquor license or other form of business license suspended or revoked and if so, a description as to the grounds of said action, the date and the jurisdiction. 
(9)  Whether the applicant, any partners of a partnership or any officers, directors or shareholder of a corporation or any of their respective family members have any financial interest in any other adult entertainment establishment and if so, the name and address of said establishment. 
(10)  Whether or not any person, firm or corporation has a financial interest in the license requested and any necessary explanation thereof. 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation: 
a.  Whether or not said corporation is organized under the laws of the state, and if not, where the corporation is so organized; 
b.  The principal place of business of the corporation; and 
c.  The date of filing of the last annual corporate report with the Secretary of State. 
(b)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant (or to individuals, shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted, or otherwise. 
(c)  Business and employment records of the applicant for the past five years. 
(d)  The complete plans and specifications of the interior of the building to be occupied if the building is in existence at the time, together with a plot plan showing the size and physical layout of the building, space available for off-street parking and access ways. If the building is not in existence, the applicant shall submit an architect's drawing of the building to be constructed in addition to the plans and specifications of the interior. All floor plan diagrams shall be a maximum size of eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. 
(e)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath as being true and correct by: 
(f)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(g)  If a partnership, the managing or general partner; 
(h)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; and 
(i)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(j)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee of $1,000.00 which shall be in addition to any other license fees assessed under this Code. If the costs of reviewing and investigating the application exceed such fee, no license shall issue until the applicant pays the extra costs. 
9.04.040 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any person until the annual fee therefore has been paid; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of those officers, directors or stockholders holding over ten percent of the outstanding issued capital stock thereof are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership, association or company, any of those officers, or any of those members holding more than ten percent interest herein, are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by, any person who is not of good moral character; 
(b)  In making a determination as to character or when considering the conviction of a crime, only those offenses involving dishonesty, character or moral turpitude shall be justification for disqualification for a license under this section. 
9.04.050 - Location of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained within 2,640 feet of any residentially zoned or used property, measured from the closest property line of such residential property to the property line of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained within 2,640 feet of any school, day care center, or church property, measured from the closest property line of such school, day care center, or church property to the property line of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained except as a special review use and after compliance with chapter 18.46 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
9.04.060 - Investigation and issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the town manager or the manager's designee shall perform a background investigation of the applicant and the information contained in the application. The town manager is authorized to investigate any fact that may be relevant or is believed to be relevant to determine the eligibility of the applicant for a license. The town manager is authorized to seek assistance of law enforcement agencies or such other assistance as the town manager believes necessary. 
(b)  The town manager or the manager's designee shall provide a notice of the results of the investigation to the applicant no later than 60 days after receipt by the town of a completed application. At any time, the town manager may supplement the investigation report with additional or newly found information. The town manager shall refuse to issue any license as set forth herein for failure of the applicant to submit a complete application. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of the results of the investigation by the town manager, the town council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of section 9.04.160 of this Code. The town council shall render its decision within 30 days after completion of the hearing. The town council shall either approve the application and order the town manager to issue the license upon satisfaction of any conditions or deny the application within 120 days of the date the application was submitted. A copy of the decision of the town council shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail at the address shown on the application. The decision of the town council shall be considered the final decision of the town. 
(d)  No license shall be issued by the town manager after approval of an application until the building in which the business is to be conducted is ready for occupancy within such furniture, fixtures and equipment in places necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter and only after inspection of the premises has been made by the town building official and applicable fire marshal to determine that the applicant has complied with the architect's drawing, plot plan and sketch for the interior of the building submitted with the application, and applicable building and fire codes. 
(e)  As used in this chapter, the term "town manager" shall include any town official or employee to whom the town manager shall have delegated the duties and responsibilities of the town manager as set forth in this chapter. 
9.04.070 - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time other than the following: 
(1)  On any Monday through Saturday, beginning each day at 4:00 p.m. and until 12:00 midnight; 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business on any Sunday or on any legal holiday observed by the State of Colorado. 
9.04.080 - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  No person under 21 years of age shall be employed by or work on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
9.04.090 - Inspections. 
    Each adult entertainment establishment shall be subject to inspection by law enforcement officers, the town building official, the town code enforcement officer, and the applicable fire marshal to ensure compliance with state laws, this Code, and conditions of the adult entertainment establishment license during normal business hours and at all other times when a person is on the premises of the establishment. 
9.04.100 - Display of license. 
    All licensees licensed under this chapter shall display their licenses in conspicuous place on their licensed premises in a clear, transparent cover or frame. The license shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. No person shall mutilate, cover, obstruct or remove a license so displayed. 
9.04.110 - Renewals. 
(a)  All adult entertainment licenses and manager licenses shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of original issue. Applications to renew each such license shall be submitted to the town manager or designee at least 45 days prior to its expiration date for a determination of whether or not said license shall be renewed for an additional one-year period. Applications for renewal shall provide the same information as that required of an original application, except as waived by the town manager as being redundant. Should an application for renewal not be so made, the holder of the license shall be deemed to have waived renewal of the license. 
(b)  All licenses not submitted for renewal 45 days prior to the anniversary date of the license shall be revoked by the town manager. The town manager may allow the delinquent licensee to renew after the said anniversary date for good and sufficient cause shown; however, a penalty of 100 percent of the license fee shall be imposed and collected prior to renewal of the license. 
(c)  The following fees shall be assessed for renewal of an adult entertainment license and manager license: 
(1)  For the renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license, $500.00; 
(2)  For the renewal of an adult entertainment manager license, $500.00. 
(d)  The fees for license renewal shall be paid upon submitting the application for renewal. If the costs of reviewing and investigating the renewal application exceed the fee, the license shall not issue until the applicant pays the excess cost. 
9.04.120 - Records and reports-Authority to promulgate rules. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such report as may be required by the town manager to implement this chapter and carry out its purpose. 
(b)  The town council is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
9.04.130 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Basis for suspension or revocation. The town manager shall suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter when the town manager determines upon sufficient cause that: 
(1)  The licensee, his or its agents, officers, servants or employees, maintain or continue to maintain a nuisance on the licensed premises. 
(2)  The licensed premises are unsanitary as certified by the Eagle County Health Department. 
(3)  The licensed premises are unsafe as certified by law enforcement officers, the town building official, the town code enforcement officer, or the applicable fire marshal. 
(4)  Any violation of the ordinances of the town, the laws of the State of Colorado or the United States of America has occurred on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Process. Before the town manager shall suspend or revoke a license, the town manager shall furnish the licensee with a written statement, by certified mail or by personal service, of the cause for proposed suspension or revocation of the license. 
(1)  The licensee shall have 20 days from the date of mailing or personal service in which to request in writing a stay of the order and hearing on the matter before the town council. 
(2)  If a hearing is requested, the licensee shall be entitled to produce witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The town manager shall present evidence to the town council and shall also be entitled to produce witnesses and cross-examine witnesses. 
(3)  The establishment shall be entitled to remain open if it requests a stay of the order and hearing during the pendency of the hearing. 
(4)  The town council shall render its decision at the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the town council shall be considered the final decision of the town. 
(c)  Emergency suspension. Where a town manager has reason to believe that a violation of the public health, safety and welfare require immediate action on the part of the town manager, the town manager may summarily suspend the license of an adult entertainment establishment or an adult entertainment employee, and said notice of suspension shall contain notice that the adult entertainment establishment or adult entertainment employee may request a hearing to contest the suspension. Should the adult entertainment establishment or the adult entertainment employee, within ten (10) days after service of the suspension notice, request a hearing on the suspension, the town manager shall set a hearing date as soon as practicable. No suspension shall exceed 30 days unless prior to expiration of the 30-day suspension a revocation proceeding is commenced. 
(d)  Duties delegated. As used in this section, the term "town manager" shall include any town official or employee to whom the town manager shall have delegated the duties and responsibilities of the town manager as set forth in this section. 
9.04.140 - Transfer of license-Change of name. 
(a)  No license granted by this chapter shall be transferred. 
(b)  As used in this section, "transfers" shall include any assignment of any interest in the license to any person not identified on the application for the license. In the case of a corporate licensee, a transfer of license includes a transfer of more than five percent of the outstanding shares of a corporation. 
9.04.150 - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or to permit to be operated, an adult entertainment establishment in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Each day of operation in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment establishment which engages in repeated or continuing violations of these regulations shall constitute a public nuisance. For purposes of these regulations "repeated violations" shall mean two or more violation of any provision within a one year period dating from the time of any violation, and a "continuing violation" shall mean a violation of any provision lasting for three or more consecutive days. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of, this chapter. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Gypsum Municipal Court, and shall be punished by a maximum fine as set forth in section 2.01.090(6) of the G.M.C., or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 180 days or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, no person under the age of 18 years shall be punished by imprisonment. (Ord. 2014-02) 
(e)  The penalties provided by this section shall be in addition to any license suspension or revocation proceedings, or any other penalties provided under the Gypsum Municipal Code, or any state or federal law. 
9.04.160 - Public hearing-Town council. 
(a)  The purpose of a public hearing shall be to receive evidence from the applicant and other interested persons concerning the eligibility of the applicant for a license, the applicant's compliance with all applicable laws or the basis for suspension or revocation of an existing license. 
(b)  Before entering any decision approving or denying an application, the town council shall consider the facts adduced as a result of the town manager's investigation as well as any other facts presented at the hearing; the reasonable requirements of the town for the license; the desires of the inhabitants; the number of other such licenses located in or near the location proposed and under consideration; and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualification of the applicant for the conduct of an adult entertainment establishment. The town council shall refuse to issue any license as set forth herein for failure of the applicant to meet licensing requirements. 
(c)  At the public hearing, the town manager and other interested persons may submit evidence concerning the eligibility of the applicant for a license and the applicant's compliance with all applicable laws. The town council may in its discretion further restrict the right of a party in interest to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses, for the purpose of preventing repetitive or cumulative evidence or examination. In making its decision to approve or deny the application, the town council shall consider those factors set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The town council shall render its decision within 30 days after completion of the hearing. The decision of the town council shall be considered the final decision of the town. 
Chapter 9.05 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

9.05.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The Town of Gypsum is committed to the protection of children from each other and from other persons on the street during nighttime hours, the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors, the reduction of juvenile criminal activity, and the enforcement of parental control of and responsibility for their children. Establishment and enforcement of a curfew for minors will benefit the town's residents and further advance these interests. (Ord. 2009-21) 
9.05.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loiter or loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location, to be dilatory, to tarry or dawdle, and shall include but not be limited to standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering, prowling, wandering, or playing. The term shall also include such activity by the driver or passenger of a motor vehicle which is parked, standing, or being driven upon any street, ally, or parking lot within the town. 
    Minor shall mean any child under the age of 18 years of age. 
    Parent shall mean a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult over the age of 18 having legal care or custody of any minor. 
    Public place shall mean any street, highway, road, alley or other public ground, public place, public building, vacant lot, or other unsupervised place within the municipal boundaries of the town. 
9.05.030 - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to loiter upon any public place after 11:00 p.m. or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense if, at the time of the violation, the juvenile was: 
(1)  Accompanied by a parent; or 
(2)  Legally emancipated or married; or 
(3)  Engaged in an activity necessary to lawful employment, or traveling directly to or from the minor's home for a lawful employment purpose; or 
(4)  Traveling directly to or from the minor's home for a school activity purpose, when such activity is authorized by school officials, and when the juvenile had the consent to attend such activity from a parent; or 
(5)  Engaged in an activity necessary to assist in an emergency involving a person's illness, injury, or death; or 
(6)  Traveling directly to or from the minor's home for a religious activity purpose, when the minor had the consent to attend such activity from a parent; or 
(7)  Traveling in a motor vehicle throughout the town while engage in lawful intrastate or interstate travel, with the consent of a parent; or 
(8)  Prevented from complying with this chapter by circumstances beyond the control of such minor. 
9.05.040 - Responsibility of parents or guardians. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a parent to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly allow or permit any such child to loiter in or upon a public place in violation of the provisions of section 9.05.03 of this chapter. 
(b)  The minor's presence upon the public place contrary to the provisions of section 9.05.03 of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the parent is guilty of violating this section. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the obligation created by this section if the parent demonstrates to the court that at the time of the offense, either: 
(1)  The parent did not have lawful custody or care of the minor; 
(2)  The minor was not residing with the parent; or 
(3)  Any of the exceptions in section 9.05.03(b) apply. 
9.05.050 - Aiding or abetting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any minor to, or aid, abet, or encourage in; or approves, encourages, allows, permits, tolerates or consents to the violation by any minor of any provisions of section 9.05.03 of this chapter. 
9.05.060 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the requirements of this curfew for minors ordinance may be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than the maximum fine established by section 2.01.090(6) of the G.M.C., per violation. Separate violations will be deemed to occur if, following issuance of a citation or summons and complaint for a violation, the violator fails to immediately take action to cease the violation and ceases the violation within 30 minutes of issuance of the citation or summons and complaint. 
(Ord. 2014-02) 
Chapter 9.06 - FALSE COMPLAINTS 

9.06.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter may be known as the "false complaint ordinance." 
(Ord. 2011-06) 
9.06.020 - False complaints prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to file or make a complaint concerning an alleged violation of the Gypsum Municipal Code by another, which the complainant knows contains false information. 
(b)  A false complaint shall be presumed to be knowingly made, which presumption shall be rebuttable, when any of the following occur: 
(1)  Two complaints by the same complainant within the same year result in "not guilty" verdicts and/or dismissal of the charges by the Gypsum Municipal Court. 
(2)  The complainant signs a statement alleging the facts resulting in the complaint and fails to appear in court when subpoenaed. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to misrepresent his or her identification when making a complaint concerning an alleged violation of the Gypsum Municipal Code by another. 
Chapter 9.07 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

9.07.010 - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
    A person commits the municipal offense of disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture, or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture, or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(2)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he has no right to occupy; or 
(3)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill. 
(Ord. 2013-10) 
Chapter 9.08 - THEFT 

9.08.010 - Petty theft. 
(a)  A person commits the municipal offense of petty theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything belonging to another with a value of less than $100.00, either without authorization, or by threat or deception, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefits; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a thing of value belongs to "another" if anyone other than the defendant has possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the value of an object shall be its pre-tax retail value. 
9.08.020 - Shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the municipal offense of shoplifting when he or she: 
(1)  Departs or attempts to depart a shop, store, business or any premises with any article offered for sale with a value of less than $100.00 without rendering payment for the article by cash, check, credit card or other acceptable means; 
(2)  Conceals on or about his or her person any article with a value of less than $100.00 offered for sale in a shop, store, business or other premises, whether on or off the said premises. Said concealment shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit shoplifting; 
(3)  Alters or exchanges pricing labels on any article with a value of less than $100.00 offered for sale in a shop, store, business or other premises; or 
(4)  Departs, attempts to depart without tendering payment, or refuses to tender payment by cash, check, credit card, or other acceptable means of payment for food or beverage with a value of less than $100.00 ordered from a food or beverage serving establishment and a significant portion of the food or beverage is consumed or taken from the premises, or for less than $100.00 in fuel to operate a motor vehicle. 
(b)  It shall not be an affirmative defense that the actor attempted or offered to tender payment for said food, beverage, or fuel by a means in which the establishment is not capable of accepting and the establishment had a written notice posted in a conspicuous place advising customers that certain forms of payment are not acceptable. 
(c)  Acceptance of a check (bank draft) is at the discretion of the establishment but non-acceptance of a check shall be posted pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, to give warning and notice to a customer or potential customer that checks are not accepted. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the value of an article shall be its pre-tax retail value. 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
  
Chapter 10.01 - MODEL TRAFFIC CODE 

10.01.010 - Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities adopted-Purpose. 
    Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 8.7 of the Gypsum Home Rule Charter and Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado ("MTC") promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP700., Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the town. The purpose of this chapter and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three copies of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado adopted herein are now filed in the office of the clerk of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 2011-08) 
10.01.020 - [Amendments to traffic code.] 
    The adopted MTC is amended and/or modified as follows: 
(1)  Section 236(9): Section 236(9) of the MTC is repealed and readopted to read as follows: 
On roads other than state highways within the jurisdiction of the Town of Gypsum, a driver of a motor vehicle may be cited for a violation of subparagraph (I) of paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of this section where the driver was stopped solely for a violation of this section or section 237. (Ord. 02, Series 2007)(Ord. 13-2010) 
(2)  Section 237(5): Section 237(5) of the MTC is repealed and readopted to read as follows: 
On roads other than state highways within the jurisdiction of the Town of Gypsum, a driver of a motor vehicle may be cited for a violation of subsection (2) of this section where the driver was stopped solely for a violation of this section or section 237. 
(3)  Section 615(4): A new subsection (4) of Section 615 is added to the MTC as follows: 
(4)  The increased penalties provided by this section shall apply any time flashing signals for the school zone are operating or during times posted within signs designating the school zone. (Ord. 02, Series 2007) 
(4)  Section 703(3): Section 703(3) of the MTC is repealed and readopted to read as follows: (Ord. 14, Series 2007) 
(3)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall come to a complete stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, no more than four feet (4') in advance of the crosswalk line on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then no more than four feet (4') in advance of the stop sign. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(5)  Section 1204: New subsections are added to the MTC as follows: (Ord. 13, 1997, Sl)(Ord. 31, 1997, SI) 
(9)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or an official traffic control device, in any of the following places at the designated times: (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
a)  On any street or highway within any residential zone district and neighborhood commercial district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. This subsection shall not apply: (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(i)  From 5.00 p.m. Friday to 7.00 a.m. Monday; (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(ii)  Adjacent to residences on First Street and Second Street between Eagle Street and Railroad Avenue which do not have driveways; (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(iii)  (iii)Adjacent to residences located on Eagle Street which do not have driveways; or (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(iv)  On Federal, State and Town holidays. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
b)  On any street or highway adjacent to Gypsum parks between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
c)  In addition to any other restrictions contained within the Gypsum Municipal Code for the parking of vehicles, things or objects, no person shall stop, stand or park, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, at any time on any street, highway, or public right-of-way or easement, any recreation vehicle, camper, fifth-wheel trailer, trailer, tractor, farm machinery, boat, commercial vehicle, machinery, construction equipment, dump truck, junk vehicle, inoperable vehicle, unlicensed vehicle, or any other object or thing. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
d)  Should any vehicle violate this subsection 9 resulting in the inability of Gypsum to collect trash and garbage as regularly scheduled, such vehicle may be immediately removed and impounded. If an unscheduled trip is required by Gypsum to collect trash or garbage, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall be fined, in addition to any other fine applicable, an amount equal to the monthly residential trash collection fee multiplied times the number of such violations within the last five (5) years. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) (Ord. 13-2010) 
e)  In addition to Town Enforcement Officers, this subsection 9 may be enforced by, summons for violations issued by, and unauthorized vehicles authorized to be removed and impounded, at the owners expense, by any Gypsum refuse collection driver or other Public Works Department employee involved in refuse collection or snow removal who is so authorized by the Town Manager. (Ord. 13, 1997, S 1) (Ord. 13-2010) 
f)  Any vehicle displaying a valid, state issued disabled parking permit on the rearview mirror or on the vehicle's license plates may park in any of the areas otherwise restricted by subsections (9) (a) and (9) (b) of this subsection 1204, except on trash or snow days as defined in Section 10.01.020(a) of the Gypsum Municipal Code, in which case the vehicle may be removed or impounded pursuant to such subsections.(Ord. 13-2010) 
(10)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or an official traffic control device, on or within a designated snow route during a declared snow emergency. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(a)  Whenever the Town Manager, Director of Public Works or Mayor finds and determines that due to falling snow, sleet, freezing rain, or a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau of similar weather conditions, likely to significantly impair or impede vehicular traffic, such persons are hereby authorized to declare the existence of a snow emergency. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(b)  The authorized person declaring a snow emergency shall provide that the declaration of the snow emergency is posted on principal thoroughfares within Gypsum. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(c)  For the purpose of this subsection, designated snow routes are all streets and highways within Gypsum, except: (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(i)  Adjacent to residences on First Street and Second Street between Eagle Street and Railroad Avenue which do not have driveways; and (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(ii)  Adjacent to residences located on Eagle Street which do not have driveways. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is found in violation of this subsection, in addition to the owner or operator being issued a notice of violation and summons, such vehicle may be removed and impounded, at the owner's expense, by any Town Enforcement officer or Public Works Department employee involved in snow removal who is so authorized by the Town Manager. In the event a snow emergency is declared between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., no vehicle shall be removed and impounded until after 8:00 a.m. following the declaration. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(e)  Whenever the person who declared a snow emergency finds that the conditions which gave rise to the declaration no longer exist, he or she may declare the snow emergency terminated, in whole or in part. Information regarding the termination of a snow emergency shall be provided in the same manner as for a declaration of a snow emergency. (Ord. 13, 1997, SI) 
(11)  Guest parking permits shall be issued at the Town of Gypsum offices for areas where no on street parking restrictions exist in the covenants. In addition to any other restrictions contained within the Gypsum Municipal Code for the parking of vehicles, such permits shall be issued pursuant to the following guidelines: 
a)  Parking permits shall be issued with no fee. 
b)  Parking permits for up to six (6) guest cars on one day will be issued for a residence as many as two (2) times annually. 
c)  Parking permits for a maximum of two (2) guest cars at a time, for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days will be issued for a residence as many as two (2) times annually. 
d)  Parking permits must be displayed on front windshield or dash when cars are parked on the street. Failure to properly display a permit may result in removal or impoundment of the vehicle pursuant to subsection 6 of section 10.01.020.A1 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
e)  Commercial service vehicles shall be allowed to park on-street without a special permit while parked adjacent to a property to which the operator of the vehicle is providing service; but only during the time services are actually being provided. This paragraph (e) of subsection 1204 (8) shall not allow operators of service vehicles to park in restricted on-street areas, including areas adjacent to the residence of the operator, except while actively providing service. 
f)  On-street parking, even with a permit and even for commercial service vehicles, shall not be allowed on trash or snow days as defined in subsections 6 and 7 of section 10.01.020.A1 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. Violation of this provision may result in removal or impoundment of the vehicle pursuant to subsections 6 or 7 of section 10.01.020.A1 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(6)  Section 1209: Section 1209 of the Model Traffic Code is repealed and readopted to read in full, as follows: 1209. Owner liability for parking violations. In addition to any other liability provided for in this Code, the owner of a motor vehicle is liable for payment of a parking violation fine unless the owner of the motor vehicle can furnish sufficient evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody, or control of another person. To avoid liability for payment the owner of the motor vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the prosecuting attorney of the Town of Gypsum the name and address of the person or company who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody, or control of such vehicle. As a condition to avoid liability for payment of a parking violation fine, any person or company who leases or rents a motor vehicle to another person shall attach to the leasing or rental agreement a notice stating that, pursuant to the requirements of this section, the operator of the vehicle is liable for payment of a parking violation fine incurred when the operator has the care, custody, or control of the motor vehicle. The notice shall inform the operator that the operator name and address shall be furnished to the prosecuting attorney of the Town of Gypsum when a parking violation is incurred by the operator. (Ord. 20 Series 2008)(Ord. 13-2010) 
(7)  Section 1210 Amended: A new Section 1210 of the Model Traffic Code titled "Designated Areas on Private Property Authorized Vehicles" is added to the adopted MTC as follows: 
1.  The owner or lessee of any private property available for public use within the Town may request in writing that specified areas on such property be designated by the Town Manager or Sheriff's Office for use only by authorized vehicles and that said areas, upon acceptance in writing by the Town Manager or Sheriff's Office shall be clearly marked by the owner or lessee with official traffic control devices, as defined in Section 42-1-102(64), C.R.S. Such a request will be a waiver of any objection the owner or lessee may assert concerning enforcement of this Section by peace officers of this State, and such officers are hereby authorized and empowered to so enforce this Section, provisions of law to the contrary notwithstanding. When the owner or lessee gives written notice to the Town Council of the Town of Gypsum that said request is withdrawn, and the owner or lessee removes all traffic control devices, the provisions of this Section shall no longer be applicable. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle other than an authorized vehicle in any area designated and marked for such use as provided in this Section. 
3.  Any owner or lessee in possession or control of a designated parking lot or other designated private property wishing to avail himself of the provisions of this Section of the Ordinance shall post on his property in a conspicuous place so that it can be seen by an ordinarily observant person, a sign which reads as follows: 
"PRIVATE PARKING UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED BY OWNER." 
Said sign shall comply in all respects with the aforementioned Section. This sign may be purchased from the Eagle County Sheriff's Office or may be obtained privately by the owner or lessee. (Ord. 02, Series 2007) 
(8)  Part 1600 
Section 1601. Accidents involving death or personal injuries - duties. 
(1)  The driver of any vehicle directly involved in an accident resulting in injury to, serious bodily injury to, or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close to the scene as possible but shall immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of Section 1603(1). Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(1.5)  It shall not be an offense under this section if a driver, after fulfilling the requirements of subsection (1) of this section and of section 1603(1), leaves the scene of the accident for the purpose of reporting the accident in accordance with the provisions of section 1603(2) and 1606. 
(2)  As used in this section and sections 1603 and 1606: 
(a)  "Injury" means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical or mental condition. 
(b)  "Serious bodily injury" means injury that involves, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, a substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks, fractures, or burns of the second or third degree. 
Section 1602. Accidents involving damage - duty. 
(1)  The driver of any vehicle directly involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident, except in the circumstances provided in subsection (2) of this section, until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of Section 1603. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(2)  When an accident occurs on the traveled portion, median, or ramp of a divided highway and each vehicle involved can be safely driven, each driver shall move such driver's vehicle as soon as practicable off the traveled portion, median, or ramp to a frontage road, the nearest suitable cross street, or other suitable location to fulfill the requirements of Section 1603. 
Section 1603. Duty to give notice, information and aid. 
(1)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, serious bodily injury to, or death of any person, or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, the driver's address, and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall upon request exhibit his or her driver's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and where practical shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if the carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(2)  In the event that none of the persons specified are in condition to receive the information to which they otherwise would be entitled under subsection (1) of this section and no police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle involved in such accident after fulfilling all other requirements of subsection (1) of this section, insofar as possible on the driver's part to be performed, shall immediately report such accident to the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority as required in Section 1606 and submit thereto the information specified in subsection (1) of this section. 
Section 1604. Duty upon striking unattended vehicle or other property. 
(1)  The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an accident with any vehicle or other property which is unattended resulting in any damage to such vehicle or other property shall immediately stop and either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other property of such fact, the driver's name and address, and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, or shall attach securely, in a conspicuous place in or on such vehicle or other property, a written notice giving the driver's name and address and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving. The driver shall also make report of such accident when and as required in Section 1606. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. This section shall not apply to the striking of street fixtures or traffic control devices which shall be governed by the provisions of Section 1605. 
Section 1605. Duty upon striking street fixtures or traffic control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or traffic control devices upon or adjacent to a street shall notify the road authority in charge of such property of that fact and of the driver's name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall make report of such accident when and as required in Section 1606. 
Section 1606. Duty to report accidents. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in a traffic accident resulting in injury to, serious bodily injury to, or death of any person or any property damage shall, after fulfilling the requirements of Section 1602 and 1603(1), give immediate notice of the location of such accident and such other information as is specified in Section 1603(2) to the nearest office of the duly authorized police authority and, if so directed by the police authority, shall immediately return to and remain at the scene of the accident until said police have arrived at the scene and completed their investigation thereat. 
Section 1607. Whenever driver unable to give notice or make written report. 
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in 1606(1) and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(9)  Part 2000: A new Part 2000 titled "Driver's License" is added to the adopted MTC as follows: 
Section 2001. Driving vehicle without valid driver's license. 
No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a highway unless such person has been issued a currently valid driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, or an instruction permit, unless such person is classified as being exempt from obtaining a driver's license pursuant to the provisions of Section 42-2-102, C.R.S. 
Section 2002. Reserved. 
Section 2003. License expired one year or less. 
No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a highway if such person's driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license has been expired for one (1) year or less and such person has not been issued another such license by the State or another state or country subsequent to such expiration. 
Section 2004. Proper class driver's license required. 
No person who has been issued a currently valid driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license or an instruction permit shall drive a type or general class of motor vehicle upon a highway for which such person has not been issued the correct type or general class of license or permit. 
Section 2005. Valid license on person required. 
No person who has been issued a currently valid driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license or an instruction permit shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway without having such license or permit in such person's immediate possession. 
Section 2006. Motorized bicycles; license required. 
An operator of a motorized bicycle shall possess a valid driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license. Motorized bicycles may be operated upon roadways and in bicycle lanes included within such roadways. No motorized bicycles may be operated on any sidewalk, pathway or upon any public lands unless such operation is specifically designated. 
Section 2007. Special restrictions on certain drivers. 
A)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall drive any motor vehicle used to transport explosives or inflammable material or as a school bus for the transportation of pupils to or from school: nor shall any person under the age of eighteen (18) years drive a motor vehicle used as a commercial, private or common carrier of persons or property unless such person has experience in operating motor vehicles and has been examined on such person's qualifications in operating such vehicles. The examination shall include safety regulations of commodity hauling and the driver shall be licensed as a driver or provisional driver. 
B)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (A) above, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall drive a commercial motor vehicle as defined in Section 42-2-402(4), C.R.S., except as provided in Section 42-2-404(4), C.R.S. 
Section 2007.5. Restrictions on minor drivers under eighteen years of age. 
(1)  The Town Council finds, determines, and declares that: 
(a)  Teenage drivers, in order to become safe and responsible drivers, need behind-the-wheel driving experience before they can begin to drive without restrictions; 
(b)  providing additional behind-the-wheel training with a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult before obtaining a minor driver's license is the beginning of the young driver's accumulation of experience; 
(c)  Once a teenage driver begins to drive without a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult in the vehicle, it is necessary to place restrictions on a teenage driver who holds a minor driver's license until such driver turns eighteen years of age in order to give that driver time to exercise good judgment in the operation of a vehicle while keeping that driver, his or her passengers, and the public safe; 
(d)  Penalties for the violation of these restrictions on minor drivers under eighteen years of age, including the assessment of points where they may not otherwise be assessed, should be sufficient to ensure that chronic violations would result in swift and severe repercussions to reinforce the importance of obeying the driving laws in order to keep that minor driver, his or her passengers, and the public safe. 
(2)  Occupants in motor vehicles driven by persons under eighteen years of age shall be properly restrained or wear seat belts as required in sections 236 and 237 of the Model Traffic Code. 
(3)  No more than one passenger shall occupy the front seat of the motor vehicle driven by a person under eighteen years of age, and the number of passengers in the back seat of such vehicle shall not exceed the number of seat belts. 
Section 2008. Refusal to give license/permit/I.D. card to peace officer on demand. No person who operates a motor vehicle, and has been issued a driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, an instruction permit or a Colorado State identification card, and who has such license, permit or identification card in his immediate possession shall refuse to remove such license, permit or identification card from any billfold, purse, cover or other container and to hand the same to any peace officer who has requested such person to do so if such peace officer reasonably suspects that such person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a civil infraction. 
Section 2009. License restrictions. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or elsewhere in any manner in violation of the restrictions, limitations or conditions imposed in a special restricted license, in a driver's, minor driver's, provisional driver's or in an instructional permit or temporary instructional permit issued to such person by the State or another state or country. 
Section 2010. Notification of change of name/address. 
A person commits a civil infraction if he fails to notify the State of Colorado Department of Revenue of any change in his name by marriage or otherwise, or change in address, within ten (10) days of such change. 
Section 2011. Altered/fictitious/license or permit. 
A)  It is a civil infraction for any person to have in his possession a lawfully issued driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, instruction permit or identification card, knowing that such license, permit or identification card has been falsely altered by means of erasure, obliteration, deletion, insertion of new matter, transposition of matter or any other means so that such license or permit in its thus altered form falsely appears or purports to be in all respects an authentic and lawfully issued license, permit or identification card. 
B)  It is a civil infraction for any person to knowingly have in his possession a paper, document or other instrument which falsely appears or purports to be in all respects a lawfully issued and authentic driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, instruction permit or identification card, knowing that such instrument was falsely made and was not lawfully issued. 
C)  It is a civil infraction for any person to knowingly display or represent as being such person's own any driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, instructional permit or identification card which was lawfully issued to another person. 
D)  It is a civil infraction for any person to knowingly permit any unlawful use of a driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license, instruction permit or identification card. 
Section 2012. Permitting unlicensed person to drive. 
A)  It is a civil infraction for any parent or guardian to knowingly cause or permit his child or ward under the age of eighteen (18) years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor has not been issued a currently valid minor driver's or provisional driver's license or instruction permit, or knowingly cause or permit such child or ward to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway in violation of the conditions, limitations or restrictions contained in a license or permit which has been issued to such person. 
B)  It is a civil infraction for any person to knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by such person or under such person's hire or control to be driven upon any highway by any person who has not been issued a currently valid driver's, minor driver's or provisional driver's license or an instruction permit, or shall knowingly cause or permit such person to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway in violation of the conditions, limitations or restrictions contained in license or permit which has been issued to such person. 
(10)  Part 2100: A new Part 2100-titled "Registration/Title" is added to the adopted MTC as follows: 
Section 2101. Registration required. 
A)  It is a civil infraction for any person who owns a motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or vehicle whish is primarily designed to be operated or drawn upon any highway, or who owns a trailer coach or mobile machinery, whether or not it is operated on a highway, within sixty (60) days after the purchase of such vehicle, to fail to apply and obtain registration therefore, except when an owner is permitted to operate a vehicle under the special provisions of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S. (Ord. 02, Series 2007) 
B)  It is a civil infraction for any owner, operator or occupant of a vehicle which is or has been duly registered for the current year in another state or country of which such owner, operator or occupant has been a resident, to fail to apply for and obtain registration for such vehicle in this State within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident of this State. (Ord. 03, Series 2003 7) 
Section 2102. Registration card in vehicle. 
It is a civil infraction for any person driving a motor vehicle to fail to have in his possession or carry in the vehicle a current registration card issued for the vehicle and subject to inspection by any peace officer. 
Section 2103. No number plates attached. 
A)  It is a civil infraction for any person in control of a self-propelled motor vehicle to fail to attach to such motor vehicle number plates during the current registration year, one (1) in the front and the other in the rear. The number plate assigned to a motorcycle, trailer or semi- trailer, any other vehicle drawn by a motor vehicle or any item of mobile machinery or self-propelled construction equipment shall be attached to the rear thereof. 
B)  It is a civil infraction for any person in control of any vehicle described in this Subsection to fail to securely fasten number plates to the vehicle to which it is assigned so as to prevent the plate from swinging, to be horizontal at a height not less than twelve (12) inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and to be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
C)  (C) It is a civil infraction for any person in control of any vehicle described in this Subsection to knowingly display or affix to such vehicle any number plates or temporary registration permit that is not issued by the State for the specific vehicle to which the number plates or temporary registration permit is attached, except as provided for in Section 42-3-103, C.R.S. 
D)  It is a civil infraction for any person: 
1.  To knowingly display, cause or permit to be displayed or to have in his possession any certificate of title or registration number plate knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended or altered; 
2.  To lend to or knowingly permit the use by one not entitled thereto any certificate of title, registration card or registration number plate issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; 
3.  To use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for the registration of any vehicle or for any renewal or duplicate thereof or knowingly to make a false statement or knowingly to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any such application; 
4.  (4) To use or permit the use of any noncommercial or recreational vehicle to transport cargo or passengers for profit or hire or in any business or commercial enterprise. (Ord. 7-1995) 
Section 2104. Expired number plates/temporary permit. 
It is a civil infraction for any person who owns, operates or is in control of any motor vehicle described in this Article to fail to display license plates or a temporary registration permit other than those of the registration period to which they pertain. (Ord. 3 Sl, 1997.) 
(11)  Deletions. The following sections of the adopted MTC are hereby deleted: 
1.  109(13) 
2.  109.5(3) 
3.  109.6 (3) 
4.  116(3) 
5.  117(4) 
6.  201(8) 
7.  202(4)Al 
8.  204(4) 
9.  205(4) 
10.  206(7) 
11.  208(4) 
12.  210(4) 
13.  211(8) 
14.  212(5) 
15.  213(6) 
16.  214(6) 
17.  215(9) 
18.  216(3) 
19.  217(2) 
20.  218(2) 
21.  220(7) 
22.  221(9) 
23.  223(3) 
24.  224(6) 
25.  225(3) 
26.  226(3) 
27.  227(3) 
28.  228(8) 
29.  229(5) 
30.  230(5) 
31.  232(3) 
32.  233(3) 
33.  234(4) 
34.  236(6) 
35.  237(4) 
36.  238(3) 
37.  239(5) 
38.  502(6) 
39.  504(7) 
40.  505(5) 
41.  506(4) 
42.  507(6) 
43.  509(3) 
44.  512(3) 
45.  603(5) 
46.  604(2) 
47.  605(3) 
48.  606(3) 
49.  607(2)(b) 
50.  608(4) 
51.  609(2) 
52.  611(2) 
53.  612(3) 
54.  613 
55.  615(1) 
56.  615(3) 
57.  701(3) 
58.  703(5) 
59.  705(3) 
60.  706(3) 
61.  707(6) 
62.  708(6) 
63.  710(4) 
64.  711(3) 
65.  801(4) 
66.  802(6) 
67.  803(5) 
68.  805(9) 
69.  901(3) 
70.  902(4) 
71.  903(5) 
72.  1001(4) 
73.  1002(3) 
74.  1003(2) 
75.  1004(3) 
76.  1005(5) 
77.  1006(4) 
78.  1007(2) 
79.  1008(4) 
80.  1009(3) 
81.  1010(4) 
82.  1011(3) 
83.  1012(3) 
84.  1013(3) 
85.  1101(12) 
86.  1103(5) 
87.  1104(4) 
88.  1105(2)(c) 
89.  1105(3)(b) 
90.  1105(8)(c) 
91.  1202(2) 
92.  1204(7) 
93.  1205(4) 
94.  1208(6) 
95.  1208(7) 
96.  1208(11) 
97.  1210(3) 
98.  1211(2) 
99.  1401(2) 
100.  1402(2) 
101.  1406(5) 
102.  1407(3) 
103.  1407.5(4) 
104.  1408(3) 
105.  1409(4) 
106.  1409(9) 
107.  1411(2) 
108.  1412(12)(A) 
109.  1414(2) 
110.  1415(4) 
111.  1502(5) 
112.  1503(6) 
113.  1703(3) 
114.  1716(4)(B) 
115.  1903(6) 
116.  1904(3) 
(12)  Section 209 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(13)  Section 219 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(14)  Section 231 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(15)  Section 240 of the MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who operates a low-speed electric vehicle in violation of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(16)  Section 503 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(17)  Section 607 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentences: 
(1)(a):  "Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this section, any person who violates any provision of this paragraph (a) commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(1)(b):  "A person who violates any provision of this paragraph (b) commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(2)(a):  "Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection (2), a person who violates any provision of this paragraph (a) commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(17)  Section 610 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(18)  Section 613 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentences: 
(1)(a):  "Any person who commits certain violations listed in section 1701(4) in a maintenance, repair, or construction zone that is designated pursuant to this section is subject to the increased penalties and surcharged imposed by section 1701(4)(c)." 
(1)(b):  "A person who commits certain violations listed in section 1701(4) in a maintenance, repair, or construction zone that is designated pursuant to this section is subject to the increased penalties and surcharges imposed by section 1701(4)(c). 
(18)  Section 702 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(19)  Section 704 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(20)  Section 709 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(21)  Section 712 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction." 
(22)  Section 806 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(23)  Section 807 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(24)  Section 808 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(25)  Section 1201 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(26)  Section 1206 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(27)  Section 1207 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(28)  Section 1403 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(29)  Section 1404 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(30)  Section 1405 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. 
(31)  Section 1504 of the adopted MTC is hereby amended by deleting the following sentence: 
"Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class A traffic infraction. 
(32)  Section 1701 of the adopted MTC is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
1701. Traffic infractions classified - penalties - penalty and surcharge schedule. 
(1)  It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any provision of the Code. 
(2)  Pursuant to C.M.C.R. 210(b)(4), the court may by order, which may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or repealed, designate the traffic offenses, the penalties for which may be paid at the office of the court clerk or violations bureau. 
(3)  The court in addition to any other notice, by published order to be prominently posted in a place where fines are to be paid, shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of fines to be imposed for violations, designating each violation specifically in the schedules. Such fines will be within the limits set by ordinance. 
(4)  Fines and costs shall be paid to, received by, and accounted for by the violations clerk or court clerk. 
(33)  Section 1707 of the adopted MTC is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
1707. Summons and complaint for traffic offenses. 
(1)  Whenever a person commits a violation of this Code other than a violation for which a penalty assessment notice may be issued in accordance with the provisions of sections 1701, 1702, Colorado Rules for Magistrates and C.M.C.R., and such person is not required to be arrested and taken without unnecessary delay before a municipal judge, county judge, or county magistrate, the Town Enforcement Officer may issue and serve upon the defendant a summons and complaint which shall contain the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, a citation of the statute alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the offense, the date and approximate location thereof, and the date the summons and complaint is served on the defendant; shall direct the defendant to appear in a specified municipal or county court at a specified time and place; shall be signed by the Town Enforcement Officer; and shall contain a place for the defendant to execute a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the summons portion of the summons and complaint. 
(2)  If a Town Enforcement Officer issues and serves a summons and complaint to appear in municipal court or county court upon the defendant as described in subsection (1) of this section, any defect in form in such summons and complaint regarding the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, the date and approximate location thereof, and the date the summons and complaint is served on the defendant may be cured by amendment at any time prior to trial or any time before verdict or findings upon an oral motion by the prosecuting attorney after notice to the defendant and an opportunity for a hearing. No such amendment shall be permitted if substantial rights of the defendant are prejudiced. No summons and complaint shall be considered defective so as to be cause for dismissal solely because of a defect in form in such summons and complaint as described in this subsection (2). 
(3)  The time specified in the summons portion of said summons and complaint must be at least twenty days after the date such summons and complaint is served, unless the defendant shall demand an earlier court appearance date. 
(4)  The place specified in the summons portion of said summons and complaint must be a municipal or county court within the county in which the offense is alleged to have been committed. 
(5)  If the defendant is otherwise eligible to be issued a summons and complaint and if the defendant does not possess a valid Colorado driver's license, the defendant, in order to secure release, as provided in this section, must either consent to be taken by the officer to the nearest mailbox and to mail the amount of the penalty thereon to the clerk of the court or must execute a promise to appear in court on the summons and complaint. If the defendant does possess a valid Colorado's driver's license, the defendant shall not be required to execute a promise to appear on the summons and complaint. 
10.01.030 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided expressly or by context, all terms used in this chapter are defined as provided in the appendices of the MTC. 
(Ord. 2011-08) 
10.01.040 - Enforcement. 
    Pursuant to Section 110(4) of the MTC, the provisions of title 10 of the Gypsum Municipal Code are enforceable in Gypsum Municipal Court. The town manager, town code enforcement officer, every officer of the Gypsum Police Department, Eagle County Sheriff's Department, and Colorado State Patrol ("town enforcement officer(s)") are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter 10.01, and make all determinations provided for herein. Every officer of the Gypsum Police Department, Eagle County Sheriff's Department, and Colorado State Patrol are also authorized to regulate traffic and to make arrests for violations of traffic laws, and are included within the term "police officer" as defined in the appendices of the MTC. 
(Ord 2011-08) 
10.01.050 - Charges for release of impounded vehicles. 
    (REPEALED) (Ord. 13-2010). 
10.01.060 - Notice of impoundment. 
    (REPEALED) (Ord. 13-2010) 
10.01.070 - Disposal or auction of impounded vehicle, object or thing. 
    (REPEALED) (Ord. 13-2010). 
10.01.080 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    Chapter 10.01 of the Gypsum Municipal Code shall be interpreted and construed to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article, part and section headings of the MTC shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article, part or section thereof. 
(Ord. 3 SI, 1997.) 
10.01.081 - Citation to Colorado Revised Statues. 
    All references to provisions of the Colorado Revised Statutes which contain counterpart provisions to the MTC as contained in chapter 10.01 of the Gypsum Municipal Code shall be deemed proper references to the counterpart provisions of the MTC and the Gypsum Municipal Code. When enforcing the MTC, arresting police officers, town enforcement officers, and the town's prosecuting attorneys and officials are authorized to cite to equivalent counterparts contained in the Colorado Revised Statutes. Any citation, by such persons to a Colorado Revised Statute containing the substantially same or identical provisions as those found in counterpart sections of the MTC, is equivalent to a citation to the relevant provisions of the MTC for purposes of designating, charging, prosecuting and penalizing violations of the MTC pursuant to chapter 10.01 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 12 SI, 1997) 
10.01.090 - Applicability of provisions. 
    Accidents and accident reports. This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the town, the use of which the town has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 1413, and part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code for Colorado, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the town. 
(Ord. 2011-08) 
10.01.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in title 10 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in title 10 of the Gypsum Municipal Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount set forth in section 2.01.090(6), or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2014-02) 
(c)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in title 10 of the Gypsum Municipal Code shall pay such penalty as provided for in the Gypsum Municipal Court Penalty Assessment and Bond Schedule adopted pursuant to Section 1701 of the MTC. Penalties for violations for which points may not be assessed pursuant to Section 42-2-127, C.R.S. shall be not less than $60.00. Penalties for violations for which points may be assessed pursuant to Section 42-2-127, C.R.S. shall be as follows: 
(1)  Three or less points - not less than $50.00. 
(2)  Four or five points - not less than $100.00. 
(3)  More than five points - not less than $150.00. 
(d)  If a person receives a penalty assessment notice or summons and complaint pursuant to Section 1701 of the MTC for a violation for which points may be assessed against the person's driver's license pursuant to Section 42-2-127, C.R.S., and such person pays the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as follows: 
(1)  For a violation having an assessment of three or more points under the Gypsum Municipal Court Penalty Assessment and Bond Schedule, the points are reduced by two points; 
(2)  For a violation having an assessment of two points under the Gypsum Municipal Court Penalty Assessment and Bond Schedule, the points are reduced by one point. 
(e)  If a person receives a penalty assessment notice or summons and complaint pursuant to Section 1701 of the MTC for a violation for which one point may be assessed or for which points may not be assessed against the person's driving license pursuant to Section 42-2-127, C.R.S., and such person voluntarily agrees to pay the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the fine and surcharge for the violation shall be reduced 50 percent from the amount stated in the Gypsum Municipal Court Penalty Assessment and Bond Schedule. (Ord. 07, Series 2003 1) 
(f)  If a person receives a summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice pursuant to this chapter for a civil infraction defined by this Code as a civil infraction, and such person fails to pay the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due and fails to appear in person or by counsel before the municipal court for a first hearing, the municipal court shall enter a plea of not guilty pursuant to Rule 211(d) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure. If a person fails to appear before the municipal court for a final hearing when scheduled, the municipal court may: 
(1)  Enter a default judgment convicting the person of the traffic infraction(s) as contemplated in section 42-2-127(6)(a), C.R.S., and 
(2)  Submit a transcript of record containing the conviction and assessment of points to the motor vehicle division of the state department of revenue pursuant to Rule 255(b) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure, and 
(3)  Issue a bench warrant for the person's arrest pursuant to section 2.01.150 of the Gypsum Municipal Code and Rule 204(f) of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure, and 
(4)  Require upon arrest, pursuant to Rule 246 of the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure, the deposit of bail or the posting of a bond to cover bail in the amount of 1.25 times the total fines, surcharges, court penalties and court costs contained in the default judgment entered against the person and compel the person's appearance at the next occurring court trial date. Failure to appear before the municipal court when scheduled following arrest shall result in forfeiture of all or part of the bail amount to the municipal court in the discretion of the municipal judge. (Ord. 14 series 2002 4) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
  
Chapter 12.02 - ACCESS TO PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ROADS 

12.02.010 - Approval required. 
    No person shall construct, reconstruct, use, or increase the level of use of any vehicular access to or from any public highway, street or road without first receiving written approval of the town planning commission. 
(Ord. 5, series 1991 SI). 
12.02.020 - Approval process. 
    Any person desiring approval from the planning commission to construct, reconstruct, use or increase the level of use of such vehicular access, shall submit a written request for access, design and construction plans, and estimated use data to the planning commission, who shall in writing approve or deny, or conditionally approve, such plans within 30 days of their submission. The planning commission may consult the town engineer for assistance in evaluating any application for approval of vehicular access, and an applicant shall be responsible for all costs and expenses associated with the review of the proposed design and construction plans. The planning commission may condition approval on intermediate and final construction inspections and approvals by the town engineer. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section to the contrary, any person desiring approval of vehicular access through a request for approval of a subdivision sketch plan, preliminary plan, or final plat shall submit design and construction plans, and estimated use data as a part of the subdivision approval process. 
(Ord. 5 series 1991 SI). 
12.02.030 - Approval criteria. 
    Applications for approval of vehicular access to public highways, streets and roads, including sketch plan, preliminary plan, or final plat, shall be evaluated based on the criteria provided in Sections 1, 3 and 4 of the Colorado State Highway Access Code, 2 CCR 601-1, which is hereby adopted and enacted by reference. 
(Ord. 5 series 1991 SI). 
Chapter 12.03 - STREET EXCAVATION 

12.03.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation Ordinance of the Town of Gypsum." 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Applicant is any person making written application to the superintendent for an excavation permit hereunder. (Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
    Town engineer is the Town Engineer of the Town of Gypsum. 
    Excavation is the excavation and other work permitted under an excavation permit and required to be performed under this chapter. 
    Permittee is any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued hereunder. 
    Street, for the purpose of this chapter 12.03 shall have the meaning provided in section 1.04.010 and shall specifically include any public sidewalk or public grounds. (Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
    Superintendent shall mean the Gypsum Superintendent of Public Works as appointed by the town council. (Ord. 7 series 1995 SI) 
12.03.025 - Superintendent to enforce. 
    The provisions of the street excavation ordinance shall be carried out and enforced by the superintendent. Any power, duty or action provided in the street excavation ordinance to be carried out by the superintendent may be delegated to the town engineer when, as determined by the superintendent, it would be beneficial to the town. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S2) 
12.03.030 - Excavation permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, cut, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street or to excavate in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit, or leave upon any street any excavated material obstruction or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefore from the superintendent. (Ord. 7 series 1995 S3) No road cuts will be allowed between November 15th through April 15th of each calendar year, except as specifically allowed by the Town of Gypsum. Pavement restoration shall be as thick as existing structure, but no less than three-inch asphalt over eight-inch base course. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.040 - Application. 
    No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application is submitted to the superintendent. The written application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the firm doing the actual excavation work, the nature, location, and purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of completion of excavation, and other data as may reasonably be required by the superintendent. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the excavation work, and such other information as may be prescribed by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S3) 
12.03.050 - Excavation permit fees. 
    Permit fees shall be paid prior to issuance of an excavation permit and shall be in addition to any other fees for permits or charges relative to the proposed work. The fee shall be based on the type of surface to be excavated in or under as follows: 
(1)  Unpaved surface - $300.00; 
(2)  Surfaces paved asphalt or chip and seal surface - $500.00; and 
(3)  Surfaces paved with cement concrete base or cement concrete - $500.00. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S4) 
12.03.060 - Excavation placard. 
    The superintendent shall provide each permittee a placard plainly printed in English letters at least one inch high with the following notice: 
"Town of Gypsum, Excavation Permit No. Expires _______" and in the first blank space there shall be inserted the year and number of said permit and after word "expires" shall be stated the date when said permit expires. The permittee shall post the placard in a conspicuous place at the excavation site. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit a placard at or about any excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S3) 
12.03.070 - Warranty of performance. 
(a)  Any permittee who performs excavation work shall warrant the quality of such work to town for a period of 24 months from the completion of such work. The warranty shall secure all performance as required by the permit and shall require the permittee to backfill, restore, and place in good and safe condition as near as practical to its original condition before the excavation and to the satisfaction of the superintendent. All streets where excavation is made shall remain in good condition for the 24-month warranty period, usual wear and tear excepted. Any settlement of the surface within the 24-month warranty period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee. The permittee shall not be required to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the town if such repairs prove defective. 
(b)  If, during the 24-month warranty period, any repairs or maintenance are necessary due to defective performance by the permittee, the town may in its sole discretion make such necessary repairs or maintenance and charge the costs to the permittee. Until paid, all such costs of repair or maintenance shall constitute a lien against the property benefited by the permittee's street excavation, and may be enforced by the town in the municipal court. In the alternative, any unpaid repair or maintenance costs may be collected through certification of the charges of the county assessor. 
(c)  The permittee may, at the time of application for a street excavation permit, deposit with the town clerk a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit (referred to in combination or singularly as "deposit") in an amount sufficient to ensure performance during the 24-month warranty period. No deposit shall be less than the estimated amount necessary to restore an excavation, as determined in the sole discretion of the town. Any surety deposited with the town must be issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. In the event a deposit is made by the permittee, any costs of repair or maintenance incurred by town during the warranty period due to defective performance shall be paid first from deposit, with any overage collected pursuant to subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S5) 
12.03.080 - Routing of traffic. 
    During the performance of the excavation work the permittee shall at all times maintain traffic conditions as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public. The superintendent may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the town police department. The following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the superintendent and the police department. 
(2)  The permittee shall notify the superintendent and town police department before traffic is returned to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(3)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the superintendent, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. If necessary, the superintendent will designate detours. The town shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing streets designated as detours without expense to the permittee. If there are no existing streets the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the superintendent. The permittee is responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any streets by the operation of its equipment. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.090 - Clearance for fire equipment. 
    The excavation work shall not interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants without the approval of the Chief of the Gypsum Fire Protection District. Passageways leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of obstructions. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.100 - Protection of traffic. 
    The permittee shall confine excavated material with suitable barriers in order to encroach upon streets as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across streets under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections not closed. Vehicular and pedestrian crossings shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to accommodate traffic safely and shall be approved by the superintendent. Pedestrian crossings shall be not less than three feet in width. 
(Ord. 7 series 1995 S3) 
12.03.110 - Removal and protection of utilities. 
    The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the superintendent and the utility company or person owning the utility. No utility owned by the town or privately owned shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee or unless other arrangements are made with the owner. The permittee shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and if the same are damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them at the expense of the permittee, and its deposit shall be liable therefore. The permittee is responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit, or other utility, and its deposit shall be liable therefore. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.120 - Protection of adjoining property. 
    The permittee shall protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public, or private property resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Where it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the private property owner, and in emergency situations the superintendent may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. When trenching through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after excavations have been backfilled. All work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. Unless specifically provided by an easement document, the permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs from any rights-of-way or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the appropriate town department or town official having control of such property. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.130 - Sidewalks excavations. 
    Any excavation made in or under a sidewalk shall provide an adequate footbridge at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.140 - Protective measures. 
    The permittee shall erect and maintain such fence, railing, or barriers about the excavation site as shall prevent danger to persons using the town street or sidewalks. At twilight there shall be placed upon the place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.150 - Care of excavated material. 
    All excavated material shall be confined in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the excavation, pedestrians, or users of the streets, and so as to minimize the inconvenience to adjoining property. Where the immediate site will not permit piling of excavated material beside the excavation, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the superintendent may require the permittee to haul the excavated material to a storage site and return it at the time of backfilling. The permittee shall secure the necessary permission and arrangements for storage and disposal sites for excavated material. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.160 - Damage to existing improvements. 
    All damage done to existing improvements during excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee in conformity with all applicable codes or ordinances. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to make such repairs, the superintendent may make such repairs and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and its surety bond shall also be liable. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.170 - Property lines and easements. 
    Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the excavation plan submitted with the excavation permit application. The permittee shall confine excavation work within easement limits. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.180 - Clean-up. 
    From time to time as may be ordered by the superintendent, and in any event immediately after completion of work, the permittee shall thoroughly clean all public and private properties of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, unused material, and other debris resulting from the work to the satisfactions of the superintendent. Upon failure to effect clean-up within 24 hours after having been notified by the superintendent, clean-up may be done by the superintendent and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and its surety bond shall also be liable. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.190 - Protection of water courses. 
    The permittee shall provide for the flow of all water courses, sewers, or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall return them to as good condition as it found them or make such provisions as the superintendent may direct. The permittee shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water and shall not obstruct the gutter of any street. The permittee shall contain, and if necessary dispose of, all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings, or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.200 - Breaking through pavement. 
    Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the outer limits of the sub-grade, that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of concrete pavement or without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line. No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.210 - Tunnels. 
    Tunnels under pavement are not permitted except by permission of the superintendent and, if permitted, shall be adequately supported and backfilled under the direction of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.220 - Backfilling. 
    Backfilling of any excavation shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the excavation was made. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers, or by water settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry as determined by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.230 - Backfilling by water settling. 
    When backfilling is done by water settling, excavated materials above utility installations shall be deposited uniformly in layers of not more than five feet in thickness and shall be thoroughly flooded. During the flooding the water shall be allowed to flow slowly to the trench from high points and shall be worked down to the full depth of the layer of backfill with bars. All bars used shall be long enough to extend entirely through the layer being filled and shall be forced down through the loose backfill material. As the bars are withdrawn, the water shall be allowed to flow downward around the bar. The channel or hold formed by the bar shall be kept open and the water kept running into it until the fill has settled. All work shall be done in such manner as to obtain a relative compaction through the entire depth of the backfill of not less than that existing adjacent to the excavation. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.240 - Dry backfilling. 
    Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches in thickness. Layers that are power tamped shall not exceed six inches in thickness. The same requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24 inches or less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified above to a depth of 18 inches above the top of the pipe before any additional backfilling is placed thereon. 
(Ord. 15, series 1999 SI) 
12.03.250 - Backfill material. 
    Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench and the space under, around, and six inches above the pipe shall be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil, or one-quarter inch minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones, and debris shall not be used in the backfill. 
(Ord. 15 series 1990 SI) 
12.03.260 - Backfilling at the surface. 
    Backfilling shall be completed by placing the backfill material well above the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type until the surface is unyielding. The surface shall then be graded as required. 
(Ord. 15, series 1990 SI) 
12.03.270 - Restoration of surface. 
(1)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, broken into, or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the superintendent. 
(2)  If, in the judgment of the superintendent, it is not expedient, by reason of traffic needs, the looseness of the earth, weather conditions, or other reasons, to make a permanent restoration of the street surface before reopening it to traffic or upon completion of the work, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement to remain until the permanent restoration may be properly made by the permittee. The permittee shall maintain temporary restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(3)  The superintendent's acceptance, approval, or presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not prevent the town from asserting a claim against the permittee and his surety bond for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. (Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.280 - City's right to restore surface. 
    If the permittee fails to complete the excavation work or restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed in the excavation permit, The superintendent, if he deems it advisable, may do all work and things necessary to restore the street or complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof plus 25%. In addition to general overhead and administrative expenses. The town shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses, and amounts paid out and due it for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount due any funds deposited by permittee, and its surety bond shall also be liable. (Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.290 - Trenches in pipe laying. 
    Except by special permission from the superintendent, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet after pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be put in place. Trenches shall be braced and sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction work as prescribed by the superintendent. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing, or other lumber shall be left in any trench. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.300 - Urgent work. 
    If, in his judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public, or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the superintendent shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day so that the excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.310 - Emergency action. 
    In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit, or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit, or utility without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit shall immediately notify the town police department and superintendent and take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions. An excavation permit shall be applied for not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the superintendent's office is open for business, and permanent repairs shall not proceed without first obtaining an excavation permit. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.320 - Noise, dust, and debris. 
    Each permittee shall avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust, and unsightly debris, and between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the superintendent, or in case of an emergency action, any tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.330 - Preservation of monuments. 
    The permittee shall notify the superintendent of any surface monuments or hubs discovered and shall not disturb them until ordered to do so by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.340 - Inspections. 
    The superintendent shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. The superintendent shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.350 - Maintain drawing. 
    Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawing, plans, and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations. Reproducible Mylar as-built maps shall be filed with the superintendent within 60 days after new installations, changes, or replacements are made. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.360 - Ordinance not applicable to city work. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the direction of competent town authorities by employees of the town or by any contractor of the town performing work for and on behalf of the town. 
(Ord. 15 series 1990 SI) 
12.03.370 - Insurance. 
    A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder, shall furnish the superintendent satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit public liability insurance of not less than $150,000.00 for any one person and $600,000.00 for any single occurrence or the limits of the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act as it may change from time to time, whichever is greater, duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. In the event of any suit or claim against the town by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the town, s giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the town requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and against its insurance. 
(Ord. 7, series 1995 S3) 
12.03.380 - Liability of town. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the town or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the town or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work. 
(Ord. 15 series 1990 SI) 
12.03.390 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the requirements of this street excavation ordinance may be fined not more than $300.00 per violation. Separate violations will be deemed to occur each day a person is in violation. 
(Ord. 15 series 1990 SI) 
Chapter 12.04 - UNIFORM HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM 

12.04.040 - Established. 
    There is established a uniform house numbering system for the town as follows: 
(1)  The houses on the south or southerly side and the east or easterly side of the streets within the town shall bear odd numbers. 
(2)  The houses on the north or northerly side and the west or westerly side of the streets within the town shall bear even numbers. 
(3)  The houses on Eagle Street shall be numbered from east to west, beginning with the number 100 on the north side and the number 101 on the south side of the street. 
(4)  The houses on First Street shall be numbered from south to north, beginning with the number 300 on the west side and the number 301 on the east side of the street. 
(5)  The houses on Second Street shall be numbered from south to north, beginning with the number 400 on the west side and the number 401 on the east side of the street. 
(6)  The houses on Railroad Avenue shall be numbered from east to west, beginning with the number 454 on the north side and the number 429 on the south side of the street. 
(7)  The houses on Highway 6-24 shall be numbered, beginning at the city limits and running from east to west, beginning with the number 500 on the north side, and the number 501 on the south side of the highway. 
(8)  The houses on the Gypsum Valley Road shall be numbered from north to south, commencing at the intersection of Highway 6-24 and the road, with the number 700 on the west side and the number 701 on the east side of the street. 
(Ord. 74 SI, 1960). 
Chapter 12.05 - MAINTENANCE 

12.05.010 - Duty to clear all public sidewalks and walkways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, lessee or agent of any building, real property or vacant lot ("property"), or any adult occupant of any single-family dwelling within the town, to fail to keep all public sidewalks and walkways within or abutting the property or dwelling clear of snow, ice, sleet and hail. These persons are jointly and severally liable for this responsibility. These persons shall remove or have removed any accumulation of snow, ice, sleet or hail after any accumulation, as promptly as reasonably possible, and no later than 12:00 noon of the day following the accumulation. Such persons shall remove the snow, ice, sleet, or hail, from the full width of all sidewalks and walkways, except those with a width exceeding five feet, which shall be cleared to a width of at least five feet. No person shall deposit snow, ice, sleet, hail or other material in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or public right-of-way in a manner which obstructs or creates a hazard for vehicle or pedestrian traffic, or interferes with the maintenance of the public right-of-way, or access to trash receptacles or fire hydrants. 
(Ord. 4 SI, 1997) 
12.05.020 - Enforcement and fines. 
(a)  Notice. If the town manager or his designee finds that a violation of this chapter exists, the manager or his designee shall notify the responsible person that the violation must be immediately corrected, or the person will be subject to fines and costs as provided in this section. Notice under this section is sufficient if in writing and hand-delivered to the responsible person or left in a conspicuous place at the property or dwelling at which the violation exists, or given by telephone followed by mailed confirmation to the responsible person. 
(b)  Fines. If the person so notified fails to correct the violation, they shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.00. The town manager may correct the violation and charge the costs thereof, to the person so notified. (Ord. 4 SI, 1997). 
(c)  Collection. Any fine or charge imposed under this chapter, if not paid when due may be collected in any manner upon the property or dwelling responsible for the violation. The town clerk may certify such fines and charges to the County Treasurer of Eagle County, Colorado to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property or dwelling in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against the property or dwelling. (Ord. 4 SI, 1997). 
Chapter 12.06 - PUBLIC PARKS 

12.06.010 - Hours of closure. 
(a)  Except as allowed by a special event permit for a special event in the Lundgren Theater or City Hall Park, all public parks located within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Gypsum shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day (Ord. 2009-04) 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be within any public park during those hours of closure as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
12.06.020 - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 12.06.010 shall be fined not more than $250.00 for each separate offense. 
Chapter 12.07 - TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

12.07.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Golf course shall mean the Gypsum Creek Golf Course, and any other golf course owned or operated by the Town of Gypsum. 
    Person of lawful authority. For purposes of this chapter, persons with lawful authority include the following: 
(1)  Police officers, firefighters, peace officers and emergency response personnel while engaged in the performance of their official duties; 
(2)  A person going upon property in an emergency to rescue a person or animal, such as livestock, pets or wildlife, from harm's way, or to remove an object that the person reasonably believes to pose an imminent safety risk. 
    Public property shall mean any publicly-owned ground, public place, public building, vacant lot, or other unsupervised place within the municipal boundaries of the town, including, but not limited to, schools, parks, and municipal buildings. 
(Ord. 2013-09) 
12.07.020 - Trespassing on golf course prohibited. 
    No person shall enter or remain on the golf course unless he or she (i) is currently engaged in playing golf at the golf course; (ii) is a town employee performing required work on the golf course; (iii) has received permission from the town to enter or remain on the golf course; or (iv) is a person of lawful authority. 
12.07.030 - Trespassing on public property prohibited. 
    No person shall enter or remain on any public property outside of the posted hours of use or permitted hours of operation unless he or she (i) has the permission of the owner or operator of the public property; or (ii) is a person of lawful author 
Chapter 12.08 - REGULATION OF PUBLIC PLACES 

12.08.010 - Scope. 
    This chapter applies to parks, open space, trails, parkways, pathways, recreational facilities, the Gypsum Creek Golf Course, and buildings and programs owned and/or operated by the town (collectively, "public places"). 
(Ord. No. 2014-16,  1(Exh. A), 1-13-15) 
12.08.020 - Rules and regulations. 
    The manager of any public place or the head of any department with authority over a public place may propose rules and regulations for such public place, including but not limited to restricting the hours, days and weeks of use. After approval by the town manager, the rules, regulations and any operating hours, shall be posted in at least one location at the public place, or otherwise provided to participants and users. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16,  1(Exh. A), 1-13-15) 
12.08.030 - Restriction on use. 
    The manager of any public place or head of any department with authority over a public place may temporarily or permanently restrict, remove, or have removed by any law enforcement officer any user, individual, or group for unsafe, belligerent or disruptive behavior, intoxication, violation of state, federal, or local laws or any other provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code, or violation of any of the rules and regulations of the public place. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16,  1(Exh. A), 1-13-15) 
12.08.040 - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the town manager. Any user, individual, or group who is restricted or removed from any public place may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the town manager, listing the reasons therefor within ten days of the original decision. The town manager shall conduct an administrative appeal hearing, upon ten days' notice to the appellant by email or first class mail. At the hearing, the appellant and original decision-maker may present evidence. The town manager's decision shall be rendered within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and shall be final. 
(b)  Appeals to municipal court. The decision of the town manager shall be subject to review by the municipal court by filing a complaint that includes the specific allegations of error no more than 14 days after the final decision by the town manager. The municipal court's review shall be limited to a determination of whether the town manager exceeded his jurisdiction or abused his discretion, based on the evidence in the record before the town manager. Any appeal of the decision of the municipal court shall be brought in district court as a civil matter pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16,  1(Exh. A), 1-13-15) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS 

13.04.010 - Water department created. 
    There is created and established a water department for the Town of Gypsum for the purpose of management, maintenance and operation of a waterworks system and plant for supplying the Town of Gypsum. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.020 - Superintendent and personnel. 
    The property and personnel under the control of the town council shall be referred to generally as the Gypsum Waterworks System and Gypsum Water Department or water department. The council shall designate some person as superintendent of the water department. The superintendent shall cause the council's policies and orders to be executed and shall bring matters to the council's attention which are appropriate for its action. The person being appointed superintendent shall have responsibility for and control of the waterworks system and shall perform all acts which may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and approval of the council. The council shall have the power to prescribe such others and further rules and regulations governing the powers and duties of the water department and its personnel. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.030 - Water work funds. 
    There is hereby created a waterworks fund into which shall be placed all revenues received from the operation of the waterworks system and plant together with all monies coming into said fund from other sources. All revenues of the water department shall be turned over to the treasurer of the Town of Gypsum who shall open and keep a separate account for said waterworks fund and shall faithfully account for all monies received and disbursed on account thereof. Money shall be paid out of the waterworks fund only upon the authority of the town council. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.040 - Conditions of water service. 
    The right to take and use water distributed through the facilities of the water department exists and shall exist only through license, and no physical connection may be made or modified to any such facilities or to any extension thereof for any purpose unless a license shall have first been obtained. Neither the issuance of a license nor the use of water thereunder shall constitute or be deemed a relinquishment of title to any water, water right or successive use of water by the Town of Gypsum. A licensee shall have the right to use water only on the licensed premises and for the purposes specified in the license. Licenses attach to the licensed premises only. No water user in or upon any premises to which water is supplied under a license for such premises, shall supply or permit water to be supplied for use on any other premises. A license is required for each and every premises using water regardless of whether it receives service inside Gypsum or outside Gypsum, pursuant to a license agreement. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.050 - Eligibility for water service. 
(a)  Inside Gypsum. All properties situate inside the corporate boundaries of the Town of Gypsum as the same may exist from time to time shall be eligible to receive water service from the water department upon compliance with these rules and payment of such fees and charges as may be applicable and necessary to extend the department's system to the property concerned. The timing and method for extending such service shall be at the sole discretion of the town council. 
(b)  Outside Gypsum. Only those properties which are outside of the Town of Gypsum but which are included within the boundaries of an area which the water department has agreed to serve by virtue of an agreement, contract or license shall be eligible for service from the water department. Eligibility for service in such areas shall be conditioned on compliance with all rules and regulations, fees and charges of the water department. 
(Ord. 12, series 1990 1) 
13.04.060 - Application for a water service license. 
    A license to take and use water distributed through the water department system is issued only upon the condition that the applicant submit a signed, written application for service on a form supplied by the water department containing but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the premises to be served, containing a designation of lot and block or other description to define the area to be served. The land upon which the water service tap will be used must be identified at the time of purchase on the application for a water service license and the tap cannot be moved or severed from this specifically identified land, or sold, leased or traded to another person, entity or property location without written consent of the town. However, a prepurchased tap can be assigned, for no additional consideration, to a subsequent purchaser of the property for which the tap was purchased. 
(2)  A statement of the purpose(s) for which the water is to be used, including calculation of peak water service requirements. 
(3)  An acknowledgment and agreement by the license that use under the license must be as limited and defined by applicable law and the rules and regulations of the water department. 
(4)  The name of the licensed plumber who will install the service line. 
(5)  An agreement on the part of the applicant to pay a system development charge, and such other rates, fees and charges then in existence. (Ord 04, series 1999) 
13.04.070 - Schedule of water rates. 
    The town council shall set rates for which water will be delivered through the waterworks system and at such a level as may be required to pay for the operation and administration, maintenance, debt service, reserves, rehabilitation of facilities, additions and extensions, improvements, and capital project requirements of the Town of Gypsum Water Department. Except as provided by written agreement entered into under special or qualifying conditions, all water delivered shall be metered and the following rates shall apply: 
(1)  Metered uses-Inside and outside Gypsum: The town encourages the use of privately owned nonpotable (raw water) irrigation systems for the irrigation of lawns, gardens and greenbelt areas. In pursuit thereof, a credit for the use of privately owned nonpotable (raw water) irrigation systems, for which there is no outside use, is contained in sections 13.08.060 and 13.08.210 of this Code. 
The monthly charge includes a service fee per service connection ("service fee") and a per gallon of use charge ("usage charge"), which is based on the total number of gallons above the amount included in the base service fee which are used within the billing period. In addition, while phase II, III, or IV water use restrictions, as provided in section 13.04.360, are in effect, customers shall also incur charges ("drought surcharge") for water usage exceeding the number of gallons per EQR included in the service fee. Drought surcharges will be billed in addition to the service fee and usage charge. The per gallon rates will be applied per EQR designated for the use in the building permit, or per EQR assigned in the town's discretion. The amount included in the base service fee is described below: 
Monthly Commercial, Industrial and Nonresidential Rates. (Ordinance 04, series 2001) 
Use Type Service Fee Per Service Connection Single EQR Surcharge Rate, applied when usage is over gallon per EQR, per 1,000 gallons Multiple EQR Surcharge Rate applied when usage is over gallon limit per EQR, per 1,000 gallons All Commercial and Industrial Uses In-Town 
(15,000 gallons/EQR) $35.85 
Fixed Fee  First 15,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 15,000 up to 20,000 for each EQR 
 $4.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 up to 25,000 for each EQR 
 $5.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 25,000 for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 15,000 gallons per EQR  $2.39/1,000 gallons for the next 15,000 gallons for each additional EQR; 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 15,000 up to 20,000 gallons for each EQR; 
 $4.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons up to 25,000 gallons for each EQR 
 $5.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 25,000 gallons for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 15,000 gallons per EQR All Commercial and Industrial Uses Out-of-Town 
(15,000 gallons/EQR) $53.80 
Fixed Fee  First 15,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 15,000 up to 20,000 for each EQR 
 $6.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 up to 25,000 for each EQR 
 $8.25/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 25,000 for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 15,000 gallons per EQR  $3.60/1,000 gallons for the next 15,000 gallons for each additional EQR; 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 15,000 up to 20,000 gallons for each EQR; 
 $6.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons up to 25,000 gallons for each EQR 
 $8.25/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 25,000 for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 15,000 gallons per EQR Irrigation - City Potable Water 
(5,000 gallons/irrigation EQR), In-Town $12.00 Multiple of EQRs  First 5,000 per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 5000 gallons up to 10,000 gallons for each EQR 
 $5.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 5,000 gallons per EQR  First 5,000 per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 5000 gallons up to 10,000 gallons for each EQR 
 $5.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons for each EQR 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 5,000 gallons per EQR Irrigation - City Raw Water, In-Town, only on as available basis $5.00  $0.32/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons, delivery subject to availability and in Town's sole discretion 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate  $0.32/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons, dependent on availability, delivery subject to availability and in Town's sole discretion 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate Water Troughs, Out of Town $0.00  $2.45/1,000 gallons, per agreement 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate Water Permit Temporary Potable (maximum duration of permit is 180 days) 
(10,000 gallons) $50.00 
(10,000 
gallons)  $ 5.00/1,000 gallons for the first 10,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate  $5.00/1,000 gallons for each gallon used over 10,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate Water Permit Temporary Raw (maximum duration of permit is 180 days) 
(10,000 gallons) $25.00 
(10,000 
gallons)  $2.50/1,000 gallons for the first 10,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate  $2.50/1,000 gallons for each gallon used over 10,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate  
Monthly Residential Rates. (Ordinance 04, series 2001) 
Use Type Service Fee Per Service Connection Single EQR Surcharge Rate, applied when usage is over gallon per EQR, per 1,000 gallons Multiple EQR Surcharge Rate applied when usage is over gallon limit per EQR, per 1,000 gallons Single Family Dwelling or Multi Family Dwelling (per unit), In-Town, for which outside use is not allowed (10,000 gallons/EQR) $25.00 
Fixed Fee  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR  First 10,000 gallons per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling or Multi Family Dwelling (per unit), In-Town, for which outside use is allowed 
(20,000 gallons/EQR) $25.00 
Fixed Fee  First 20,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $1.65/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR  First 20,000 gallons per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $1.65/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling or Multi Family Dwelling (per unit), Out-of-Town, for which outside use is not allowed 
(10,000 gallons/EQR) $37.50 
Fixed Fee  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $4.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR  First 10,000 gallons per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $4.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling or Multi Family Dwelling (per unit), Out-of-Town, for which outside use is allowed 
(20,000 gallons/EQR) $37.50 
Fixed Fee  First 20,000: gallons included in Service Fee 
 $2.45/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR  First 20,000 gallons per EQR included in Service Fee 
 $2.45/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling with Accessory Dwelling Unit. In-Town, for which outside use is not allowed 
(10,000 gallons/EQR) $31.25 
Fixed Fee  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $3.00/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling with Accessory Dwelling Unit, In-Town, for which outside use is allowed 
(20,000 gallons/EQR) $31.25 
Fixed Fee  First 20,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $1.65/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR  First 20,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $1.65/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $3.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling with Accessory Dwelling Unit, Out-of-Town, for which outside use is not allowed 
(10,000 gallons/EQR) $46.85  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $4.75/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR  First 10,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $4.50/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 10,000 gallons 
 $4.75/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 10,000 gallons per EQR Single Family Dwelling with Accessory Dwelling Unit, Out-of-Town, for which outside use is allowed 
(20,000 gallons/EQR) $46.85  First 20,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $2.48/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $4.75/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR  First 20,000 gallons included in Service Fee 
 $2.48/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 20,000 gallons 
 $4.75/1,000 gallons for each 1,000 gallons used over 50,000 gallons 
 Drought Surcharge: 20% of the per 1,000 gallon rate for usage exceeding the first 20,000 gallons per EQR Penalty for using Town water supply without permit for any type of use $2,650.00, or such other maximum fine amount established by Section 2.01.090(6), G.M.C., whichever is higher. Per offense Per offense Penalty for using the Town potable water supply for irrigation on residential or commercial property which is required to be supplied by a separate nonpotable supply source $2,650.00, or such other maximum fine amount established by Section 2.01.090(6), G.M.C., whichever is higher. Per offense Per offense  
(Ord. 2014-02) 
(2)  Mixed uses. If a customer's property contains both commercial and residential uses measured on one meter, the applicable commercial rate shall be charged as stated above. The customer has the option of installing a separate meter at the customer's sole cost to separately meter residential use for billing at the residential rates. 
(3)  Other agreements. The town reserves the right to charge a different rate by contract or agreement between the parties at the town's sole discretion. 
(Ordinance 04, series 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2017-07,  1, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 2018-02,  2, 3-13-18) 
13.04.080 - System development charges. 
    No license for water service shall be issued by the water department without prior payment of an appropriate system development charge and a guarantee by the applicant that all costs, materials, labor and fees required to connect licensee's premises to the water main will be borne by the applicant. Taps may be purchased up to six months prior to issuance of a building permit, but an adjustment payment to the most current tap fee shall be made if the related building permit is not issued within six months of tap purchase. Tap fees paid at building permit issuance are good for 365 days from building permit issuance. Prior to connection to the municipal system and/or at the time of issuance of the building permit(s), whichever first occurs, the tap fees as specified below shall be paid in full. 
(1)  Inside Gypsum. Commencing on August 1, 2007, any applicant shall pay to the town clerk and treasurer a system development charge of $6,000.00 for each equivalent residential unit (EQR) of demand necessary to serve the peak water service requirements of the premises as computed in accordance with the provisions of section 13.08.060; provided however, no reduction shall be made to the EQR demand hereunder if a raw water irrigation system is used under section 13.08.060. This fee includes the labor, a proportionate cost of existing municipal facilities and cost of installing the corporation stop necessary or accessing the water department's water main. The cost of the excavation, backfill, service line, stop box, meter pit, meter corporation stop and tap saddle are further responsibility of the applicant. The town may require in all annexation agreements, that the applicant pay additional fees for either for infrastructure specified by the town necessary to support new annexed tap connections, and/or pay $1,200.00 per EQR of the tap fee at final plat approval to pay Gypsum for its investment already existing and for upsizing that may be required with additional growth. Such annexation infrastructure or fee determination shall be at the town's sole discretion. 
(2)  Special service area. The applicant shall pay an additional system development surcharge for each EQR of demand in any special service areas that may be designated by Gypsum, and such fee shall be determined in Gypsum's discretion and due at building permit. 
(3)  Outside Gypsum. The applicant shall pay to the town clerk and treasurer a system development charge of $12,000.00 for each equivalent residential (EQR) of demand necessary to serve the peak water service requirements of the premises as computed in accordance with the provisions of section 13.08.060. This fee includes the labor, a proportionate cost of existing municipal facilities and cost of installing the corporation stop necessary or accessing the water department's water main. The cost of the excavation, backfill, service line, stop box, meter pit, meter corporation stop and tap saddle are further responsibility of the applicant. The town may require in all annexation agreements, that the applicant pay additional fees for either for infrastructure specified by the town necessary to support new annexed tap connections, and/or pay $2,400.00 per EQR of the tap fee at final plat approval to pay Gypsum for its investment already existing and for upsizing that may be required with additional growth. Such annexation infrastructure or fee determination shall be at the town's sole discretion. 
(4)  The town may, in its sole discretion, negotiate with the applicant to establish other terms or conditions which shall constitute compliance with the water tap fee payment requirement of this chapter. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections (1) through (4), above, an applicant for non-residential uses in which the tap fees requirement equal to or exceeds the sum of $25,000.00 shall be entitled to make such payment in three equal installment payments to be paid over a period not exceeding five years on a schedule set by the town. If any payment is not fully paid when due, the amount past due shall be treated as an unpaid charge pursuant to section 13.04.100. 
(5)  Accessory dwelling units shall not be subject to water tap fees, but are subject to monthly service fees per section 13.04.070. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07,  2, 5-23-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-07,  2, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed the former  13.04.080, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  13.04.080 pertained to system development charges and tapping fees and derived from Ord. 04, Series 2007; and Ord. No. 2016-02,  3, adopted Feb. 9, 2016. 
13.04.090 - Special permits and fees. 
    The water department shall have the authority to issue temporary permits and licenses for the use of water from the waterworks system. Such uses, permits and licenses are subject to fees and charges as set by the town council and as specified in section 13.04.070 and include but are not limited to the following: 
Hydrant permits and fees. 
(1)  A permit authorizing the temporary use of a water department hydrant is available upon approval by the water department superintendent and pursuant to the fees set by the Code in section 13.04.070. Permits shall be valid only during the dates specified therein and shall not be issued without prior payment of all hydrant permit fees. No permit shall be valid for longer than 180 days from the date of issuance. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
(2)  Permits for filling tank trucks shall be issued for each truck and shall remain in such truck at all times during the life of the permit. 
(3)  Charges for water used under such permits shall be calculated as set forth in section 13.04.070 above, on a per 1,000 gallon basis, and further shall include such special administrative costs as are deemed appropriate. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
(4)  In addition to the per 1,000 gallon charge specified in section 13.04.070, the hydrant permit fee shall be $100.00 per hydrant tap per user. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
(5)  Failure to comply with permitting shall result in the penalty as set forth in section 13.040.070, and any damages resulting from the illegal use. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
(6)  Permit holder shall be responsible for all and any damages caused to any hydrant or portion of the town's system which occurs due to the use of the hydrant. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
(7)  Permit holders must use a meter for all use of any hydrant, which shall be provided by the town on an as available basis, which is covered in part by the permit fee. (Ord. 3, series 2001 1) 
13.04.100 - Payment of water rates and charges. 
    All charges for water as provided for in this chapter must be paid to the town clerk and treasurer. Billings will occur on a monthly schedule and if payment is not received by the town on the due date they shall become delinquent and subject to late charges. Failure to pay for water service to the property shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be a perpetual charge against the property until paid. In the event that water bills for property outside the town corporate limits are not paid upon demand, the town clerk and treasurer shall report such delinquencies to the county treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.110 - Responsibility for payment of water rates. 
    The responsibility for payment of water consumed by a service address, and any other fees, rates, tolls, penalties or charges associated with providing water service shall rest with the property owner. Failure to pay for water service to the property shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be a perpetual charge against the property until paid. In the event that water bills for property outside the Town corporate limits are not paid upon demand, the town clerk and treasurer shall report such delinquencies to the county treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
(Ord. No. 2018-02,  4, 3-13-18) 
13.04.111 - Certification of delinquent charges and fees. 
    All delinquent fees, rates, tolls, penalties or charges associated with providing water service or facilities to provide such service, including costs of extending lines and system enhancement costs or water dedication charges, shall constitute a perpetual priority lien upon any lots, land, buildings or premises provided service or to be provided service by such facilities. In the event said charges are not paid when due, the town clerk may certify such charges to the County Treasurer of Eagle County, Colorado to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property served in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against property. (Ord. 16 series 1992 2) 
13.04.120 - Late charges, interest charges and fees. 
    Payments are considered late after the 15th day of the month of the billing. Late charges will be added at the rate of one percent of the unpaid balance at the time of the next billing. The town shall mail a written notice, deposited in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, to the customer of its intent to disconnect service, at least seven days prior to the disconnect date. If the delinquent portions of the bill is not paid by the date on the written notice water service will be discontinued. Property owners or tenants are prohibited from turning water services back on even once payment has been made. Tampering with services will result in the issuance of a fine of $2,650.00 or such other maximum fine amount established by section 2.01.090(6), G.M.C., whichever is higher. Only the Gypsum Water Department is authorized to turn water services on or off. 
13.04.130 - Standards and installation of plumbing and plumbing fixtures. 
    All plumbing and plumbing fixtures installed to deliver or receive water from the Gypsum Water Department shall comply with the most current standards and specifications of the Gypsum Water Department. All plumbing installed within the service area of the water department shall be completed by a licensed plumber who shall be responsible for complying with all permit requirements for new construction and shall be responsible for notifying the water department superintendent of any code violations discovered in the course of his work. Failure to do so shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of the plumber's license. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.140 - Expanded water service. 
    Should the owner or occupant of the property desire expanded or additional water service or to apply the water to a purpose not stated at the time of the original application, written authorization must be obtained therefor from the water department. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.150 - Decrease or discontinuance of service. 
    Any customer who desires to decrease or discontinue water service to a property must notify the superintendent of the water department of such desire in writing before any reduction in water rates will be made. A decrease or discontinuance in water service must be preceded by a similar reduction in demand by removal of fixtures or disconnection from the waterworks system. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.160 - Right to water shut off by town. 
    The town reserves the right to shut off its main for the purpose of maintenance, repairs, extensions or for any other purpose, and no claim shall be made against the town for any damage caused by the shut off. In all cases of routine maintenance the water department will make every reasonable attempt to notify the customer in advance of the shut off, giving an estimate of the time the waterworks system will be out of service. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.170 - Separate connections required. 
    Two or more premises cannot be supplied from one tap. For purposes of definition, separate premises are those that do not share a common foundation or roofline. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.180 - Service pipe regulations. 
    The service pipe and fittings through which a licensee receives water service from the facilities of the waterworks system shall be owned and installed at the expense of the licensee and must lie entirely within a public right-of-way, easement or the licensee's property. The service pipe shall not be allowed to cross adjoining properties without the express written permission of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 1) 
13.04.190 - Cross-connection and interconnection. 
    The backflow of nonpotable water or foreign materials into the Gypsum water system is prohibited. All devices which have an effect on interconnection or cross-connection control shall be approved by the water department. 
(Ord. 12, series 1990) 
13.04.200 - Water service outside Gypsum corporate limits. 
    The town council shall have the authority to lease water and water rights for use outside the corporate boundaries of the Town of Gypsum, but such leases shall provide for limitations of delivery of water to whatever extent may be necessary to enable the board to provide an adequate supply of water to the people within the boundaries of the Town of Gypsum and provided, further, that every such lease shall contain terms to secure the payment into the waterworks fund of sufficient money to fully reimburse the town of the cost of furnishing the water or water rights which is the subject of such a lease. 
(Ord. 12, series 1990) 
13.04.210 - Water service curtailment outside Gypsum corporate limits. 
    Use of water outside the corporate limits of the Town of Gypsum is subject to the paramount rights of the users within the town and in periods of water shortage or scarcity, the town council may reduce, curtail or shut off the supply to users outside the corporate limits of the town in compliance with section 13.04.360 herein. 
(Ord. 12, series 1990 S1) 
13.04.220 - Tap activation. 
    Any license for water service issued must be activated within 365 days from the date of the license, except that all taps purchased prior to January 1, 2000, shall be activated on or before December 31, 2004, on the property identified in the application for tap. If such activation is not made by December 31, 2004, then any new or expanded use of water requiring a tap connection shall be the subject of a new tap fee at the then prevailing rates of the town; provided however, a credit in the amount paid for the prepurchased tap shall be given equal to the amount actually paid for the prepurchased tap, without interest. Activation shall be deemed to have occurred when the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  All charges and fees have been paid, 
(2)  Connection to the water main has been made, 
(3)  The service line has been installed and the meter has been set, 
(4)  Water service has commenced. 
In the event these conditions have not been met within the prescribed period of time the water service license shall automatically terminate. In the event of termination, the applicant shall have the right to apply for a one-year extension to the water service license. Such application must be accompanied by all appropriate increases in tapping fees and system development charges plus an administrative fee of $25.00 and must receive the written approval of the superintendent prior to issuance of a license by the town. 
(Ord. 04, series 1999) 
13.04.250 - Tap size. 
    The minimum size tap allowed to be installed within the Town of Gypsum's water service area shall have an inside diameter of three-fourths of an inch and which shall be considered sufficient to supply one equivalent residential unit (EQR) of demand. Tap sizes larger than three-fourths of an inch require written authorization of the superintendent prior to issuance of a license by the town. 
(Ord. 12, series 1990) 
13.04.260 - Water meter requirements. 
    All new taps to the Town of Gypsum waterworks system shall require the installation and utilization a water meter as approved by the water department. The cost of purchase and installation shall be the responsibility of the license, however ownership and maintenance responsibility of the meter shall immediately pass to the water department. (Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.270 - Access to water meters. 
    The owner of the property served grants and permits the water department and any of its employees or agents to enter upon the premises for the purposes of reading, repairing, servicing or otherwise maintaining the department's meter or turning on or off water services at the property owner's curb stop. 
(Ord. 14 series 2011) 
13.04.280 - Metered uses. 
    In addition to the metered uses detailed in section 13.04.070 the town requires the metering of all water used to service stock watering tanks and all temporary uses of water from the waterworks system. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.290 - Water facility ownership. 
    Unless an agreement provides otherwise, all water mains located within the Town of Gypsum Water Department's service area are owned by the Town of Gypsum. The dividing point between town owned facilities and licensee owned facilities shall be defined as the connection point of the licensee's service line to the corporation stop tapped into the water department's water main. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.300 - Extension of mains or water facilities. 
    Mains or water facilities of the water department may be extended or expanded only with the specific permission of the town council and at the sole expense of the applicant for extension. Procedures for the extension of any main shall be established by the town council and may be modified from time to time as required. 
    The applicant or his contractor will ordinarily install all mains that are 16 inches in diameter or smaller. Such installation of mains and appurtenant facilities will require that the applicant: 
(1)  Submit plans, specifications, easement documents, surveys and construction cost estimates prepared by a registered professional engineer for the proposed installation, which plans, specifications and easements must be approved in writing by the water department prior to award of contract and commencement of installation. 
(2)  Pay all costs of plan review and inspection of the installation by the water department or its agents as determined by the water department. 
(3)  Dedicate all installed facilities, easements, rights-of-way, plans, specifications, as-built drawings, surveys and construction documents to the town upon completion. (Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.310 - Facility extension cost recovery. 
    For every new service connection that is made to a facility which has been constructed, extended or expanded by any entity other than the Town of Gypsum, there will be charged in addition to the normal system development charge a further charge that will be determined by the town council that will allow for proportionate cost recovery to the original dedicating entity. Charges for the repayment of such installation costs shall endure for a constructed facilities or until complete repayment of the amount authorized by the town council, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.320 - Water waste or pollution. 
(a)  Waste. All connectors to the Town of Gypsum waterworks system shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water delivery appurtenances closed when not in actual use. In addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, violation of this water waste ordinance may result in the discontinuance of water service and penalties of $50.00 for the first occurrence, $200.00 for the second occurrence, and $500.00 for each additional violation. Any such penalty may be added to the monthly charges and, if not paid, shall constitute a lien and perpetual charge against property which may be certified to the county treasurer for collection pursuant to section 13.04.111 herein. 
(b)  Pollution. No person, within all areas and drainage basins located and lying below points five miles above the streams and sources from which the town's water supply is derived shall permit any act whatsoever which shall tend to foul or render impure or unwholesome any of the water supply of the Town of Gypsum. No person shall cast into, or allow to flow in, or fall into any of the waters contributing to the town's supply, or any reservoir belonging to the town, any filth, sewage, carrion, garbage, mineral, clays, rock or earth of any kind, or any organic pollutants, nor do any act or thing which would pollute or tend to pollute the watersheds or water supply sources of the town. (Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
(Ord. No. 2018-02,  3, 3-13-18) 
13.04.330 - Water use during fire emergencies. 
    During all emergencies of fire, the use of hoses and all outlets where a constant flow is required or maintained is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.340 - Fire protection service. 
    All connections to the waterworks system for public or private fire protection shall be made under license for fire protection. The only use for which water may be taken from fire protection facilities without a special permit is for extinguishing fires. Public fire hydrants are placed at locations designated by either the water department or fire chief. Such hydrants are maintained and owned by the water department. 
    Any use of a fire hydrant of fire sprinkler system, not made for extinguishing fires, or pursuant to a permit granted by the water department is strictly prohibited. Unauthorized use shall be paid for at special charges for the actual or estimated amount of water used, together with a base charge of not less than $50.00 and such additional amount as is necessary to cover any damage, injury or costs relative to the unauthorized use. 
(Ord. 12 series 1990 S1) 
13.04.350 - Water conservation. 
(a)  All new commercial, industrial, institutional and other nonresidential construction or remodel or renovation of such uses which involve the installation of new or additional plumbing fixtures shall require the installation of water saving or water conserving devices such as low volume toilets using not more than three gallons per tank fill or flush and low volume shower heads, faucets, spigots and other fixtures as determined by the town and which comply with section 13.04.130 herein. 
(b)  Water shall be used only for beneficial purposes and shall never be wasted. Any low flow or low volume water fixture that requires replacement shall be replaced by an "equal or better" water fixture only. Replacement of low flow/volume fixtures with fixtures requiring or utilizing a higher flow or volume of delivery are not permitted. 
(c)  Water for irrigation of lawns and other outside uses shall be by sprinkler or drip irrigation methods. 
(d)  Any unauthorized use of said water shall be paid for at the same rate as if that use had been authorized together with the costs incurred by the water department in discovering and collecting for the unauthorized use. Such payments shall not in any way affect the right of the water department to suspend or revoke a license for unauthorized use or charge additional penalties or pursue such other remedies as may be authorized by law. Nor shall it affect any criminal liability which may have attached by reason of such unauthorized use. 
(Ord. 12, series 1995 S3) 
13.04.360 - Water use restrictions. 
    In case of water shortage or scarcity, the town council may, upon proclamation, place any restrictions which they deem necessary upon the use of water in accordance with the following staged water restriction program. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to check the town website after 9:00 a.m. every second and fourth Wednesday of every month, between April 1 and October 31, to determine what phase of watering restrictions may be in place. 
Phase I: Voluntary Restrictions on Water Use 
(1)  Property owners and managers are advised to irrigate lawns that are serviced by the town potable water supply not more than every other day and applying not more than one inch of water. 
(2)  Property owners and managers are advised to irrigate lawns between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(3)  Vehicle owners are advised to limit the use of water to wash vehicles and equipment to once per week. 
(4)  Property owners and managers should refrain from using water for cleaning driveways, parking lots, streets, etc. 
(5)  Restrictions (1)-(3) should be considered mandatory for the Town of Gypsum except where restriction no. (3) would substantially degrade air quality. Uses by the town will be restricted by administrative order to set example and also to affect water savings. Areas in which the town should restrict its own use of water include: 
a.  Irrigation of town lawns, open space and parks. 
b.  Washing of town vehicles, equipment, etc. 
c.  Street general maintenance. 
d.  Hydrant testing and sewer line cleaning other than what is required to meet state health standards. 
(6)  Residential/industrial/commercial consider in-house steps to encourage water efficiency. 
Phase II: Mandatory Limited Restrictions on Water Use 
(1)  Restriction on lawn watering to every other day (odd/even schedule). Homes with odd numbered addresses may only water on odd numbered calendar days and homes with even numbered addresses may only water on even numbered calendar days. 
(2)  Watering shall only take place during 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(3)  Extensions may be permitted for brand new lawns. 
(4)  Restrictions on vehicle/equipment washing to once per week. 
(5)  Moratorium on hydrant use permits for all nonessential uses. 
(6)  Moratorium on the issuance of new irrigation taps. 
(7)  Institute fines and penalties for water use violations as outlined in section 13.04.320. 
(8)  Private swimming pools are limited to only adding water to the pool to make up for evaporation and splash, but may not empty the pool for cleaning and replacement of water. Private pools not already filled by the time this phase is implemented by the town may not be filled. 
(9)  Restrictions on Town of Gypsum uses. To be accomplished by administrative order. 
a.  Limit water main flushing, hydraulic sewer cleaning, and hydrant flow testing to minimum required to meet state health standards. 
b.  Town water use for general maintenance limited to essential levels. 
(10)  Drought surcharges on customer water use will be billed to each customer class based on the usage and amounts specified in section 13.04.070. Drought surcharges are billed in addition to the customer's applicable monthly service fee and usage charge. 
Phase III: Mandatory Restrictions on Water Use 
(1)  Moratorium on lawn irrigation. 
(2)  Moratorium on car/vehicle/equipment washing. 
(3)  Moratorium on sale of new water taps. 
(4)  Moratorium on evaporative cooling of commercial buildings. 
(5)  Moratorium on use of any water for private swimming pools. 
(6)  Voluntary in-house restrictions. Encourage water efficiency. 
(7)  Voluntary industrial/commercial restrictions. Goal is no water waste. 
(8)  Institute fines and penalties for water use violations. 
(9)  Drought surcharges on customer water use will be billed to each customer class based on usage and amounts specified in section 13.04.070. Drought surcharges are billed in addition to the customer's applicable monthly service fee and usage charge. 
Phase IV: Curtailment of Nonessential Water Use 
(1)  Restriction of all water supplies to potable and sanitary use. 
(2)  Fire fighting restricted to prevent loss of life. 
(3)  Moratorium on delivery of water to users outside the boundaries of the Town of Gypsum. (Ord. 12 series 1990 S1; Ord. 08 series 2012) 
(4)  Drought surcharges on customer water use will be billed to each customer class based on usage and amounts specified in section 13.04.070. Drought surcharges are billed in addition to the customer's applicable monthly service fee and usage charge. (Ord. 12 series 1990 S1; Ord. 08 series 2012) 
(Ord. No. 2018-02,  1, 3-13-18) 
  
  
13.04.370 - Definition. 
    A raw water irrigation system or nonpotable irrigation system shall be defined as a privately owned irrigation system that is not connected to the town's nonpotable water supply system and is used to irrigate lands owned by the user. The system must comply with the dedication requirement of section 13.08.060. 
(Ord. 5 series 1996 S2) 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER RIGHTS DEDICATION 

13.08.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "town water rights dedication ordinance." 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.020 - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to require the dedication of water rights prior to the extension of treated or raw water service to new customers or to existing customers with inadequate and stable supply of water to the town service area; to prevent the abandonment of water rights to the detriment of the town; to ensure the financial stability of the town water utility; and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(b)  This chapter, in part, provides a supplemental requirement for annexation as provided by state statutes and also supplemental requirements to the subdivision requirements of the town; and does not eliminate, modify, or replace any requirements set forth in other statutes or ordinances. 
(Ord 13 SI, 1992) 
13.08.030 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Annexation means the act of attaching, adding, joining, or uniting a parcel of land to the legal entity known as the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Appurtenant means belonging to, accessory or incident to, adjunct, appended, annexed to, or used in conjunction with. 
    Board or board of trustees means the board of trustees of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Conveyance of water rights means the legal process by which legal title to the water rights to be dedicated is transferred to the town by appropriate deed, stock assignment, or both. 
    Dedication means an appropriation of an interest in land or water to some public use, made by the owner, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. 
    Equivalent residential unit or EQR, as used in this chapter, means a number related to the volume of water consumptively used by a single-family residence housing a statistical average of three and one-half persons and having not more than 2,500 square feet of irrigated lawn or garden. The demand for water represented by 1.0 EQR assumes that none of the following limits are exceeded: 
(1)  An average annual requirement of 0.54 acre feet; 
(2)  A peak monthly water demand of 25,000 gallons; and 
(3)  A peak daily demand of 900 gallons. The consumptive use, for water uses not associated with use at a single-family residence, is considered to be equal to a volume of water, expressed in EQR units, as determined by the town with guidance by the schedule provided in the table of EQRs under section 13.08.060. The town shall have sole and exclusive discretion in determining whether the basic dedication requirement should be increased or decreased, on a case by case basis, after consideration of the place, method, efficiency and operation of wastewater treatment for the use served. Provided however, for residential uses it is not the intent hereof for the town to reassess the dedication requirement should such limits be exceeded. Residential units shall only be reassessed upon the addition of fixtures, habitable space or a substantial enlargement of lawn size. (Ord. 33, SI, 1997) 
    Extensions of service means any extension of the municipal water utility for which a tapping charge is assessed. 
    Historical use affidavit means a document which sets forth the following information concerning the water rights proposed for dedication: 
(1)  The name(s) and addresses of the owner(s) of all water rights owned by the party seeking extension of service; 
(2)  A legal description of the land to be annexed or provided with municipal water services; 
(3)  The total number of acres to be annexed or provided with municipal water service; 
(4)  The total number of acres presently being irrigated and/or intended to remain in irrigation; 
(5)  A copy of all decrees concerning all water rights appurtenant to the property and all other rights owned or controlled by the party seeking extensions of service; 
(6)  A copy of any legal decree or judgment which affects the title of those water rights entered since the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
(7)  A copy of the documents by which the owner received title to the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication; 
(8)  A copy of all diversion records of the water rights proposed for dedication; 
(9)  The owner's statement as to the historic use of the water rights appurtenant to the property and/or proposed for dedication. 
    Lease means any grant for permissive use which results in the creation of a landlord-tenant relationship. 
    Person means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a municipality, or any other legal entity, public or private. 
    Plat is an accurately surveyed map or chart of a piece of land subdivided into lots with streets, alleys, roads, and other such avenues of transportation delineated thereon and drawn to a scale. 
    Replat means to make a change in the original plat. 
    Subdivide means to separate into small divisions a tract of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, separate interests in common, condominium interest or other division for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership, or for building or other development, or for street use by reference to such subdivision or a recorded plat thereof. 
    Sufficient legal priority means that the water rights proposed for dedication may reasonably be expected to provide a dependable water supply throughout the season of use in the amount for which they are decreed. In making this determination, factors to be considered shall include, but not by way of limitation, the adjudication date and appropriation date of the water rights, the decreed use(s), the historic use of the water under the decree, the physical flow available, and the administration practices of the office of the state engineer. 
    Town means the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Town manager means any town manager of Gypsum, Colorado. 
    Transfer of water rights means the conveyance of legal title to water rights of the town in addition to referring to all actions required under the laws of the State of Colorado to be brought in the water court, water division no. 5, to ensure that the dedication requirement is fulfilled. Such action may include, but not by way of limitation, a change in the type, place, or time of use, a change in the point of diversion, a change from a fixed point of diversion to alternate or supplemental points of diversion to a fixed point of diversion, a change in the means of diversion, change in the place of storage, a change from direct application to storage and subsequent application, a change from storage and subsequent application to direct application, a change from a fixed place of storage to alternate places of storage, a change from alternate places of storage, or any combination of such changes. Transfer of water rights includes transfer of conditional as well as absolute water rights. 
    Water rights means a decreed right to use in accordance with its priority a certain portion of the waters of the state by reason of the appropriation of the same. 
(Ord. 13, SI, 1992) 
13.08.040 - Dedication requirement-Generally. 
    A dedication or transfer of direct flow and/or storage water rights to the Town shall be required prior to the town committing to provide any new or enlarged water service as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. For any new or enlarged residential use of water, an estimate of water demands based on the dedication requirements stated in section 13.08.060 shall be submitted to the town prior to any extension of water utilities, expansion of water use from an existing connection, or approval of any annexation, subdivision or zoning request. Such estimate shall also include a detailed list of all water rights and water resources owned or controlled by the applicant or otherwise associated, in any way, with the property to be supplied water. The residential dedication requirement shall be made as follows: 
a.  Water rights to be considered for dedication shall be approved prior to annexation by the town, and conveyed to the town by final plat. 
b.  If in lieu of fees are required, the town may require, that the applicant deposit $1,400.00 for each equivalent residential unit (EQR) for every lot assessed by the town, due at annexation. 
c.  The remaining water right dedication fees, at the fee then existing, shall be paid at final plat, or at building permit, whichever occurs first. 
d.  The table of equivalent residential units is specified in section 13.08.060. 
e.  At such time that actual building plans and/or a request for a tap are submitted to the town for any property to be served, the dedication requirement shall be verified and modified (if necessary) to reflect the actual nature of the facilities to be serve under section 13.08.060. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses. For all other new or enlarged water uses, including but not limited to: commercial, industrial, transportation facility, irrigation, recreational, office, retail, schools, churches or lodging uses, applicant shall provide a good faith EQR estimate of water based on the dedication requirements stated in section 13.08.060 to the town prior to any extension of water utilities, expansion of use from an existing connection, or approval of any annexation, subdivision or zoning request. Such estimate shall also include detailed list of all water rights and water resources owned or controlled by the applicant or otherwise associated, in any way, with the property to be supplied water. An applicant shall be entitled to provide the town actual historic water usage reports and records for similar businesses, structures or uses which an applicant owns, controls or is affiliated with. In the event the town determines such historic usage reports or records will accurately forecast the anticipated water use by the applicant, the town, in its discretion, shall be entitled to base the EQR estimate on such reports or records. The non-residential use dedication requirement shall be made as follows: 
a.  Water rights to be considered for dedication shall be approved prior to annexation by the town, and conveyed to the town by final plat. 
b.  If in-lieu of fees are required, the town may require, that the applicant pay water right dedication fees as follows, in the town's discretion: 
1.  For the estimated EQR, but not less than at a rate of one EQR per non-residential lot; and 
2.  Applicant shall pay $1,000.00 per EQR of the estimated water right dedication at annexation. The remaining water right dedication, at the fee then existing, shall be paid at final plat or at building permit, whichever occurs first. 
c.  The town may, in its sole discretion, determine other terms or conditions by which applicant may satisfy the non-residential water right dedication, in compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Reinspection and recalculation. As a condition of continued water delivery by the town and to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter, the town shall have the right to reassess, reinspect and recalculate an existing connection's use, where it is demonstrated to the reasonable discretion of the town that the dedication requirement originally established for a connection was either in error or where demands from the connection exceed the anticipated or represented demands for that connection. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant a right to any owner or user of a connection to compel the town to recalculate the demand and no reconveyance, refund or rebate of water rights or cash in lieu of water rights shall be made by the town. 
(Ord. 08, Series 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2016-02,  1, 2-9-16) 
13.08.060 - Dedication requirement-Table. 
    The basic water rights dedication requirement shall be 1.0 acre foot of historic consumptive use per year, over the course of a full calendar year, for a water right, or water rights, of sufficient legal priority and season of use to service each equivalent residential unit (EQR) of demand as calculated under the Table of EQRs below, as determined by the Town in its sole discretion. The actual annual demand of 0.54 acre feet of consumptive use water assumes actual diversions, without transit losses, throughout the year; it is assumed that the 1.0 acre foot of historic consumptive use water is necessary to satisfy said demand after reasonable transfer and transit losses. The determination of suitability of a water right for transfer or the cash-in-hand of water right dedication shall be determined in the town's reasonable discretion. Consistent with section 13.08.070, such dedicated amount shall not be less than the total amount of water, expressed in EQRs, necessary to meet the total water demand requirement of the new or expanded water use(s). Payment in lieu of water right dedication will be at the sole discretion of the town and at a rate of payment consistent with the provisions of section 13.08.110(1). 
TABLE OF EQRs 
Nature of Facility to Be Served EQR 1. Residential with Potable Irrigation A. Residential unit up to 550 square feet consisting of a studio or one-bedroom/sleeping area with up to 1,000 square feet of irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler or drip irrigation. 0.54 B. Residential unit between 551 and 1,000 square feet consisting of up to two-bedrooms/sleeping area with up to 1,000 square feet of irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler or drip irrigation. 0.70 C. Residential unit between 1,001 and 3,000 square feet consisting of up to four-bedrooms/sleeping area with up to 2,500 square feet of irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler or drip irrigation. 1.0 D. Residences over 3,000 square feet: Each additional 100 square feet of living space. 0.0175 E. Each additional 100 square feet of irrigated lawn and garden by sprinkler or drip irrigation. 0.03 2. Residential with Non-potable Irrigation A. Residential unit up to 800 square feet consisting of a studio, one or two-bedrooms/sleeping area. 0.25 B. Residential unit of up to 1,000 square feet consisting of up to two-bedrooms/sleeping area. 0.35 C. Residential unit of up to 3,000 square feet consisting of up to four-bedrooms/sleeping area. 1.00 D. Each additional 100 square feet of living space. 0.0175 3. Generally A. Each additional bedroom over four bedrooms. 0.15 B. An annual average water demand equal to 0.426 acre-feet. 1.0 C. An average monthly peak water demand equal to 15,000 gallons. 1.0 D. A peak daily demand of 900 gallons. 1.0 E. Each coin operated washing machine up to 12 lbs. capacity. 0.35 F. Common area irrigation and amenities such as swimming pools, club houses and laundry facilities to be assessed on a case-by-case basis, at the town's sole discretion, in addition to the EQR values expressed above. 4. There shall be no partial EQR credit granted for irrigation area less than the limit in the above table. Any uses described in subparagraph 1 of this table, above, which do not utilize municipal water for any irrigation shall be: A. Entitled to a reduction in EQR rating of 0.5 EQR per 2,500 square feet of lawn or landscaping which is irrigated with non-potable water from a non-municipal system. The maximum credit which can be obtained for residential uses is 50 percent of the total EQR dedication requirement due from the project (however, if credit for any percentage of total EQR is obtained under this code provision, by irrigation from non-potable water from a non-municipal system, then the town shall proportionately reduce the water delivered for the residential use); B. Prohibited from having more than one outside hose bib which shall be placed on the front of the residence and shall not be used for any watering of lawns and gardens; and C. Subject to an irrigation plan disclosure statement as described in section 13.08.210. 5. Mobile home or mobile home space: A. Each mobile home or mobile home space in a court with not more than 1,000 square feet of irrigated lawn and garden. 0.80 6. Transient rental units, hotels, motels or rental units within residences: A. Managers unit: Uses single family or multi-family classification as applicable. 0.60 B. Each additional room without cooking or kitchen facilities. 0.30 C. Each additional room with cooking or kitchen facilities. 0.35 D. Coin operated washing machine 12-pound capacity or less. 0.30 7. Dormitories (per each rental bed space) without laundry or kitchen facilities. 0.10 8. Recreational vehicle parks: A. For each camping or vehicle space without sewer hook-up. 0.35 B. For each camping or vehicle space with sewer hook-up. 0.40 C. For common facilities, pump-out and water filling stations, and related facilities, the town will assess demand based on anticipated volume. 9. Bars and restaurants: A. For businesses with less than 25 seats. 1.50 B. For each additional seat. 0.04 10. Service stations and gas stations: A. Full service station with two toilets, two lavatories and one hand wash bay. 1.00 B. Demands in excess of the above are determined by projected volume. 11. Churches and nonprofit organizations with no residence or regular eating facilities. 1.00 12. Commercial retail stores with no process water, no residences, and no eating facilities including two restrooms which have a total of two lavatories and two toilets (one each per restroom): 1.00 A. For each additional toilet or urinal with manual flush. 0.30 B. For each additional toilet or urinal with continuous flow. 1.00 C. For each additional lavatory. 0.15 D. For each shower or bath or combination. 0.30 E. For each manual operated drinking fountain. 0.10 F. For each continuous flow drinking fountain. 1.00 13. Commercial offices (such as banks, professional office space and other low traffic occupations) with no process water, no residences, and no eating facilities including two restrooms which have a total of two lavatories and two toilets (one each per restroom) 1.00 A. For each additional toilet or urinal with manual flush. 0.30 B. For each additional toilet or urinal with continuous flow. 1.00 C. For each additional lavatory. 0.15 D. For each shower or bath or combination. 0.30 E. For each manual operated drinking fountain. 0.10 F. For each continuous flow drinking fountain. 1.00 14. Industrial, including warehouses which include two restrooms which have a total of two lavatories and two toilets (one each per restroom): 1.00 A. For every 350 gallons/day of process water with not more than 15 percent consumptive use. 1.00 B. For each additional toilet or urinal with manual flush. 0.30 C. For each additional toilet or urinal with continuous flow. 1.00 D. For each additional lavatory. 0.15 E. For each shower or bath or combination. 0.10 F. For each mop sink. 0.10 G. For each manually operated drinking fountain. 0.10 H. For each continuous flow drinking fountain. 1.00 15. Schools including principal's administrative office and school staff but not including cafeteria, gymnasium or athletic field facilities: A. Up to 50 students. 1.00 B. Each additional student. 0.02 C. Cafeteria, gymnasium and athletic requirements determined on a case-by-case basis at the town's sole discretion. The foregoing shall be based on the projected maximum usage of the school facilities and shall be subject to a periodic audit as required by section 13.08.220. 16. Swimming pools up to 25,000 gallon capacity: A. Year-round operation 1.00 B. Summer only (less than six months). 0.50 C. For each additional 1,000 gallons of capacity. 0.02 17. Fire protection sprinkler systems. 0.00 18. Irrigation by sprinkler or drip system: A. Residential per 100 square feet. 0.03 B. Commercial per 100 square feet. 0.03 C. Commercial or residential irrigation of more than 5,000 square feet of lawn or landscaping subject to special rates imposed by the town at the town's sole discretion. 19. Car Washes: A. All car washes will be based on water delivery requirements and consumptive use projections with EQRs to be determined by the town at the town's sole discretion. 20. Commercial laundromats A. Each washer up to 12-pound capacity. 0.35 B. For each additional pound of capacity over 12 pounds 0.015  
    Uses which are connected to the waste water facilities of the town will be evaluated by location of the waste water return point in setting, modifying or determining dedication requirements, in the town's sole discretion. Additionally, all uses which compute to be more than 3.0 EQR per tap connection are subject to review, calculation and assessment on an ad hoc basis by the town after consideration of the anticipated water to be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07,  3, 5-23-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-07,  3, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed the former  13.08.060, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  13.08.060 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 04, Series 2008; and Ord. No. 2016-02,  2, adopted Feb. 9, 2016. 
13.08.070 - Water rights dedication requirements-Increasing overall system yield. 
    Water rights dedication requirements as determined and set forth in section 13.08.040 herein must be serviced by water rights capable of increasing the overall yield of the town's water supply system, as determined by the town, in its discretion. Sufficient water rights must be dedicated so as to enable the town to divert a quantity of water, at a point of diversion specified by the town, equal to the total demand required, and as set forth in section 13.08.060, to fully serve the applicant's full development water requirements from the town's water system, taking into account the period of service required for the applicant's uses. In many instances, the yield of (a) dedicated water right(s) may be reduced due to terms and conditions imposed in administrative or judicial proceedings confirming the town's ability to use said water rights(s). Accordingly, an applicant shall, prior to dedication to the town, estimate to the town's satisfaction the amount of yield that is subject to such reduction. The applicant shall consult with the town's water attorney and/or engineering consultant in making such estimate. The estimated loss in yield shall be accounted for in any water rights dedication requirement, in addition to the rates per EQR, pursuant to section 13.08.060. 
    Absent a written agreement between the town and an applicant providing for immediate service, no water service under chapter 13.04 shall be extended nor water delivered to any tap until and unless the basic dedication referenced has been satisfied hereunder and until the water rights dedicated or cash in lieu of water rights has been expended, the choice of which shall solely rest in the town, in a manner whereby administrative or judicial confirmation of the right to divert such additional demands by the town has been finally accomplished. 
13.08.080 - Responsibility for satisfying the basic water rights dedication requirements. 
    The basic water rights dedication requirement shall be satisfied by the applicant seeking approval of annexation, subdivision, replotting, or the extension of municipally treated water service, whether or not that person will be the ultimate user(s). (Ord 13, SI, 1992) 
13.08.090 - Reimbursement for future costs. 
    In addition to all other requirements which must be met in order to obtain final plat approval, annexation, extensions of water service, or resubdivision, the town shall have the right to collect from developers, or other parties seeking the aforementioned approvals a fee of $500.00 for each equivalent residential unit (EQR) proposed to be served by the town's municipal-treated or raw water supply toward the actual costs of the eventual legal and engineering fees required to transfer the water rights to the town's facilities for diversion and use. Where it is known by the town that a water court or other administrative proceeding will be required to serve an annexation, development or project, the town shall have the right to require an agreement with the developers or other party seeking the approval for the reimbursement of all costs incurred by the town in securing such proceedings. The agreement shall be entered into or the fee shall be paid at the time of final approval by the town, and no municipal water service shall be extended to such development until the fees have been fully paid or an agreement acceptable to the town has been entered into. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
(Ord. No. 2016-02,  4, 2-9-16) 
13.08.100 - Determination of service demands. 
    In accordance with the basic dedication requirements set forth in section 13.08.040 and this chapter, the town shall determine, after consultation with the person or persons skilled in the knowledge of water rights, whether the water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be of sufficient legal priority under the laws of the state to ensure the town's ability to meet the service demands of the new user. This determination will be aided by an historic use affidavit and/or engineering report which must be provided by the new user. The determination of the town shall be final. Provided however, any person aggrieved by such a determination may file a written protest to the board of trustees within ten days of the date of such determination and the decision of the board of trustees shall be final. The timely filing of a protest hereunder shall be a condition precedent of the bringing of any action challenging such a determination. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.110 - Water rights acceptance, rejection or in lieu of fees. 
    The town shall have the right in its sole discretion, to accept or reject any water rights dedication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Rejection of any water rights will be based on an opinion by the town's water attorney that the water rights do not have sufficient legal priority or yield, or are not susceptible to transfer for use by the town at the town's point of municipal diversion, to be of reliable long term use to the town. If the town determines that the proposed water rights fail to satisfy the basic dedication requirement, the town shall require the applicant to satisfy the water rights dedication requirements by one of the following alternatives or a combination thereof, which the town and not the applicant, shall elect: 
(1)  The applicant, in order to comply with the basic water rights dedication requirement, at the town's request, will pay the town a fee equal to $7,000.00, or a fraction thereof, for each equivalent residential unit (EQR) of demand required to satisfy the total water demand or water right needs of the applicant, as determined by the town. Water right dedication fees may be paid between annexation and issuance of final plat, at the current water right dedication fee then existing. Of said water right dedication fee, $1,400.00 per equivalent residential unit (EQR), 20 percent for each equivalent residential unit (EQR), shall be due to the town at annexation, as credit toward future water dedication fees determined at the time that the dedication requirement fee is finally paid. The remaining balance of the water right dedication fees at the fee then applicable per equivalent residential unit (EQR) shall be due to the town prior to recording final plat; or 
(2)  The town may require a dedication of water rights and provide to the applicant a partial credit toward full compliance with the dedication requirement and require cash in lieu of water right dedication for the balance. The town's determination of the extent of the partial credit may be appealed to the board of trustees by providing a written protest and appeal within ten days of the notice of the determination of the partial credit. The decision of the board of trustees shall be final with respect to the determination. The timely filing of the protest and appeal shall be a condition precedent to any action challenging such a determination; or 
(3)  The town may, in its sole discretion, negotiate with the applicant to establish other terms or conditions which shall constitute compliance with the basic dedication requirement of this chapter. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a), above, an applicant for non-residential uses in which the basic dedication requirement is paid in lieu of fees which equal or exceed the sum of $25,000.00 shall be entitled to make such payment in three equal installment payments to be paid over a period not exceeding five years on a schedule set by the town. If any payment is not fully paid when due, the amount past due shall be treated as an unpaid charge pursuant to section 13.04.100. 
(Ord. 05, Series 2007). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02,  5, 2-9-16) 
13.08.120 - Water right's dedication procedure. 
    The applicant shall first determine the total water requirements and capacities necessary to reliable and fully service the proposed development. This shall be done through the submittal of a water service requirement analysis to the town's water department superintendent. Upon satisfactory acceptance by the superintendent of the water requirements for the new development and a positive determination by the superintendent that the development can physically and reasonably be serviced by the town, water rights meeting the requirements set forth in sections 13.08.070 and 13.08.110 shall be submitted to the town for consideration. It is the policy of the town that no water service shall be extended to an applicant or to applicant's new development until such time as the water rights dedication requirements has been fully satisfied and the dedication of water rights is imminent. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.130 - Costs and expenses. 
    All costs and expenses attendant to the review of water demand and water rights as well as conveyance; and transfer of water rights dedicated to the town and all costs relating to the enforcement of or compliance with this chapter shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.140 - Procedure for dedication by town board. 
    Any decision made by the town board designate under the delegation powers contained within this chapter shall be submitted by him to the town board of trustees at its next regular meeting, and the decision shall not become final until the same has been ratified by the board of trustees. Any interested parties shall have the opportunity to be heard with respect to the decision. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.150 - Purchase option-Time limit. 
    Any person required to comply with the basic dedication requirement shall also grant to the town the option to purchase any and all water rights which are appurtenant to the land to be annexed but which are in excess of the basic dedication requirement. The option may be exercised by the town at any time for a period of one year following the date of the grant to the town with regard to any or all of the water rights subject to the grant. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.160 - Purchase option-Price. 
(a)  The option price shall be that price agreed upon by the parties. If the parties do not agree upon an option price within 30 days after notice of the town's intent to exercise its option is received by the owner, appraisal at the town's expense will establish the price that reflects the fair market value of the water right(s). 
(b)  The appraisal shall be conducted by one appraiser appointed by the town, one appraiser appointed by the owner of the water rights, and a third appraiser who shall be appointed by both parties. The average of the three appraisals shall be the option price. (Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.170 - Purchase option-Right of first refusal. 
(a)  Grant of right. In addition to the grant of the option to purchase by the new user(s), there shall be a grant to the town by the user(s) of a right of first refusal regarding the water rights subject to the option to purchase. If the town, for any reason, should choose not to exercise its option to purchase, it shall retain the right of first refusal in the event the water rights are sold independently of the land, for a period of ten years following annexation or final approval, or replotting, or extension of water service to a subdivision. 
(b)  Notice period. If the owner of the water rights subject to the right of first refusal wishes to sell the water rights to a third party, he shall give to the town at least 90 days, notice of his intention to effect a sale of the water rights by delivering to the town a bona fide written offer to purchase made by a third party. 
(c)  Exercise of right. During the 90-day notice period provided for in this subsection, the town shall enjoy its right of first refusal entitling it to purchase the water rights proposed for sale. If within 90 days following notice by the owner of his intention to sell his water rights, the town chooses to exercise its rights to purchase, then the town shall pay to the owner the fair market price of the water rights prevailing at the time of the offer, which price shall be at least equal to the amount tendered to the owner in the bona fide offer by the third party. In the event that the town determines not to exercise its right to purchase the water rights offered for sale, the owner shall be free to sell the water rights to a third party; provided, however, that any such sale to a third party shall be for a price which is at least equal to that price which was tendered to and refused by the town. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.180 - Dedication of water rights for open space. 
    The owner of any property proposed to be annexed or subdivided who dedicates property to the town pursuant to any other ordinance of the town to be used for open space, park, aesthetic, recreation, or irrigation purposes shall also comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.190 - Lease of water rights for agricultural or open space property. 
    If the owner of the property proposed to be annexed or subdivided desires to retain the land, or any portion thereof, in agricultural production or as open space prior to development, he shall e permitted to lease back, on an annual basis and for irrigation, aesthetic and recreational purposes only, the water rights transferred pursuant to this chapter. The terms of the lease shall be negotiated with the town board of trustees or their designate. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.200 - Exceptions. 
(a)  The town may substitute or waive any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to the extension of a new municipal-treated water service or raw water service for which the basic dedication requirement has been previously complied with by any person and where no increase in demand is constituted. 
(Ord. 13 series 1992 S1) 
13.08.210 - Raw water irrigation. 
    It is a policy of the town to encourage the use of nonpotable water for irrigation of lawns, gardens and greenbelt areas. In pursuit thereof, a credit for the use of nonpotable irrigation systems has been made in the table of EQRs contained in section 13.08.060, above. To receive credit developer shall, prior to preliminary plan approval: 
(1)  Provide an opinion letter from a qualified attorney, professional engineer or hydrologist which represents that the water rights to be used in a raw water irrigation system are adequate in character, amount and seniority to provide a reliable source of irrigation water for the uses intended; 
(2)  Demonstrate to the town's satisfaction that the use of water rights owned by developer will not materially injure the town's water rights; 
(3)  Cause covenants and a plat note on the final plan to be recorded which provides notice to lot purchasers that: 
a.  Municipal water supplies shall not be used for irrigation use absent further compliance with this chapter; 
b.  Prohibits cross-connection of potable and irrigation water systems; 
c.  That prohibits more than one hosebib to be located on any structure and that hosebib shall be located on the front of the structure and shall not be used for irrigation purposes; and 
d.  Contains such other terms and conditions which the town reasonably requires. 
(4)  Developer shall not realign or modify any existing irrigation ditches in conjunction with the development of a raw water irrigation system without first presenting to the town evidence that written consent to such activity has been provided by all owners of the ditch or lateral. 
(Ord. 12, series 1995 S7) 
13.08.220 - Periodic audit of connections/recalculation of dedication requirement. 
    The town shall have the right to, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, inspect any premises connected to the municipal water system of the town to verify that connections or water using features or uses are not being made of municipal water for which water right dedication fees or compliance has not been made. In the event new or expanded facilities or uses are being made of town water for which compliance with this chapter has not been made, the town shall recompute the dedication requirement and bill such to the owner or a charge due and collectible as requirement of continued water service. Schools shall be subject to a review of projected maximum student usage every five years. 
(Ord. 12, series 1995 S8) 
Chapter 13.12 - WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or Clean Water Act shall mean the Clean Water Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-217), 33 U.S.C. SI251 et seq., as the same is in effect on the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may hereafter be amended. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Connection permit shall mean the written permission to connect to the sewer main of the town pursuant to the rules and regulations of the sewer department and the provision of this chapter; and shall be revocable upon a change of use. 
    Discharge permit means a permit to discharge industrial waste into, the sewer system of the Town of Gypsum, as authorized and permitted by this chapter. 
    Equivalent residential unit or EQR means a number related to the volume of water consumptively used by a single-family residential unit as further defined in sections 13.08.030 and 13.08.060, table of EQRs. 
    Industrial discharger or discharger means any nonresidential user who discharges effluent into the city waste water treatment facilities by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. 
    Industrial waste means solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial manufacturing trade or business process, or from the development recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Main line shall mean any pipe, piping or system of piping used as a conduit for sewerage in the town's system and owned by the town. A sewer main line shall be eight inches or more in diameter. 
    Pollutant means any substance discharge into the city wastewater treatment facilities or its collection system, which is listed in the National Pretreatment Standards, 40 C.F.R. part 4003, as amended. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the waste water treatment system of the city. This reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as otherwise prohibited. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment such as equalization tanks or facilities for the protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater treatment facilities of the city. 
    Public sewer means a sewer line, appurtenances, accessories or a portion thereof owned and maintained by the town, that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Runoff waters means any water from storm or surface runoff, including by way of example but not by limitation, ground waters, or storm and surface runoff from building foundations or roof drains, or any other collected or uncollected water from natural sources. 
    Sanitary sewage or sewage means the water-carried human waste or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground surface storm or other waters as may be present. 
    Service line shall mean any pipe, line or conduit used to provide sewer service from the main line to a building. A service line is not the property of the town, and the town shall have no liability whatsoever in respect thereto from the point of, and including, the tap onto the main line. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for 15 minutes or longer, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows from such user during normal operation and which adversely affects the city's sewer system or performance of its wastewater works. 
    Superintendent shall mean that person appointed by the town to supervise the operation and maintenance of town's facilities. 
    Tap or connection shall mean the connecting of the service line from the structure which it is to serve to the public sewer system, either directly to a public main line or indirectly through a private main line. 
    Tap fee shall mean the payment to the town of a fee for the privilege of connecting to the sewer system a particular use. The "tap fee" may also be known as a "use fee" and is dependent upon the projected demand at the time of the application and not upon physical tapping. 
    Wastewater means industrial waste or sewage or any other waste, including that which may be combined with any ground water, surface water, or storm water that may be discharged into the waste water treatment facilities of the town. 
    Any other term not herein shall be defined as presented in the "Glossary - Water & Sewage Control Engineering" A.P.H.A., A.W.W.A., A.S.C.E. and F.U.S.A., latest editions. 
(Ord. I series of 1987, S1) 
13.12.020 - Wastewater department created. 
    There is created and established a wastewater department for the town for the purpose of management, maintenance, care and operation of the sewage collection system and treatment works. 
(Ord. I series of 1987, S2) 
13.12.030 - Superintendent appointment and duties. 
    The town shall appoint a superintendent of the wastewater department. The person, party or entity appointed shall be qualified to manage the wastewater department and shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the wastewater system, and shall perform all things pertaining to the wastewater system, and shall perform all acts which may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of the wastewater department, subject to the approval of the town. The town shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rules and regulations governing the powers and duties of the superintendent and such other rates, rules and regulations as are now contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. I series of 1987, S3) 
13.12.040 - Ownership. 
(a)  All existing and future mains and treatment works connected with and forming an integral part of the sewage system shall become and is the property of the town. This ownership will remain valid whether the mains and treatment works are constructed, financed, paid for, or otherwise acquired by the town, or by other persons. 
(b)  That portion of all existing and future service lines extending from the main to each unit or building for each customer, connected with and forming an integral part of the town's system, shall become and is the property of the customer. This ownership shall remain valid whether the service lines are constructed, financed, paid for, or otherwise acquired by the town, or by other persons. 
(Ord. I series of 1987, S4) 
13.12.050 - Town responsibility. 
(a)  The town shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of all main sewer lines. The property owner shall be responsible for any service line from and including the tap onto the main line, and for the expense of maintaining, repairing and replacing such service line. 
(b)  It is expressly stipulated that no claim for damage shall be made against the town by reason of the following: blockage in the system causing the backup of effluent; damage caused by "smoking" of lines to determine drainage connections to town lines; breakage of service main by town personnel; for interruption of service and the conditions resulting therefrom; breaking of any service or supply line, or pipe, by any employee of the town; the making of connections or extensions; burst service pipes or other facilities not owned by the town; or for doing anything to the system of the town deemed necessary by the town or its agent. The town shall have no responsibility for notification to customers of any of the foregoing conditions. 
(Ord. 1 series 1987, S5) 
13.12.060 - Privies and septic tanks prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided, no person shall maintain within the town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, evapotranspirative system, cesspool or other facility intended for use for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S6) 
13.12.070 - Connection to sewer required. 
    The town council deems it necessary for the protection of the public health that the owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used or property being developed for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the town, to install at the owner's expense suitable toilet facilities therein, and connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such connection with the public sewer system shall be made within 30 days after date of written notice given by certified or registered mail to such owners notifying them to connect their premises with the sewer. 
(Ord. 1 series 1987, S7) 
13.12.080 - Powers and authority of agents. 
(a)  The superintendent, and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The town or the superintendent acting on instructions of the town shall have the sole authority to waive, suspend or modify these rules, and any such waiver, suspension or modification must be in writing, signed by the town or the superintendent. 
(Ord. 1 series 1987, S8) 
13.12.090 - Classification of sewage wastes. 
(a)  Categories. The wastewater department shall classify wastes into three main categories, termed "normal sewage," "special sewage," and "prohibited sewage," which are generally defined herein. The classification of wastes shall be the responsibility of the superintendent and shall follow recommended procedures of the state board of health, and, subject to approval of the town, shall be final and binding. 
(1)  Normal sewage. Normal sewage shall mean sewage which can be treated at the town's sewage treatment works without pretreatment and within normal operating procedures, and which, when analyzed, shows by weight a daily average of not more than the following concentrations: 
Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) 500 mg/L 
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 220 mg/L 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 220 mg/L 
Nitrogen (total as N) 40 mg/L 
Phosphorus (total as P) 8 mg/L 
(2)  Special sewage. Special sewage shall mean any sewage which does not conform to the definition for normal sewage, but which can be treated by the town after pretreatment by the user or by utilization of special operating procedures by the town at the sewage treatment works. 
(3)  Prohibited sewage. Prohibited sewage shall mean any sewage which may reasonably be anticipated to have a deleterious effect upon the sanitary sewerage system, or any person s or property, and, therefore, in the opinion of the town, cannot be serviced by the town. Prohibited sewage shall include clear water injected into the sewage system by means of a drainage collection system. 
(Ordinance 2000-12 4, series 2000) 
13.12.100 - Analysis of sewage. 
    The superintendent shall be responsible for all sampling, testing, analysis and classifying of sewage. Testing and analysis shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" latest edition. Results of tests shall be made available to the user at the town's office. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S10). 
13.12.110 - Responsibilities of the customer. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any sewer main or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the town. All taps, connections and stub-outs shall be inspected by the superintendent prior to back filling. 
(b)  Sewage system. Each customer shall be responsible for maintaining the entire length of the service line serving customer's property. Leaks or breaks in the service line shall be repaired by the property owner within 72 hours, the superintendent shall shut off the service until the leaks or breaks have been repaired; in addition, the town shall have the right to effect the repair and collect the cost therefor from the customer, and shall be entitled to place a lien against the property of such customer, securing payment of such cost. 
(c)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. No public or private swimming pool shall be connected with the sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a special permit therefor from the town, which permit shall define and specify the time during which water may be discharged from such pools into the sanitary sewer system and prescribe the fees and charges therefor, if any. 
(d)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, to any sewer main, any special or prohibited sewage or any harmful waters or wastes, whether liquid, solid, or gas, capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(e)  The admission into the public sewers of any special sewage shall be subject to the review and approval of the town, which may prescribe limits on the strength and character of such sewage. Where necessary, in the opinion of the town, the owner shall provide, at the owner's expense, such pretreatment facilities as may be necessary to treat such special sewage prior to discharge to the sewer main, plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the town and of the state board of health, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any special sewage, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at the owner's expense. 
(1)  In the discretion of the town and/or the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a service line carrying normal, special or found carrying prohibited sewage shall install and maintain, at the owner's expense, a suitable control manhole in the service line to facilitate measurements, tests, and analysis of the wastes. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," and shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. A similar requirement can be imposed by the superintendent to any residential property served by a service line found carrying special or prohibited sewage. (Ordinance 2000-12 4, series 2000) 
(2)  In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest down-stream manhole in the sewer main to the point at which the service line is connected. Grease, oil and sand interceptors of a design recommended by the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of special sewage or liquid wastes containing grease in an excessive amount, or any flammable wastes, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Where installed, they shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously effective operation at all times. (Ord. I series 1987, S1) 
13.12.120 - Requests for disconnection or connection. 
    The town may authorize disconnection of a use from the sewer system at the request of a customer. A fee of $25.00, plus actual costs of disconnecting the service, shall be charged to the customer. Connection or reconnection to the system shall also cost $25.00, plus actual expenses of connection. 
(Ord. 1 series 1987, S12) 
13.12.130 - Service inside municipal limits of town. 
(a)  Inside Gypsum. Commencing on August 1, 2007, tap fees shall be assessed based on the table of EQRs set forth in section 13.08.060 and the tap fee shall be $7,000.00 per EQR. Taps may be purchased up to six months prior to issuance of a building permit, but an adjustment payment at the most current tap fee shall be made if the related building permit is not issued within six months. 
(b)  Outside Gypsum. Tap fees shall be assessed based on the table of EQRs set forth in section 13.08.060 and the tap fee shall be set as determined by the town, but shall not be less than $10,500.00 per EQR. Taps may be purchased up to six months prior to connection, but an adjustment payment at the most current tap fee shall be made if the connection is not made within six months. (Ordinance 2013, Series 13) 
(c)  Tap fee expiration. Tap fees paid at building permit issuance, whether for inside or outside of Gypsum's municipal boundaries, are good for 365 days from building permit issuance. The town may require re in all annexation agreements or out-of-town sewer service agreements, that the applicant pay additional fees for either for infrastructure specified by the town necessary to support new annexed tap connections, and/or pay $1,400.00 per EQR of the tap fee at final plat approval to pay Gypsum for its investment already existing and for upsizing that may be required with additional growth. Such annexation infrastructure or fee determination shall be at the town's sole discretion. 
(d)  Surcharge fees. The applicant shall pay any additional tap fee surcharge for each EQR of demand as required by the applicant's subdivision improvement agreement. The additional tap fee surcharge shall be due at building permit, unless otherwise provided in the subdivision improvement agreement. (Ord. 13, series 2013) 
13.12.140 - Service outside the town. 
    No service shall ever be provided to property outside of the town, except upon the express written consent of the town council. The town council will take out-of-town sewer taps under consideration where water quality is of greater concern near waterways such as Gypsum Creek and the Eagle River, or other water quality concerns are present, at the town's discretion. Generally, the town will not grant consent for out-of-town sewer service unless the subject property is also served by the town's potable water works. In cases where the property is not connected to town water service, and if the town determines it will allow out-of-town sewer service, then provisions of such sewer service shall meet all requirements of county, state and federal law, including, but not limited to separation requirements from any non-town water supply. To preserve water quality in local water bodies, the town may, at its discretion, consider providing wastewater service to any property where the structure perimeter is closer than 660 feet to a spring, well, suction line, potable water supply line, Potable water supply cistern, dwelling occupied buildings, piped or lined irrigation ditch, subsoil drains, intermittent irrigation laterals, lakes, water courses, streams, irrigation ditches, dry gulches or septic tanks. Similarly, if any out-of-town property is proposing to serve a discharge of more than 2,000 gallons per day, then the town may consider providing wastewater service to such out-of-town property. In weighing any decision to allow an out-of-town connection to Gypsum's wastewater service, the town may also consider other variables related to water quality in addition to the distance specified in this section. 
(1)  The town, in its sole discretion, may provide an exemption from this requirement to afford an applicant for service from the town's sewage collection system and treatment works reasonable time to connect to the town's potable water system. (Ordinance 2013, Series 13) 
(2)  Charges for furnishing sewer service outside of the town shall be at the discretion of the town and as outlined under section 13.12.310. Monthly fee for sewer service outside of the town shall be as outlined under section 13.12.320. (Ordinance 2013, Series 13) 
(3)  In every case where the town furnishes service to properties outside the town, the town reserves the right to discontinue the service when, in the judgment of the town, it is in the best interest of the town to do so, and such license shall be considered a revocable license. (Ordinance 2004, Series 07 2) 
(4)  If an out-of-town sewer service is approved for a property, it in no way obligates the town to provide additional sewer services or taps to the property, for water or for sewer, if requested. (Ordinance 2013, Series 13) 
(5)  Any grant of out-of-town wastewater service by the town is conditioned upon the recipient being subject to comply with all Town Code provisions regarding wastewater service, as such requirements may be amended from time to time. 
13.12.150 - Application for service. 
(a)  Application for service must be filed with the town on forms provided by the town and accompanied by appropriate fees prior to any action to connect to the system. Only upon authorized approval of the application and a receipt therefore, may a connection to the system be made. A duplicate copy of the receipt, or approved application, must be filed with the building department of Eagle County or respective town. 
(b)  No taps will be permitted or made between November 1 and April 15, without specific, formal approval of the town. All information requested on the tap application form must be completed. 
(c)  The land on which the prepurchased tap will be used must be identified at the time of the purchase on the application for service form and tap payment. A prepurchased tap cannot be moved or severed from the land identified by the approved application without written consent of the town. 
(Ord. 08 series 1999) 
13.12.160 - Cancellation of application. 
(a)  The town reserves the right to revoke any application previously granted, before service has been provided. 
(b)  An approved application shall be retained, along with fees paid, by the town, for a period of 12 months. If the applicant has not then requested service, the town, at its discretion, may cancel the application and retain the fees paid, or by begin assessment of minimum service charges. 
(Ord. I series 1997, 16) 
13.12.170 - Denial of application. 
    Town reserves the exclusive right to deny an application for service, when, in the opinion of the town, the service applied for would create an excessive seasonal, or other, demand on the facilities. Denial may also be based upon an unresolved obligation between the town and the applicant, inadequate documentation of easements for main lines serving the property, or other valid reasons. 
(Ord. I series 1987 17) 
13.12.180 - Change in customer's equipment or service. 
    No change in the customer's equipment or service shall be made without the prior approval of the town. Any change in a customer's equipment or service which increases the service provided by the town, shall require a redetermination of the tap fees, monthly service charge and payment of any additional tap fee and service charge so determined. The redetermined tap fee shall allow a credit for previously paid tap fees. Changes in a customer's equipment or service which result in a decrease in the service provided by the town, shall not result in a reduction or refund of tap fees or service charges. When buildings are moved or destroyed resulting in non-use of the tap for a period in excess of one year, the tap authorization is terminated and no credit will be permitted for new uses or construction on the subject property. 
(Ord. I series 1987, 18) 
13.12.190 - Unauthorized connection fees. 
    In addition to all other remedies described in this chapter including disconnection, the town may assess an unauthorized connection fee equal to twice the normal tap fee payable by persons tapping onto the town's lines without prior payment of connection fees, approval of application, or adequate inspection of lines. 
(Ord. I series 1987, SI9). 
13.12.200 - Construction of service lines. 
(a)  Construction of all service lines shall be done in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, in accordance with this chapter and in accordance with any rules and regulations adopted by the wastewater department. 
(b)  A separate and independent service line shall be provided for every building, and except as otherwise provided herein, shall be installed at the expense of the property owner. 
(c)  The applicant for the connection permit shall notify the superintendent when the service line is ready for inspection and connection to the public main. 
(d)  Existing service lines may be used in connection with new buildings only when found, on examination by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  All contractors, plumbers and others doing work on any main, service lines, or structures in the town shall comply with Eagle County, state highway department, or local regulations on excavation, backfill, compaction and restoration of surfacing. 
(f)  All permits, fees and licenses shall be paid for by the contractor, plumber, or others doing work in the town prior to the start of construction. 
(g)  All excavations for service installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public or private property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent. 
(h)  All inspection fees on sewer construction required by the town, County of Eagle or the state shall be paid by the plumber, contractor, or others doing work for the town. 
(1)  The violation of any provision of this section or the town's installation specifications, shall constitute sufficient grounds for termination of service and the imposition of a fine as set forth in section 13.12.370 of this chapter. Whenever it appears a violation has been committed, the installer and owner shall be sent a written notice. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S20) 
13.12.210 - Inspection and tapping charges. 
    All taps must be made or inspected by the town, and all service lines must be inspected. Constructors of service lines shall call the superintendent for an open ditch inspection of all service lines. If said inspection is not made within 24 hours of the call, construction may proceed. There shall be no charge for the initial inspection; however, if an additional inspection is required, there shall be an inspection charge of $35.00 for each additional inspection. Stub-outs must be inspected, capped and permanently marked at grade but there shall be no charge for the initial inspection. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S21). 
13.12.220 - Main extensions. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in the rules and regulations are also applicable to this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a main within the town without having first made formal application to the town for approval, and having complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All main extensions within the town must have the prior approval of the town. Plans for such extensions shall be submitted to the town's engineer, along with the application for a line extension. The town's engineer shall then review and submit the plans, with appropriate documentation and recommendations, to the town for final approval. The plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the town's specifications set forth in the rules and regulations, and with other specifications and requirements appropriate to the situation, and the engineering and administrative fees for reviewing and studying such compliance shall be at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S22) 
13.12.230 - Processing of sewer extensions with the State of Colorado. 
    The town assumes no responsibility for the processing of, or decision not to process, an application for main line extension before the Colorado Department of Health or any other agency. The decision to process or not to process such an application rest solely with the developer or constructor of the main line, and the town assumes no responsibility or liability for that decision. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S23) 
13.12.240 - Locations of main extensions and additions. 
    Mains shall be installed in roads or street which the county, state highway department, or other public agency has accepted for maintenance as a public right-of-way, as well as in easements granted to the town. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S24) 
13.12.250 - Procedure for main extension construction. 
(a)  The landowner, developer or subdivider shall provide detailed engineering plans and specifications to the town pursuant to this chapter describing the proposed main and service connections being requested. Subject to the town's review, recommendations and approval of such plans as provided for in this chapter, the landowner, developer or subdivider shall obtain bona fide design and cost estimates for the work which shall serve as guidance for the parties to enter into a standard line extension contract with the town, covering standard regulations on line extensions and rebates for transmission overseeing lines. The town may at its option require the landowner, developer or subdivider to either: 
(1)  Deposit in advance with the town an amount in cash, certified funds or other payment and security acceptable to the town, equal to the cost of the contract to be let, including engineering and inspection expenses, so that the town can construct the line extension with its own forces, or 
(2)  Furnish the town with a performance and surety bond guaranteeing the performance of the work of a contractor, holding the town harmless for the payment to the contractor, and one year's maintenance bond. 
(b)  If subsection (a)(1) above is elected and the cost of the work shall increase through change order, the landowner, subdivider, or developer shall be so notified, and no change order shall be approved until an amount equal to the deficiency is added to the deposit. Upon completion of the work, the final cost shall be certified by the town's engineer and any overage refunded, or deficiency made up, by the landowner, subdivider or developer. 
(c)  A performance and maintenance bond equal to 100 percent of contract (or construction cost) shall be furnished to the town on all sewer main construction contracted for by the town. 
(d)  All inspection fees on sewer mains required by the town, County of Eagle, or the state highway department, shall be paid by the plumber, contractor or others doing work in the town. 
(e)  Special structures such as lift stations, pumping stations, pressure reduction valves (P.R.V.), meter vaults, and similar devices, required to insure proper operation of the extensions, shall be constructed from designs of the town's engineer or such other engineers as may be approved by the town. 
(f)  The constructor shall be responsible for "overseeing" main line extensions as required by the town. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S25) 
13.12.260 - Requirements for acceptance of lines. 
(a)  Landowners, subdividers, or developers who have completed construction of mains shall, before the lines are accepted by the town for taps, convey the lines and appurtenances to the town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and the bond furnished shall warrant said improvements to be free from defects and shall cover all maintenance for one year from the date of acceptance of the lines and other improvements by the town. The method and form of conveyance shall be determined by the town in its sole discretion. 
(b)  Prior to the acceptance of the lines by the town, all easements necessarily accompanying the lines shall be duly recorded and provided for. The scope, width and form of the easements shall be determined in the town's sole discretion. 
(c)  Prior to the town's acceptance of the lines the town shall be provided with two full size 24-inch by 36-inch reproducible mylars of "as built" drawings of all lines and facilities stamped by a Colorado registered professional engineer. The town shall further be provided with certification by a Colorado professional engineer that all lines and facilities installed have been designed and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the town. 
(d)  Each landowner, subdivider, or developer who desires service, will in consultation with and the approval of the town, plat and grant to the town easements and rights-of-way in form, width and scope acceptable to the town in which to construct the same, where such facilities are required to cross land not being subdivided, or under the subdivider's control for granting of public rights-of-way. 
(e)  The town may, in its discretion, extend mains under such conditions as the town deems appropriate. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S26) 
13.12.270 - Main sizes. 
    The size of the main required to serve any area of the town shall be determined by the town. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S27) 
13.12.280 - Reimbursement. 
    No reimbursement or recovery costs shall be permitted for main line extensions except as provided by existing contracts. The town may in its sole discretion contract to require overseeing of mains and permit rebates as it deems necessary and proper. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S28) 
13.12.290 - Rates and charges. 
    The rates, charges, and other information shown herein shall apply only to customers inside the town and shall in no way obligate the town to provide service outside the town under any of the conditions contained in this section. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S29). 
13.12.300 - Classification of customers for tap fees and service fees. 
    Customers shall be classified according to the "table of EQRs" set forth in section 13.08.060; not withstanding the foregoing, paragraph numbers 3, 4, 20(a), 20(b) and 20(c) of the table of EQRs, which are EQR assessments for irrigation purposes shall not be considered in the computation of the wastewater tap fee and service charges. 
(Ord. 06, Series 2007) 
13.12.310 - Tap fee. 
(a)  Inside Gypsum. Commencing on August 1, 2007, tap fees shall be assessed based on the table of EQRs set forth in section 13.08.060 and the tap fee shall be $7,000.00 per EQR. Taps may be purchased up to six months prior to issuance of a building permit, but an adjustment payment at the most current tap fee shall be made if the related building permit is not issued within six months. 
(b)  Outside Gypsum. Tap fees shall be assessed based on the table of EQRs set forth in section 13.08.060 and the tap fee shall be set as determined by the town, but shall not be less than $10,500.00 per EQR. Taps may be purchased up to six months prior to connection, but an adjustment payment at the most current tap fee shall be made if the connection is not made within six months. 
(c)  Tap fee expiration. Tap fees paid at building permit issuance, whether for inside or outside of Gypsum's municipal boundaries, are good for 365 days from building permit issuance. The town may require in all annexation agreements or out-of-town sewer service agreements, that the applicant pay additional fees for either for infrastructure specified by the town necessary to support new annexed tap connections, and/or pay $1,400.00 per EQR of the tap fee at final plat approval to pay Gypsum for its investment already existing and for upsizing that may be required with additional growth. Such annexation infrastructure or fee determination shall be at the town's sole discretion. 
(d)  Surcharge fees. The applicant shall pay any additional tap fee surcharge for each EQR of demand as required by the applicant's subdivision improvement agreement. The additional tap fee surcharge shall be due at building permit, unless otherwise provided in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
(e)  Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). EQR calculations for ADUs shall not be subject to tap fees, but are subject to monthly service fees per section 13.12.320. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08,  1, 5-23-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-08,  1, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed the former  13.12.310, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  13.12.310 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 07, Series 2007; and Ord. 13, Series 2013. 
13.12.311 - Tap activation. 
(a)  Any water service issued pursuant to the application process described in section 13.12.150 of this Code, must be activated within 365 days from the date of the license, except that all taps purchased prior to January 1, 2000, shall be activated on or before December 31, 2004, on the property identified in the application for tap. If such activation is not made by December 31, 2004, then any new or expanded waste water service requiring a tap connection shall be the subject of a new tap fee at the then prevailing rates of the town; provided however, a credit in the amount paid for the prepurchased tap shall be given equal to the amount actually paid for the prepurchased tap, without interest. 
(b)  An prepurchased tap shall not be sold, leased or traded to another person or property; however, they can be assigned, for no additional consideration, to a subsequent purchaser of the property for which the tap was purchased. 
13.12.320 - Monthly service charge. 
(a)  Effective October 1, 2013, the monthly service charges shall be assessed for commercial occupancies on an EQR basis as is specified in section 13.08.060, and as assigned by the building permit for the occupancy or if no EQR was assigned, then as assigned in the town's discretion, as follows: 
(1)  In-town commercial occupancies. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $37.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $3.70/month 
(2)  In-town commercial occupancies with residential occupancy. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $50.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $5.00/month 
(3)  Out-of-town commercial occupancies. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $55.50/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $5.55/month 
(4)  Out-of-town commercial occupancies with residential occupancy. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $75.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $7.50/month 
For all of the above specified rates, there shall not be an adjustment for fractional increments of less than 0.1 EQR. 
The above wastewater charges are based upon the typical BOD, TSS and pH levels for the above occupancies. To the extent such BOD, TSS and pH levels are exceeded, as is specified in section 13.12.090, the town, in its sole discretion, may sample wastewater discharge, and assess any penalties as provided for in section 13.12.370. 
(b)  The monthly service charges shall be assessed for residential occupancies as follows: 
(1)  In-town residential occupancies. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $24.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $2.40/month 
(2)  In-town residential occupancies utilizing an existing town maintained lift station. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $27.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $2.70/month 
(3)  Out-of-town residential occupancies. 
Charge per one EQR assigned ..... $36.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned ..... $3.60/month 
(4)  Out-of-town residential occupancies utilizing an existing town maintained lift station. (No new connections will be permitted out of town that require town maintained lift stations.) 
(5)  In-town single-family residence with an accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
Charge per 1.0 EQR for single-family residence and 0.25 EQR for ADU is $30.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned for the single-family residence only is $2.40/month 
(6)  Out-of-town single-family residence with an accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
Charge per 1.0 EQR for single-family residence and 0.25 EQR for ADU is $45.00/month 
Charge per each additional 0.1 EQR assigned for the single-family residence only is $3.60/month 
(Ord. No. 2017-08,  2, 5-23-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-08,  2, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed the former  13.12.320, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  13.12.320 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 07, Series 2007; and Ord. 13, Series 2013. 
13.12.330 - Tap fees for unclassified uses. 
    In those situations where a prospective user applies for a permit for service to a structure or use not defined in the preceding section; or where, in the town's opinion, the structure represents a classification not contemplated in the establishment of the previously defined tap fees, the town shall, in its sole discretion establish a fair, reasonable, and equitable tap fee for the structure. 
(Ord. I series 1987, S33) 
13.12.340 - Amended monthly service charges. 
    In those situations where in the town's sole discretion, the monthly service charges shown in this chapter do not represent a fair, reasonable, and equitable charge for the intended use, the town, in its sole discretion, may adjust the rates. 
(Ord. I S34, 1987) 
13.12.350 - Payment of monthly service charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the town to bill all service charges in advance. all service charges provided for in this chapter must be paid to the town clerk and treasurer either monthly, in three equal payments paid on the tenth day of each month of the billing cycle, or quarterly, on the tenth day of the second month of each billing cycle. If such charges are not paid, the town clerk and treasurer, on the date due, they shall become delinquent, and late charges shall be assessed, a lien may be imposed upon the property, and service may be terminated. 
(b)  Late charges shall be assessed to delinquent accounts as follows: 
(1)  One percent per month on the outstanding balance; 
(2)  Payments are considered delinquent on accounts payable quarterly, if the payment is received after the last business day of the third month of the billing cycle. 
(Ord. 1, S35, 1987) 
13.12.360 - Lien for failure to pay rate and charges. 
(a)  At any time the customer is 90 days in arrears or more in payment of any charges due to the town, the town shall have the right, in addition to all other remedies which it may have, in its sole discretion, to terminate service to the customer. The customer shall be given ten days' notice of intent to disconnect service, mailed postage prepaid. The cost of disconnection and reconnection shall be charged to the customer. 
(b)  The town shall have the right to assess to any customer who is in arrears in payment of the account, all legal, engineering, court, and other costs necessary to or incidental to the collection of the account. 
(Ord. 1, S36, 1987) 
13.12.361 - Certification of delinquent charges and fees. 
    All delinquent fees, rates, tolls, penalties or charges associated with providing sewer service or facilities to provide such service, including costs of extending lines and system enhancement costs, shall constitute a lien upon any lots, land, buildings or premises provided service or to be provided service by such facilities. In the event said charges are not paid when due, the town clerk may certify such charges and fees to the County Treasurer of Eagle County, Colorado to be collected, together with the costs of collection, against the property served in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against the property. 
(Ord. 16, S3, 1992) 
13.12.370 - Penalties. 
(a)  No person, entity or business licensee shall maliciously, willfully or negligently, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any portion of the town's system. Nor shall any person, entity or business licensee discharge any special or prohibited sewage to the town's system as specified in section 13.12.110(d) above. 
(b)  Any person, entity or business licensee who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, any person, entity or business licensee who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount no less than $500.00, and up to $1,000.00, to be paid to the Town of Gypsum; 
(2)  For the second violation, any person, entity or business licensee who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount no less than $1,000.00 up to $10,000.00; and 
(3)  For the third violation, any person, entity or business licensee who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of actual costs to the town to remedy the injury caused by the violation(s) or $10,000.00, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Any person, entity or business licensee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation. 
(Ordinance 2000-12 4, series 2000) 
Chapter 13.14 - ENTERPRISE ACTIVITIES 

13.14.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    District 11 means any state or local governmental entity which has authority to conduct water activities, including a water conservancy district created pursuant to article 45 of Title 37, C.R.S., a water conservation district created by articles 46, 47, or 48 of Title 37, C.R.S., a water and sanitation district or other entity created pursuant to Title 32 C.R.S., an entity created pursuant to Title 29 or 37, C.R.S., a county or a municipality. (Ord. 06, series 2001 2) 
    Grant means a cash payment of public funds made directly to an enterprise by the state or a local governmental entity or a district, which cash payment is not required to be repaid. "Grant" does not include public funds paid or advanced to an enterprise by the state or a local governmental entity or a district in exchange for an agreement by an enterprise to provide services including the provision of water, the capacity of project works, materials, or other water or sewer activities, nor does "grant" include refunds made in the current or next fiscal year, gifts, any payments directly or indirectly from federal funds or earnings on federal funds, collections for another government, pension fund earnings, reserve transfers or expenditures, damage awards or property sales. (Ord. 06, series 2001 2) 
    Sewer activity enterprise means the functions and services of the town established and maintained to provide sewer activities including, but not limited to, the collection, treatment, use, reuse, augmentation, exchange, or discharge of wastewater, including the provision of wholesale or retail wastewater or stormwater services, and all services and facilities related thereto. 
    Water activity enterprise means the functions and the services of the town established and maintained to provide water activities including, but not limited to, the acquisition diversion, storage, carriage, delivery, distribution, treatment, use, reuse, augmentation, exchange, or discharge of water, including the provision of wholesale or retail water services and the acquisition of water or water rights, and all services and facilities related thereto. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.020 - Water activity enterprise operations and facilities. 
    The water activity enterprise shall manage, operate, maintain, and conduct all water activities, services, and facilities of the town. The enterprise is authorized to utilize, improve, extend, enlarge, repair, replace, acquire, dispose of, encumber, contract with respect to, and otherwise control and supervise all water activity facilities and property of the town. The water activity enterprise shall be wholly owned by the town. All facilities, property and assets which are utilized by the enterprise or form part of the water activity enterprise shall be the property of the town. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.030 - Sewer activity enterprise operations and facilities. 
    The sewer activity enterprise shall manage, operate, maintain, and conduct all sewer activities, services, and facilities of the town. The enterprise is authorized to utilize, improve, extend, enlarge, repair, replace, acquire, dispose of, encumber, contract with respect to, and otherwise control and supervise all sewer activity facilities and property of the town. The sewer activity enterprise shall be wholly owned by the town. All facilities, property, and assets which are utilized by the enterprise or form part of the sewer activity enterprise shall be the property of the town. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.040 - Multiple enterprises. 
    The water activity enterprise may conduct or continue to conduct one or more water activities, and the sewer activity enterprise may conduct or continue to conduct one or more sewer activities, including contracting with governmental entities, enterprises, or nongovernmental entities or persons. The town council may, from time to time, by resolution establish or restructure any activity within the water activity enterprise or the sewer activity enterprise as a separate enterprise. The town council may establish separate enterprises for any other appropriate activity or function conducted by the town. Failure to designate other enterprises in the Gypsum Municipal Code shall not exclude such other enterprises from the provisions of Section 20, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.050 - Governing board. 
    The town council shall be the governing board of each enterprise. The governing board shall conduct the business of the enterprise in the same manner and follow the same procedures as the town council. All official business of the governing board may be combined with and shall be conducted only during regular or special meetings of the town council at which a quorum is present. The record of proceedings of the governing board may be incorporated into the minutes of the town council. No oaths, bonds, or other qualifications shall be required of the governing board. All actions of the governing board shall be considered as the actions and business of the town undertaken by the town council acting as the governing board of the enterprise. All business and actions of the governing board shall be governed by and made subject to all requirements, privileges, immunities, protections, limitations, and other provisions of law. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.060 - Powers. 
    The governing body of each enterprise may, without limitation, exercise the town's legal authority relating to activity conducted by the enterprise, except as expressly provided herein. Such authority shall include, but not be limited to, all powers set forth in Article 45.1, Title 37, C.R.S. ("Act"), Title 31, C.R.S., Article XX, Section 6 of the Colorado Constitution and the Gypsum Home Rule Charter. Enterprises are authorized to issue or reissue bonds, notes, or other obligations payable from revenues or other available funds of the enterprise pursuant to law. The powers and authorities specifically conferred herein shall not modify, limit, or affect the powers conferred by any other law directly or indirectly, except as expressly provided herein. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1; Ord. 06, series 2001 2) 
13.14.070 - Taxes. 
    Enterprises shall not levy or assess any tax which is subject to the provisions of Section 20, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.080 - Grants. 
    Enterprises shall not accept or receive any revenues in grants from the state or local government, unless expressly authorized by the town council. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.090 - Contracts. 
    All contracts related to activities or functions conducted by the enterprises shall be approved by the governing board and executed by town officers with the town as the contracting party. Any preexisting contract relating to activity or functions conducted by any enterprise shall be considered as having been approved by the governing board. All contracts relating to an activity or function of an enterprise shall be implemented and discharged by the enterprise, unless otherwise provided by the town council. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.100 - Revenue. 
    All revenue for services and facilities provided by an enterprise, including rates, fees, tolls, charges, and all other income of the enterprise shall be collected, used, and expended for activities and purposes for which the enterprise was established as determined by the governing board in accordance with and as set forth in the fiscal budget for the enterprise adopted by the town council pursuant to law. Rates for services and facilities provided by an enterprise shall be established by the governing board and collected and enforced by the town. No revenue of an enterprise or spending thereof shall be subject to the provisions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 1; Ord. 06, series 2001 2) 
13.14.110 - Enterprise fund. 
    Enterprise funds have been established by the town council for enterprise accounting and budgetary purposes and will be maintained to account for revenue and expenditures of the water activity enterprise and the sewer activity enterprise. All budgets, reports, audits, and financial operations of an enterprise shall conform to and be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental (enterprise) units and other requirements of state law. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 1) 
13.14.120 - Enterprise disqualification. 
    Any enterprise established or recognized pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect, whether or not it is qualified or disqualified as an enterprise pursuant to the provisions of Section 20, Article X of the State Constitution, until modified or repealed by the town council. 
(Ord 2 series 1994 S1) 
13.14.130 - Miscellaneous. 
    Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority to the governing board or an enterprise to utilize other policies or procedures for operating or continuing the enterprise, except as otherwise expressly provided herein. It is the intent of the town council to reestablish the water activity enterprise and the sewer activity enterprise in conformance with the provisions of the Act, the provisions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, and the Gypsum Home Rule Charter according to its most reasonable interpretations thereof. The application and effect of this chapter with respect to the water activity enterprise and the sewer activity enterprise shall be both prospective and retrospective to the effective date of the provisions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 2 series 1994 I; Ord. 06, series 2001 2) 
Chapter 13.16 - NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    A charitable, nonprofit organization shall be defined as an entity classified as nonprofit for tax purposes by the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. 7 series 1986 I) 
13.16.020 - Criteria. 
    The town council, in its sole discretion may exempt a charitable, nonprofit organization from payment of water and sewer tap fees, water and sewer service fees and the requirements of the water rights dedication ordinance, in whole or in part. The following criteria shall be used by the council in reaching its decision as to whether a waive will be granted: water or sewer demands placed upon the municipal system; size of the building; use of the building; number of members of the organization; type of community service provided and hardship presented to the organization if the fees or requirements were imposed. 
(Ord. 7 series 1986 2) 
13.16.030 - Waiver. 
    Upon review of the criteria listed above, the town may, in its discretion, waive all or part of the requirements and/or fees required by the water and sewer provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. 7 series 1986 3) 
Chapter 13.20 - REVENUE COLLECTION 

13.20.010 - Revenue collection. 
    All unpaid rates, fees, charges, taxes, fines and penalties authorized under this Code, together with any amounts owing to the town pursuant to any judgment, order or decree issued by a court of competent jurisdiction and any other amounts owing to the town by law, shall constitute a lien upon any lots, land, building, or property served by the town and may be certified to the County Treasurer of Eagle County, Colorado to be collected, together with the costs of collection against the property served. in the same manner as though they were part of the taxes assessed against the property. Such certification and collection shall be in addition to other remedies and methods of collection provided in this Code. 
(Ord. 3 series 1995 I) 
Chapter 13.24 - FIRE PROTECTION 

13.24.010 - Fire protection, ambulance and emergency medical service for annexed property. 
    The owner of any property to be annexed into the town that is not within the boundaries of a service district or districts providing fire protection, ambulance and emergency medical service shall, as a condition of annexation, petition for inclusion into or formation of the appropriate service district. 
(Ord. 02, 2000) 
13.24.020 - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings provided in chapter 17.50, unless the context of their use requires otherwise. 
(Ord. 02, 2000) 
13.24.030 - Level of service for fire protection. 
(a)  Solely for the purpose of determining whether fire protection impact fees are imposed pursuant to chapter 17.50, G.M.C., public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection and first response emergency medical services shall be deemed to be adequate and available if the facilities and equipment available to provide such services to the area in question will meet or exceed the LOS standards set forth in subsection (2) below, and: 
(1)  Adequate public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection are currently in place or are guaranteed to be in place prior to the impacts occurring from the proposed development approval; or 
(2)  Necessary public safety facilities and equipment for fire protection are under construction or contract to purchase and will be available prior to the impacts occurring from the proposed development approval; 
(3)  The town council determines that fire protection risks are sufficiently mitigated through the provision of approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems in all improvements (occupancies); the use of approved fire resistive construction in all improvements (occupancies); the use and maintenance of approved fire resistive landscaping; the private provision of approved first response emergency services; or other reasonable and effective mitigation techniques. In such event, mitigation of fire protection risks will meet the equivalent minimum LOS standards as set forth below and as amended from time to time. (Ord. 02, 2000) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following LOS standards shall apply: 
(1)  The provisions of the current fire code, building code and any other code, statute, ordinance, or standard related to fire protection are being met, enforceable, equivalent standards or mitigation which have been duly adopted or approved by the town, are being met. 
(2)  Adequate response times will be maintained if the new development is approved. Response times will adhere to the following except as indicated below: 
a.  Provide fire response in less than six minutes for 90 percent of all fire suppression calls within the town. 
b.  The response time requirement for fire response, may be waived at the option of the town council in consultation with the applicable fire protection service provider if approved, built-in, automatic fire protection systems are installed and maintained in all improvements (occupancies). 
(3)  The following fire fighting flows represent performance standards using fire fighting apparatus and equipment only, and do not replace the fire fighting flow requirements set forth in the uniform fire code as adopted by the town. The fire fighting flow requirements set forth in such fire code consider the availability of additional mutual aid resources and are based upon fire loading for particular occupancies. 
a.  Two hundred fifty GPM initial attack flow within two minutes of arrival for 90 percent of all fires. 
b.  Two hundred fifty GPM sustained flow within five minutes of arrival for 90 percent of all fires. 
c.  Five hundred GPM sustained flow within eight minutes of arrival for 80 percent of all structure fires. 
d.  One thousand GPM sustained flow within five minutes of arrival for all areas within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant. 
e.  Three thousand five hundred GPM sustained flow within 15 minutes of arrival for hydrated areas. 
(4)  Consistent and adequate emergency dispatching services is maintained. 
(5)  The proposed development approval will not increase the ISO fire protection class rating in the fire protection service provider's service area or the area for which the development approval is sought. (Ord. 02, 2000) 
(c)  All or some of the LOS standards contained in subsection (2) above may be waived at the sole discretion of the town council, following consultation with the applicable fire protection service provider, and applicant provides adequate protection as required by subsection (2)a., meets or exceeds the other minimum LOS standards as set forth in subsection (2) above through adequate mitigation, and complies with subsection (2)e., above. (Ord. 02, 2000) 
13.24.040 - Level of service for emergency medical services. 
(a)  Solely for the purpose of determining whether emergency medical services impact fees are imposed pursuant to chapter 17.60, G.M.C., public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical response shall be deemed to be adequate and available if the facilities and equipment available to provide such services to the area in question will meet or exceed the LOS standards set forth in subsection (b) below, and 
(1)  Adequate public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are currently in place or are guaranteed to be in place prior to the impacts occurring from the proposed development approval; or 
(2)  Necessary public safety facilities and equipment for emergency medical services are under construction or contract to purchase and will be available prior to the impacts occurring from the proposed development approval; or 
(3)  The town council determines that emergency medical service risks are sufficiently mitigated through reasonable and adequate means. In such an event, mitigation of emergency medical service risks shall meet the equivalent minimum LOS standards as set forth below and as amended from time to time. (Ord. 02, 2000) 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following LOS standards shall apply: 
(1)  Adequate response times will be maintained if the new development is approved. Response times will adhere to the following except as indicated below: 
a.  Provide first response basic life support (BLS) and automatic external defibrillation (AED) in under six minutes for 90 percent of all calls requiring emergency medical assistance within the town. 
b.  Provide advanced life support within eight minutes for 90 percent of all calls requiring emergency medical assistance within the town. 
c.  Provide rescue services within eight minutes for 90 percent of all rescue calls within the town. 
(2)  Consistent and adequate emergency dispatching services is maintained. (Ord. 02, 2000) 
(c)  All or some of the LOS standards contained in subsection (b) above may be waived at the sole discretion of the town council, following consultation with the applicable emergency medical service provider, and applicant provides adequate protection as required by subsection (b)(1), and meets or exceeds the other minimum LOS standards as set forth in subsection (b) above through adequate mitigation. (Ord. 02, Series 2000) 
TITLE 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTIONS 
  
Chapter 15.04 - INTERNATIONAL CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 

15.04.010 - Application. 
(a)  As modified by this chapter, the International Fire Code and the Fire Code Standards, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Fire Code Institute, and amendments thereto; the Urban Wildland Interface per the local jurisdiction; the current Edition of National Fire Protection Association Standards for reference; the International Building Code, 2015 Edition; the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition; the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition; the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition; the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition; the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code currently adopted by the State of Colorado (NEC); the ICC/ANSI Accessibility Standards 2009 Edition, and the Colorado Manufactured Home Installation Program of the State of Colorado, are hereby adopted by this reference and incorporated herein as if set forth in full and shall apply to all dwellings, buildings and structures located within the boundaries of the Town of Gypsum, hereinafter referred to as the "regulated area," unless otherwise provided. All international codes and standards set forth in this subsection 15.04.010 shall be available from the building official, building department, Town of Gypsum, 50 Lundgren Boulevard, Gypsum, Colorado 81637. (Ord. 2012-12) 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided herein, where the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter of the Gypsum Municipal Code differ from the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision or another law, ordinance, resolution or order having application in the Town of Gypsum, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. (Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  3, 9-26-17) 
15.04.011 - Permit requirements/references. 
(a)  Table 1 titled "Town of Gypsum Permit Requirements" together with the remaining Tables 2 through 9 inclusive, as attached hereto are hereby incorporated herein by this reference. Table 1 sets forth the projects that may require permit(s), if any, and identifies the specific type of permit(s) required and the site inclusion requirements. Additional permits not identified in Table 1 may also be required. 
(b)  It is the duty of any person or entity that proposes to construct a project which is not specifically set forth in Table 1, to contact the Building Official of Town of Gypsum for a determination of the type of permit(s) required, if any, and the site inclusion requirements. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.012 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, all words, terms and expressions contained herein shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set out in the Code, except that: 
    Agricultural building shall mean a pole barn, private noncommercial greenhouse no larger than 300 square feet in size, shed or similar structure designed and constructed to house only farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products and shall not include footings, piers, concrete floors, insulation, finish materials, plumbing, heat or similar elements. Electricity may be provided for lighting purposes only in which an electrical permit is required. (Ord. 2009-22) 
    Building official or inspector shall mean the Town of Gypsum Chief Building Official and the building official's duly authorized deputies, inspectors, staff and others reasonably involved in code administration and enforcement. 
    Certificate of occupancy shall mean a certificate issued by the Town of Gypsum stating that the structure or building is suitable for occupancy. Except for Group U Occupancies, no building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as waiving any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance or requirement of the Town of Gypsum. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance or requirement of the Town of Gypsum shall not be valid. 
    Chief of the fire department shall mean the head of the fire protection district having jurisdiction, or his regularly authorized deputies. 
    Code shall mean the International Fire Code and the Fire Code Standards, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Fire Code Institute and amendments thereto; the Urban Wildland Interface per the local jurisdiction; the 2014 edition of National Fire Protection Association Standards for reference; the International Building Code 2015 Edition; the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition; the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition; the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition; the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition; the National Electrical Code, and all appendix chapters, 2014 Edition; the ICC/ANSI Accessibility Standards 2009 Edition, and the Colorado Manufactured Home Installation Program of the State of Colorado; and all amendments to said codes and standards as of the date of the adoption of this chapter and as set forth in section 15.04.013 of this chapter. 
    Construction hours shall mean the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, during which construction is allowed in the Town of Gypsum. 
    Construction improvement agreement shall mean an agreement entered into between the permit holder/owner/developer and the Town of Gypsum for the completion of all unfinished work on any building, landscaping, infrastructure, erosion control and other required public improvements as required for a certificate of occupancy. A financial guarantee may be required as part of this agreement. The improvements required by any such agreement shall be completed within one year of the date of the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
    Duplex or town home shall mean a building with two or more dwelling units separated by a zero-clearance common property line. The exterior walls adjoining the common property line are required to be one hour rated firewalls, see Table 9. 
    Erosion control shall mean the ground cover, faces of cut and fill sloped that shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. Erosion control may be accomplished through landscaping, revegetation, mulching, cribbing, riprap or other means approved by the building official. 
    Factory-built housing unit shall mean any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy, either permanent or temporary which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in a manufacturing facility intended for assembly and installation, on a permanent foundation as a building site and which carries a Colorado Division of Housing "factory-built unit certification". 
    Final inspection means the final inspection of all buildings and structures which are subject to provisions of this chapter this chapter that must occur when such buildings and structures are deemed complete and includes the final approval obtained from the Town of Gypsum before any such building or structure is ready and available for occupancy or use. 
    Fire code official shall mean either the town fire code official or the district fire code official. 
    District fire code official shall mean the fire chief of the fire district, and his/her duly authorized deputies, inspectors, staff and others reasonably involved in fire code administration and enforcement of existing nonresidential buildings, common areas of existing multi-family residential buildings, activities subject to operational permits, fire alarm systems, and fire sprinkler systems. 
    Town fire code official shall mean the town building code official and his/her duly authorized deputies, inspectors, staff and others reasonably involved in fire code administration and enforcement of construction, fire alarm systems, and fire sprinkler systems. 
    Health officer shall mean the Eagle County Health Officer as appointed by the Eagle County Board of Health. For the purpose of administering the individual sewage disposal system regulations (Chapter IV Eagle County Land Use Regulations), the environmental health officer has been designated as his duly authorized representative. 
    Improvement location certificate shall mean the certificate issued by a Colorado Registered Professional surveyor pursuant to Sections 38-51-102(8), C.R.S., and 38-51-108, C.R.S. Such a certificate shall be required on all newly constructed buildings or additions, and, unless waived by the building official, the improvement location certificate as issued must show that the building, including any addition thereto, has not been built within a setback or utility easement. (Ord. 39 Series 1999) 
    Installation insignia shall mean the marking required by Section 24-32-3105, C.R.S., which regulates the installation of manufactured homes, and directs that upon completion of the installation of a manufactured home an insignia will be attached to the home that certifies the installation. No permanent utilities shall be connected to the home prior to the installation of the seal. Temporary utility connections are permitted for construction purposes when pertinent testing has been completed. 
    Installation manual shall mean the manufacturers installation instructions for manufactured homes and factory built housing. Such manual must be available at time of inspection. 
    Loft shall mean any story or floor area in a building that is open to the floor directly below, but that does not qualify as a mezzanine due to its failure to comply with one or more of the items specified for mezzanine floors in Section 505 of the International Building Code. At least one side of the loft shall be at least 50 percent open to the room below. Lofts may be habitable space or nonhabitable space. (Habitable lofts in residential occupancies shall be considered as sleeping rooms or bedrooms and must have egress windows and a smoke detector.) 
    Lot shall mean any legal parcel of land created in compliance with the Town of Gypsum Subdivision Regulations on record in the office of the Town of Gypsum or Eagle County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Manufactured home installation program shall mean a program requiring that installers of manufactured housing be certified by the State of Colorado and that such housing units be inspected by a State of Colorado certified inspector. 
    Manufactured housing (mobile home) shall mean a factory-assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made to be readily moveable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation. (American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A119-1: (1) The phrase "without a permanent foundation" indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner. ANSI Article A119.1: Standard for Mobile Homes, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA Edition No 501A, 1990)(Section 1-2). 
    Road or street shall mean a way or right-of-way reserved for public or private use (other than an alley) that also provides primary vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. A road or street may also be used for drainage or utility access to adjacent properties, and may but need not necessarily be commonly identified as an avenue, drive, highway, lane, place, road, street or other similar designation. 
    Sign shall mean any letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark, illuminating device, or other device intended to attract attention to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article machine or merchandise whatsoever, and painted, printed, constructed or displayed in any manner whatsoever. 
    Site shall mean any parcel or area of land having an area sufficient to satisfy the provisions of the Town of Gypsum Subdivision Regulations. 
    Temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO) means a certificate that may, but is not required to be issued by the Town of Gypsum Official, authorizing a structure for which a certificate of occupancy has not been issued, to be temporarily occupied as hereinafter provided. 
    Town shall mean the area consisting of the incorporated limits of the Town of Gypsum, as the same exists from time to time and may also hereinafter be referred to as the "regulated area". 
    Work shall mean the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, moving or change in the class of occupancy of any building, equipment or structure, and the placement and use of a mobile home as a living unit other than in an approved mobile-home park as defined in the Town of Gypsum Zoning Regulation, section 18.16.040. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997; Ord. No. 2017-12,  4, 9-26-17) 
15.04.013 - Amendments to the Code. 
(a)  Where the requirements or conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter differ from the requirements or conditions of the Code, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  The International Building Code, 2015 Edition and the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition are incorporated into this chapter by reference with the following amendments: 
(1)  Amendment of Section 104.1 and R-104.1- "General." The first sentence of the first paragraph is amended to read: 
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of this Code is neither intended nor implied. 
(2)  Amendment of Section 105.2 and R-105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit." The following sentence and bullet points shall be added: 
The following structures shall not require a Building Permit: 
  One story detached buildings used only as a tool and/or storage shed, playhouse or other and similar uses, provided such buildings are not intended or used for human habitation, the area does not exceed 120 square feet and the height does not exceed 10 feet at the peak of the roof 
  Decks not more than 30 inches above grade, (18 inches if built into a setback) with no permanent construction above the floor line other than guardrails. Note: Fences and decks less than 18 inches above grade are allowed in setback. See 18.05.030 note 2 
  Agricultural buildings as defined in the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
  Fences over 36 inches in height shall not be allowed in the front yard. 
(3)  Amendment of Section 106.1 and R106.1 - "Submittal Documents." 
All commercial building plans, remodels, etc. shall be designed and stamped by a Colorado licensed architect and engineer. Foundation plans for all commercial buildings shall be designed and stamped by a Colorado registered professional engineer. Foundation plans for a residential building with a soils bearing pressure of less than 1500 PSF are required to be designed by and stamped by a Colorado registered professional engineer. Foundation plans for a residential building three stories or less in height with a soils bearing pressure of 1500 PSF or higher shall be designated per Chapter 4 of the 2015 International Residential Code or designed and stamped by a Colorado registered professional engineer or architect. When a residential building of otherwise conventional construction contains structural elements exceeding the limits of Section R301 of the International Residential Code, the structural plans shall be designed and stamped by a Colorado registered professional engineer or architect. 
(4)  Amendment of Section 106.3.1 and R106.3.1 "Approval of construction documents." The following paragraph shall be added: 
A building permit will not be issued by the Town of Gypsum until all construction drawings, applications, and permit fees are submitted and approved. With approval of the Building Official, a footing and foundation permit may be issued prior to the receipt of other permit information, if adequate structural, site plan, floodplain and geological hazard information is provided. The permittee shall proceed at their own risk until the full set of documents are received and approved. 
(5)  Amendment of Section 108.3 and R108.3 "Building Permit Valuation." The following sentences shall be added: 
The valuation for residential building permit purposes in the Town of Gypsum shall be $125.00 per square foot. The valuation for other permits shall be based on the most current Building Valuation Data Chart. 
(6)  Amendment of Section 105.7 & R105.7 General "Placement of permit". The following sentences shall be added: 
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to display the Building Permit card on the job site throughout the construction process. 
If this card becomes lost, there will be a $20.00 fee to update or replace the card. 
(7)  Amendment of Section 110.3.8, 110.3.9 "Special Inspections" and R109.1.5 "Other Inspections." The following sentences shall be added: 
LOG HOMES: A third party inspection by a certified log inspection agency shall be required of all logs used for the structural system of a log home. 
METAL BUILDINGS: An inspection by engineer of record or special inspector shall be required at an appointed time by the Building Official. (Usually prior to covers being installed) 
ELEVATORS: See Town of Gypsum Resolution No. 97-5 
(8)  Amendment of Section 509.1 "Separations." The following subsections shall be added: 
a.  Single-family residences having primary and secondary units located therein, except for Duplex or Townhomes. 
b.  Insulation placed in occupancy separations shall not contain combustible materials. 
c.  A one-hour fire resistive assembly shall be required for separation of individual tenant finishes of Group B Occupancies located under a common roof assembly. 
(9)  Amendment to Section 509.1 Separation and add section R302.6 "Heating Equipment Room Occupancy Separation." The following sentence shall be added: 
The mechanical room in Residential buildings (R-1, R-2, R-3. and R-4) containing a boiler, central heating plant, or hot water supply boiler in excess of 400,000 BTU per hour input, shall be required to be separated by one-hour fire resistive construction and have a 20 minute rated door with smoke seal, self-closing and latching. 
(10)  Amendment of Section R305 and 1208.2 "Minimum ceiling height." The follow sentence shall be added: 
Maximum Ceiling height for crawlspace shall be 6 feet, measured from finished grad to underside of floor joists. Crawlspaces deeper than 30 inches require a permanently affixed ladder. "(Ord. 2009-28) 
(11)  Add Section 707.15 and R302.6.1 "Shaft Enclosure Required." The following subsection shall be added: 
Factory built chimneys shall be enclosed with materials suitable for construction of a one-hour fire resistive wall. Fire blocks can be omitted in chimneys that are protected on all sides. Town of Gypsum requirements for enclosure of factory built chimneys shall be as set forth in Table 7, included in the text hereof and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(12)  Amendment of Section R301.2.3 "Snow Loads." This section is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
Roof snow load requirements for the Town of Gypsum shall be (40 PSF) forty pounds per square foot live load and (10 PSF) ten pounds per square foot dead load. Decks are (50 PSF) fifty pounds per square foot live load and (10 PSF) ten pounds per square foot dead load. 
(13)  Amendment of Section R401. 4 "Soils Tests." And 1803.1 "General". This section is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
An open hole classification of the soil at each building site shall be determined by a Colorado registered Soils Engineer. 
(14)  Amendment of Section R401.3 "Drainage" and 1804.4 "Site Drainage." The following paragraph shall be added: 
Positive drainage away from the exterior of all foundation walls must be maintained. In those locations where the foundation is subject to a high water table, or where surface or ground water drainage will present a problem, additional precautions may be required. 
(15)  Amendment of Section R403.1 and 1808.8 "General." The following phrase shall be added at the beginning of the first sentence in this section: 
Unless designed by a structural engineer for a specific location, 
(16)  Amendment to Section R1003.9 "Termination." The following sentences shall be added: 
Solid fuel chimney caps shall not be constructed in a way that prevents accessibility for cleaning. Where solid fuel and gas burning appliance flue vents are terminated within 24 inches horizontally of each other, said flue vents are to offset 10 inches vertically. 
(17)  Amendment of Section R1005.1 "Listing." The following sentences shall be added: 
In bedrooms and areas required by the manufacturer, outside combustion air shall be required in both gas-fired and wood burning fireplaces, and shall be terminated inside the firebox wall. Ducts for said combustion air shall be a minimum of 26 gauge galvanized metal when located in afire restrictive shaft. 
(18)  Amendment of Section R1005.5 - "Support." The following sentence shall be added: 
Factory built chimneys shall be supported at intervals not to exceed 10 feet by wall straps or equivalent. 
(19)  IBC section 1301 to be deleted and replaced with the following: 
Commercial thermal envelopes to meet the minimum requirements of table 9. 
(20)  Amendment to Section 3307.01 - "Protection of Adjoining Property." The following paragraph shall be added: 
Drainage improvements shall be required on all construction projects. The work is to be completed in strict conformance with the approved plans and ready for inspection no later than the date of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or the Certificate of Occupancy inspection, whichever occurs first. It will be the general contractor's responsibility to maintain positive drainage on the site during all phases of construction, including protection of any drainage along the public roadways, irrigation ditches, streams, ponds or other water bodies. Drainage improvements shall not adversely affect adjoining properties. 
(21)  Amendment to Section 107.2.1 and R106.1.1 "Information on Construction Drawings". The following sentence shall be added: 
"Elevation drawings, with all four directional views, shall be submitted with plans. All commercial plans shall be stamped by a Colorado registered professional Architect." 
(22)  Amendment of Section 310.1 Residential Group R. The description of Group R-3 Residential Occupancies is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
R-3 Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as R-1, R-2, R-4 or I and where buildings do not contain more than two dwelling units as applicable in Section 101.2; or adult care facilities that provide accommodations for five (5) or fewer persons of any age for less than 24 hours per day; or child care facilities that provide accommodations for up to six (6) children from birth to eighteen (18) years of age and up to two (2) additional children of school age who are attending full-day school, for less than 24 hours per day. Adult and child care facilities that are within a single-family home are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code in accordance with Section 101.2. (Ord. 2011-10) 
(23)  N1101.14 "Certification" is amended by changing the word "Mandatory" to "Optional". 
(24)  N1103.3.3 "Duct Testing Mandatory" is deleted in its entirety and amended to read as follows: 
Duct testing shall be required only for duct systems outside the building thermal envelope. The 3rd party test report shall be provided to the building official before the mechanical rough inspection has been scheduled. 
(25)  N1103.4 "Mechanical System Piping Insulation" is amended to add the following exception: 
Insulation is not required for mechanical system piping when the piping is inside the thermal envelope. 
(26)  N1103.5.1 "Heated Water Circulation and Temperature Maintenance Systems" is amended by changing the word "Mandatory" to "Optional". 
(27)  N1103.5.3 "Hot Water Piping System Insulation" is amended by deleting Number 1 and Number 4 and adding the following: 
Hot water piping system in the thermal envelope of a structure will not require insulation. 
(28)  N1104.1 "Lighting Equipment" is amended by changing the word "Mandatory" to "Optional". 
(29)  Section 1301 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
Commercial thermal envelopes to meet the minimum requirements of Table 9. 
(30)  Residential Fire Sprinklers. Residential fire sprinklers as required by Sections R309.5, R313, and P2904 of the 2015 International Residential Code are not required to be incorporated into residential buildings; however, if such improvements are included in a residential structure the standards and requirements of such sections shall apply. 
(c)  Plumbing license required. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 12-58-115, C.R.S., only qualified licensed plumbers may install "Plumbing Systems" as defined in Section 202 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition. 
(2)  The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, and Section 106.6.2 "Fee schedule" is hereby amended as follows: (The current schedule of Plumbing Permit Fees is contained in Table 5.) 
a.  Amendment of Section 903.1 "Vent Termination". The following sentences shall be added: 
The vent termination on metal roofs shall be within 3 feet of the ridge or an alternate means of protection shall be provided. 
b.  Amendment of Section 903.1 and P3103.1 "Roof extensions". Add in the number "10" where asked for number in section. 
c.  Amendment of Section 918.3 and P3114.3 "Where permitted". The following sentence shall be added: 
Only where construction does not allow ease of installation, or up to the A.H.J. 
d.  Amendment to Section 1003.10 "Access and maintenance of interceptors and separators". The following sentences shall be added: 
The Town of Gypsum requires bars/restaurants, schools, food preparation businesses (including any business with a cafeteria), grocery stores, gas stations and car washes (any business with an interceptor or separator) to provide the Town with copies of their grease/waste removal records semi-annually. The records shall be delivered to the Public Works department no later than July 31st and January 31 st of each year. Penalties for noncompliance shall be $100.00 a day, with a maximum of $10,000.00. 
e.  General note: All water closets (toilets) shall be vented with a 2 inch vent. 
(3)  Exterior Sewer Cleanout. There shall be a sewer cleanout near the junction of the building drain and the building sewer. The sewer cleanout shall be outside of the building, brought up to grade level, accessible and within 5 feet of the exterior wall. All sewer cleanouts shall have a plug that is threaded with a raised square head. Countersunk square heads shall be installed where raised heads are a trip hazard. 
(4)  Building Water Pressure. All water service installations to buildings shall have a pressure reducing valve to reduce the pressure in the building water distribution piping to 80 psi static or less. The pressure reducing valve shall be installed before the meter. A backflow preventer that complies with Table 608.1 of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall be installed following the meter. Isolation valves shall be located before the pressure reducing valve and after the backflow preventer (i.e. isolation valve-PRV-meter-backflow preventer-isolation valve). The backflow preventer shall have 12 inches of clearance below the device and 24 inches of open space for the test cocks. 
(e)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, is incorporated herein by reference with the following amendments: 
(1)  Amendment of Section 106.5.2. See Table 4 for fee schedule. 
(2)  General Note. All PVC exhaust flues for boilers, water heaters and furnaces shall be tested with 5psi of air. 
(3)  Mechanical Combustion Air. All combustion air, vent and duct terminations shall be a minimum of 3 feet above grade level or other surfaces where snow may accumulate and 2 feet above roof surfaces. 
(4)  Recessed dryer boxes shall be installed in a minimum of a 2x6 wall. 
(f)  The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference, with the following amendments: 
(1)  Add Section 104.5.1 "Fire restrictions - declaration, amendment, rescission, or reinstatement." The following section shall be added: 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code, in order to reduce the danger of uncontrolled fires starting or spreading within the Town, the Town Manager may, based on an evaluation of the fire danger and after consultation with the Fire Chiefs of the Gypsum Fire Protection District and the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District and the Eagle County Sheriff, declare, amend, rescind, or reinstate fire restrictions within the Town. Fire restrictions may restrict, condition, or prohibit any activities determined to pose the risk of starting or aiding the spread of uncontrolled fire. Fire restrictions shall be imposed by an order signed by the Town Manager stating its effective date, which may be immediately upon signature, its duration, which may be until repealed, and all restricted, conditioned, or prohibited activities. The Town Manager's order shall immediately be published on the Town's website and posted at the Town Hall. The Town Manager's order shall be promptly scheduled for consideration at a regular meeting of the Town Council, at which time the Council shall by resolution either confirm, modify, or rescind the Town Manager's order. 
(2)  Amendment of Section 105.1.1 - "Permits required." Section 105.1.1 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
105.1.1 Permits required. Operational permits required by this code shall be obtained from the District Fire Code Official. Construction permits required by this code shall be obtained from the Town Fire Code Official or designee. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection. 
(3)  Amendment of Section 105.1.3 - "Permits for the same location." Section 105.1.3 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
105.1.3 Permits for the same location. When more than one permit is required for the same location, the District Fire Code Official is authorized to consolidate operational permits into a single operational permit, and the Town Fire Code Official is authorized to consolidate construction permits into a single construction permit, provided that each provision is listed in the permit. A construction permit and an operational permit may not be consolidated into a single permit. 
(4)  Amendment of Section 105.2, 105.3, 105.4, and 105.5. The phrase "fire code official" as used throughout Sections 105.2, 105.3, 105.4, and 105.5, and their subsections, is deleted and replaced with the phrase "respective Fire Code Official." 
(5)  Amendment of Section 105.6 - "Required operational permits." The phrase "fire code official" as used throughout Section 105.6 and its subsections, is deleted and replaced with the phrase "District Fire Code Official." 
(6)  Amendment of Section 307.2 - "Permit Required." Section 307.2 is deleted and replaced with the following: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit is required prior to kindling afire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildfire management practices, prevention, or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled, and shall be obtained from the District Fire Code Official. Any other permitting approvals required by other jurisdictions, including but not limited to air quality permitting, must be obtained from the appropriate entity. 
(7)  Amendment of Chapter 45 "REFERENCED STANDARDS." Chapter 45, and all other references to the National Fire Protection Association standards, are revised to refer to the current edition of the NFPA. 
(g)  Tiny Houses. The following standards are hereby incorporated into this chapter and shall be applicable to tiny houses used as single dwelling units. Tiny houses shall comply with the 2015 International Residential Code and the 2014 NEC except as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, all word, terms and expressions contained herein shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set out in the Code, except that the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
(a)  "Egress roof access window" shall mean a skylight or roof window designed and installed to meet requirements of an emergency escape opening in R310.2. 
(b)  "Landing platform" shall mean a landing measuring two treads deep and two risers tall, provided as the top step of a stairway to access a loft. 
(c)  "Loft" shall mean any floor located above the main floor and open to it on at least one side, with a ceiling height less than 6 feet 8 inches, complying with the area, access, and a guardrail. The area is used for living or sleeping space. 
(d)  "Tiny House" shall mean a dwelling which is 400 or less in square feet in floor area excluding lofts, and may be placed on a foundation or remain on wheels with proper leveling jacks and tie downs. 
(2)  Minimum Ceiling Height. Habitable space including hallways in tiny homes shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 foot 8 inches. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 foot 4 inches. No obstructions shall extend below these minimum ceiling heights including beams, girders, ducts, lighting, or other obstructions. 
(3)  Lofts. 
(a)  Minimum loft area. Lofts are allowed to be used for sleeping or living space and shall meet the minimum area requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Minimum area. Lofts shall have an area of not less than 35 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum head height. Lofts shall have a minimum head height of 5 feet. Unless portions of the loft have a sloping ceiling measured less than 3 feet, in which case these areas are not considered as part of the minimum required area of 35 square feet. 
(d)  Loft access. The access to and primary egress from lofts shall be of any type described in this section. 
(e)  Stairways. Stairways accessing a loft shall comply with the following. 
(1)  Width. Stairways accessing a loft shall not be less than 20 inches in clear width at all points at or above the permitted handrail height. The minimum width below the required handrail shall not be less than 17 inches. 
(2)  Headroom. The headroom in stairways accessing a loft shall not be less than 6 feet 2 inches measured vertically from the sloped line connecting the tread nosing in the middle of the tread depth. 
Exception. The headroom for landing platforms shall not be less than 4 feet 6 inches. 
(3)  Treads and risers. Risers for stairs accessing a loft shall not be a minimum of 7 inches and a maximum of 12 inches. 
Exception. Landing platforms shall measure two treads deep. 
(4)  Handrail. Handrails shall comply with section R311.7.8 
(5)  Stairway guards. Guards at open side of stairways shall comply with section R312.1. 
(6)  Ladders. Ladders accessing lofts shall comply with sections A and B. 
A.  Size and capacity. Ladders accessing lofts shall have 12 inch minimum rung width and 10 inches to 14 inch spacing between rungs. Ladders shall be capable of supporting a 200 pound load on any rung. Rung spacing shall be uniform within 3/8. 
B.  Incline. Ladders shall be installed at 70 to 80 degrees from horizontal. 
(7)  Ships ladder. Ships ladders accessing lofts shall comply with sections R311.7.12.1 and R311.7.12.2. The clear width at and below the handrails shall not be less than 20 inches. 
(8)  Loft guards. Loft guards shall be located along the open side or side of the loft area located more than 30 inches from the main floor. Loft guards shall be not less than 36 inches in height or one-half the clear height to the ceiling, whichever is less. 
(9)  Emergency escape and rescue openings. Tiny houses shall meet the requirements of section R310 for emergency escape and rescue openings. 
Exception. Egress roof access windows in lofts used as a sleeping room shall be deemed to meet the requirements of section R310 where installed with the bottom of their opening no more than 44 inches above the loft floor. 
(h)  Exemptions to certain accessory dwelling units. Pursuant to Section 18.10.040(2) of the Gypsum Municipal Code, certain accessory dwelling units existing prior to May 1, 2017 are not required to meet the full extent of the 2015 International Residential Code, but will require an inspection for the health and safety requirements listed in Section 18.10.040(2) of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  5, 9-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-09,  1, 9-11-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-12,  5, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed the former  15.04.013 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15.04.013 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 34, Series 1997; Ord. 39, Series 1999; Ord. 2009-15; Ord. 2009-28; Ord. 2010-03; Ord. 2010-04; and Ord. 2011-10. 
15.04.014 - Responsibility of owner, contractor or authorized agent. 
    Neither the granting of a permit, nor the approval of the drawings and specifications, nor inspections made by the building official shall in any way relieve the owner of such building or structure from full responsibility for carrying out all work in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.015 - General restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall commence or continue any work on or with respect to any building, structure, factory-built housing unit, mobile home or equipment, without first obtaining the necessary permits from the Town of Gypsum. Failure to first obtain a permit prior to start of construction shall be assessed a fine of three times the value of the permit fee, over and above the original permit fees. 
(b)  The general contractor/permittee shall provide adequate sanitary and waste management facilities during construction. 
(c)  No person shall commence or continue any work on or with respect to any private or subsurface sewage disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the Eagle County Environmental Health Division. 
(d)  Written approval of the Eagle County Environmental Health Division shall be obtained before the back filling of any private or subsurface sewage disposal system. 
(e)  With respect to any work undertaken in violation of the provisions of subsections (c) or (d) of this section, the building official or environmental health officer or their duly authorized representatives, may at any time require that such work, in whole or in part, be exposed for inspection. 
(f)  No person shall occupy any new building, factory-built housing unit or mobile home until sewage disposal facilities, meeting the minimum standards of the regulations, of the state board of health or any of the Eagle County Individual Sewage Disposal Regulations, have been installed and have been approved, in writing, by the Eagle County Environmental Health Division. 
(g)  No person shall occupy any new building, factory-built housing unit or mobile home until a final electrical, plumbing, mechanical and building inspection has taken place and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. (Ordinance 34, Series 1997). 
(h)  In commercial buildings that require tenant finishes both water and sanitary sewer service connection EQRs will be charged by fixture count at time of plumbing rough-in. 
(i)  All streets, sidewalks and roads shall be swept daily and kept clean of mud and debris. No inspections will be performed if streets, sidewalks and roads are not clean. A minimum fine of $100.00 per day, per occurrence will be assessed to the general contractor. Work will stop immediately until cleaned and approved by Town of Gypsum staff. 
(j)  A Town of Gypsum business license shall be required by all contractors, or subcontractors, having a place of business, or working within the Town of Gypsum. Failure to obtain and maintain such license shall constitute fines, summons to municipal court, and/or removal from jobsite until such license has been recorded with the Town of Gypsum. 
(k)  All single family and multi-family dwellings being constructed, interior alterations, repairs, fuel fired appliance replacements or additions, any of which require a building permit, require the installation of carbon monoxide alarms within 15 feet of the entrance to all lawfully occupied sleeping rooms and on the ceiling of the level of the building that the fuel burning appliance is located if it is on a level that does not have sleeping rooms (appliances in crawlspaces are exempt). (Ord. 2013-07) 
(l)  The seller of any single family or multi-family dwelling shall ensure that an operational carbon monoxide detector is installed within 15 feet of the entrance to all lawfully occupied sleeping rooms. 
(m)  Any single-family or multi-family dwelling that is used for rental property that has a change in tenant occupancy shall have an operational carbon monoxide detector installed within 15 feet of all lawfully occupied sleeping rooms provided by the owner of the property. (Ord. 2009-10) 
15.04.016 - Residential inspections. 
    The following inspections may be required for one- and two-family dwellings. [Code references are to the 2015 International Residential Code (IRC)]. It is the responsibility of the holder of the building permit to coordinate all inspection activity and to ensure that approved plans (including plot plan or site plan) are on the job site for inspection purposes. Failure to have approved plans on the job site or not being ready for the requested inspections may result in disapproval of all inspections that were scheduled and the assessment of a reinspection fee. 
3.1 Footing Inspection: The footing inspection shall be made prior to the placement of concrete and after all column or wall footings are excavated, forms erected, and any required reinforcing steel is in place. See Chapter 4 of the IRC. 
The following requirements must be met: 
Concrete to be a minimum of 2500 psi. 
Foundations shall bear on solid undisturbed soil. 
Soils report is required. 
Footings shall be a minimum of 42 inches below finish grade. 
3.2 Foundation Wall Inspection: The foundation wall inspection shall be made prior to the placement of concrete and after all forms are set and overlapping reinforcing steel is tied together per approved plans. 
Inspection of the foundation shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. 
3.3 Groundwork Inspection: The groundwork inspection shall be made prior to the complete installation of base course and after all under slab mechanical or electrical components and plumbing piping have been installed. All material shall be adequately supported and installed according to the Code and/or listing. 
The water service line (from the curb stop to the first valve in the house) shall be inspected by the Public Works Department. The exterior sanitary sewer line may be inspected by the Public Works Department at the time of the sewer tap inspection. 
3.4 Backfill Inspection: The backfill inspection shall be made prior to backfilling of foundations and after foundation drain and waterproofing of foundation have been accomplished. Foundations shall be adequately supported before backfilling begins. See Code sections R-405 and R-406. 
The following requirements must be met: 
Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade. 
Drains shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means. If the drain connects to a sump pit, a pump piped to discharge to daylight will be required. 
Gravel or crushed stone shall extend one foot beyond the outside edge of the footing and six inches above the top of the footings. Perforated drainage pipe drains shall be covered with a minimum of six inches of material and shall have a minimum of 2" of material beneath the drain, unless it rests directly on the footing. 
Foundation walls below grade shall be waterproofed with membranes extending from the edge of the footing to the finished grade. See Code section R-406.2. The membrane shall consist of two-ply hot mopped felts, six mil polyvinyl chloride, 55-pound roll roofing or equivalent material approved by the Building Official. 
All poured concrete foundation walls enclosing basements shall be damp-proofed in accordance with Code section R-406.1. 
3.5 Throat Inspection: Throat inspections shall be made only for masonry fireplaces. They shall be conducted after the firebox is built and the first flute liner is in place. Construction of a chimney may not continue until this inspection is approved. 
3.6 Rough-in/Framing Inspection: Rough-in/framing inspections shall be made prior to the installation of insulating material, gypsum wallboard, and/or exterior wall covering that conceals fasteners for exterior wall covering or sheathing. 
This inspection is required after all framing, fire stopping and bracing are in place and after all electrical wiring, piping, mechanical duct work, vents and chimneys are completed and ready for rough-in inspection. If desired and requested in advance, a single, courtesy preliminary framing inspection will be performed. As all trades are not installed at this time, no approval shall be given after a preliminary framing inspection. However, any deficiencies will be noted in a written report, which will be referenced when the complete framing inspection is performed. Gas line and electrical service inspection(s) may be additionally requested with the framing inspections or at any other time before Final Inspection, as long as there is no concealment of piping or service and grounding conductors. 
3.7 Electric and gas service inspections: Gas service inspections shall be made when the gas line installation is complete and the required pressure test is in place and holding pressure. Electric service inspections shall be made when the service equipment, including system grounding, is in place. 
3.8 Lath inspection: All exterior exposed to weathering shall be flashed. 
3.9 Insulation: Insulation to be installed to the Town of Gypsum minimum requirements. 
3.10 Drywall: Installed per 2003 International Residential Code. 
3.11 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy: In accordance with Section 15.04.017. 
3.12 Final Inspection. The Final Inspection must occur in accordance with Section 15.04.018 and when all buildings and structures which are subject to the provisions of this Chapter are deemed complete. A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the buildings or structures which are subject to this Chapter pass Final Inspection. Final Inspection approval shall not be granted for one and two family dwelling units until the permit holder/owner/developer meets all of the requirements of section 15.04.012 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  6, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-12,  6, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed the former  15.04.016 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15.04.016 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2009-10. 
15.04.017 - Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
    A TCO shall not be issued unless the following components, if they are a part of the approved plan for the project, are complete and approved by the Town of Gypsum Building Official: 
3.13  Kitchen operative. 
3.14  One bathroom operative as per approved plans. 
3.15  All smoke detectors installed per the Code and operative. 
3.16  The following life safety items are fully installed: 
Address numbers. 
Handrails. 
Guardrails 
Decks. 
Stairs. 
Separation between the garage and house complete with a self closing minimum 20 minute rated and labeled door or 1 3/8 inch solid wood or 1 3/8 inch solid or honeycomb core steel door. Any opening into the garage ceiling for attic access shall have a minimum 20 minute rating or the drywall on the garage side shall extend all the way to the roof sheathing. 
3.17  Furnace/boiler is operable. 
3.18  Final electrical approval. 
3.19  Final plumbing and mechanical approval. 
3.20  Culvert under driveway installed per Town of Gypsum specifications (as located on the approved drawings), and the on-site drainage improvements are cleaned to allow water to flow freely. 
3.21  Positive drainage away from the structure at all locations that does not adversely affect neighboring property. 
3.22  All-weather surfaced driveway and sidewalk to front door installed. 
3.23  There shall be sufficient roadway access for emergency vehicles. 
3.24  The TCO shall have a time period of up to, but not more than 90 days from the date of issuance. If weather does not permit completion within the previously described 90-day time period it may be extended, however, the extension of the TCO shall not extend longer than the July 1st of the following year. 
3.25  The TCO shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises until final approval for occupancy is completed. 
3.26  A deposit of $1,500.00 shall be paid to the Town of Gypsum prior to a TCO for a residential inspection being issued. If landscaping or other items have not been completed by the expiration of the TCO, then the deposit shall be forfeited to the Town of Gypsum and the permit holder will be held in violation of this chapter and be summoned to court. 
3.27  A deposit of $3,000.00 shall be paid to the Town of Gypsum prior to a TCO being issued for a commercial structure. If landscaping or other items have not been completed by the expiration of the TCO, then the deposit s forfeited to the Town of Gypsum and the permit holder will be held in violation of this chapter and be summoned to court. 
3.28  A completed and approved inspection by the Town of Gypsum Public Works Department. 
15.04.018 - Final inspection. 
    By way of explanation and not limitation, final inspection approval for one and two family dwelling units will be granted only where the following components of a project are deemed complete and are in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter including the Code, and approved by the Town of Gypsum Building Official. (Ord. 2009-10) (Ord. 2010-14) 
3.29  Kitchen operative. 
3.30  All bathrooms complete and operative as per the approved plans. 
3.31  All smoke detectors installed per the Code and operative. 
3.32  The following life safety items are fully installed: 
Address numbers. 
Handrails. 
Guardrails 
Decks. 
Stairs. 
Separation between the garage and house complete with a self-closing minimum 20 minute rated and labeled door or 1 3/8 inch solid wood or 1 3/8 inch solid or honeycomb core steel door. Any opening into the garage ceiling for attic access shall have a minimum 20 minute rating or the drywall on the garage side shall extend all the way to the roof sheathing. 
3.33  Furnace/boiler is operable. 
3.34  Final electrical approval. 
3.35  Final plumbing and mechanical approval. 
a.  Town building code official and town fire code official review and approval of commercial or multi-family projects. District and town fire code official joint approval of acceptance testing. 
3.36  Culvert under driveway installed per Town of Gypsum specifications (as located on the approved drawings), and the on-site drainage improvements are cleaned to allow water to flow freely. 
3.37  Positive drainage away from the structure at all locations that does not adversely affect neighboring property. 
3.38  All-weather surfaced driveway and sidewalk to front door installed. 
3.39  There shall be sufficient roadway access for emergency vehicles. 
3.40  A completed and approved inspection by the Town of Gypsum Public Works Department. 
3.41  A completed and approved inspection by the Planning and Engineering Departments for commercial projects or multi-family projects and as needed for one and two family dwellings. 
3.42  All required permits are issued. 
3.43  An all weather surfaced and sidewalk to front door driveway installed. 
3.44  Landscaping or revegetation for erosion control complete. Grass seed to show significant growth to be deemed complete. (Ord. 2010-14) 
3.45  The exterior of the building is completed, including roof assembly and parking areas, as per approved plans. 
3.46  Where applicable, design and review boards' approval required prior to C.O. being issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  7, 9-26-17) 
15.04.019 - Permits and fees. 
(a)  The building department shall issue a permit where: 
(1)  An application for a permit has been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(2)  The proposed work set out in the application conforms to this chapter and all other laws, regulations, resolutions, or orders having application in the Town of Gypsum; and 
(3)  All construction drawings, applications, and permit fees have been submitted and approved. 
(4)  A footing and foundation permit may be awarded (at the discretion of the building official) prior to receipt of other permit information if structural and site plan information pursuant to Section 106.1.1 of the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, and International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, and the Town of Gypsum Subdivision Regulations, is provided. The permittee shall proceed at their own risk until all required construction drawings have been submitted and approved. 
(5)  A reduced fee for a repetitive plan check will be allowed when more than one building is to be constructed from a set of plans approved by Town of Gypsum Building Department. One master set of plans will be kept on file at the Town of Gypsum Building Department and a set stamped "field copy" will be returned to the permittee to be placed at the job site. 
(6)  Unless otherwise amended or changed the reduced repetitive plan check fee shall be 20 percent of the original plan check fee. 
(7)  The schedule of fees to be charged for the issuance of a permit under this chapter shall be as set forth in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6, as attached hereto and incorporated into this chapter by this reference. Minimum permit and inspection fees shall comply with the minimum stated in Table 3 of this chapter. 
(b)  The building department shall not issue a permit any time: 
(1)  The proposed work, as set forth in the application, or the proposed use of the building or structure if completed, would not comply with the provisions of the Town of Gypsum Zoning Ordinance; or 
(2)  The owner or applicant, in relation to the proposed lot or site, has not complied with the provisions of the Town of Gypsum's Subdivision regulations controlling the subdivision, platting, partitioning, or other division of land; or 
(3)  The proposed work, as set forth in the application, or the proposed building or structure if completed, would be in violation of the Town of Gypsum Zoning Map; or 
(4)  If a private or subsurface sewage disposal system is necessary and the proposed site does not meet the requirements, conditions, or imposed provisions of state law or regulation of the state board of health, or any of Eagle County's sewage disposal regulations. Where a private or subsurface sewage disposal system is necessary, and the proposed site meets the requirements or conditions therefore imposed by a provision of the aforesaid laws, regulations, or resolutions, the building official shall not issue a permit until a sewage disposal permit has first been issued in writing by the environmental health office; or 
(5)  The proposed site is located, in whole or in part, within any area determined by the building official to necessitate special building requirements as a result of geological hazards or is in any floodplain hazard area as described in any town ordinance, and the special permit required by such ordinance has not been obtained by the applicant. All special building requirements included in any such special permit shall be incorporated into the permit issued to the applicant under this chapter; or 
(6)  In the opinion of the building official, the results of the tests referred to in section 15.04.018 of this chapter are not satisfactory; or 
(7)  The proposed building or structure violates the design requirements described in section 15.05.040 or the subdivision specific design guidelines adopted by the planning commission pursuant to section 15.05.060. (Ord 13, series 2000) 
(c)  An application for a permit shall: 
(1)  Be made on the form prescribed by the building department; and 
(2)  Be signed by the applicant; and 
(3)  Be accompanied by the fee prescribed for work to be undertaken; and 
(4)  State the intended use of the building structure; and 
(5)  Include copies in triplicate of a site plan and scale drawings and specifications of the work to be carried out as required by Section 105.3 and R-105.3 of the International Building and International Residential Codes, 2003 Editions, however, when fire department review is required, plans and specifications must be submitted in quadruplicate. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 105.3 of the 2003 International Building Code, 2003 Edition, the site plan shall show and include all of the following: 
a.  Outline of proposed and existing building with setback drawings. 
b.  Outline of proposed and existing building with setbacks from property lines indicated on all sides. 
c.  All easements, utility, water and sewer lines. 
d.  Driveway and driveway intersections with public road, including grades, widths, and necessary culverts and ditches. 
e.  Parking spaces dimensioned and numbered, with snow removal area(s) indicated. 
f.  Proposed method of drainage of water away from foundation and into drainage way. 
g.  Proposed soil stabilization, revegetation or landscape plan with erosion and sediment control. 
h.  Location of live streams, ponds, or lakes, all other dry washes and irrigation ditches, and 100-year floodplain limits. 
i.  Proposed and existing wells on subject property and adjacent property. 
j.  Location of individual sewage disposal system, when proposed, with distances from proposed system to dwellings indicated, wells, and other fixed reference objects. 
k.  Any additional information deemed reasonable and necessary by the building official and/or zoning officer. 
(6)  All plans and drawing shall be submitted in electronic pdf file format, or as otherwise approved by the town fire code official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  8, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-12,  8, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed the former  15.04.019 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15.04.019 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance 34, Series 1997. 
15.04.020 - Documents on the site. 
(a)  The person to whom the permit is issued shall, during construction, keep on site: 
(1)  A job address signboard as specified in Table 8. 
(2)  The building permit job weather card posted in a conspicuous place, and; 
(3)  The approved filed drawings and specifications referred to in section 15.04.016. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to display the building card on the job site throughout the construction process. If this card becomes lost, there will be a $20.00 fee to update or replace the card. (Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.021 - Powers of the building official. 
(a)  The building official is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter under authority of the Town of Gypsum. 
(b)  The building official may pursuant to the 2015 International Building Code, and the International Residential Code, 2015 Editions, Sections 104.1-104.11.2 and R-104.1-R-104.11.1, respectively, do or require any one or all of the following: 
(1)  Enter any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of administering this chapter. 
(2)  Direct that tests be made of materials, devices, construction methods, structural assemblies or foundation conditions; or sufficient evidence or proof as necessary to determine whether the material, devices, construction or foundation meet the requirements of this chapter. The records of such tests shall be kept available for inspection during the construction of the building or structure and for such a period thereafter as required by the building official. 
(3)  Direct by written notice, or by attaching a placard to premises, the correction of any condition where, in the opinion of the building official, such condition violated the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Revoke a permit where there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12,  9, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-12,  9, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed the former  15.04.021 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15.04.021 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance 34, Series 1997. 
15.04.022 - Appeals. 
(a)  Creation. A board of appeals shall be created as provided in Section 112 and R-112 of the International Building Code and International Residential Code, but as amended as follows: 
(1)  Qualifications of board members: 
a.  If any such persons are available in the town, each member shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect or a building contractor or superintendent of building construction, or other person qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, and 
b.  If possible, at no time shall there be more than two members from the same profession or business on the board of appeals; and, if possible, there shall be at least one licensed architect and one licensed structural or civil engineer on the board of appeals. 
(b)  Appeal to the Gypsum Town Council. 
(1)  Grievances: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals shall have the right of appeal therefrom to the Gypsum Town Council. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days from the date of the decision of the board of appeals, and in the case of an appeal by the building official; the original appellant shall be notified within five days from the date of the decision that the building official intends to appeal the decision. 
(2)  Procedure: Appeals hereunder shall be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk, who shall schedule the appeal for hearing no later than the second regular meeting following receipt of said notice. The town clerk shall notify the secretary of the board of appeals, the building official and the appellant and appellee in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(3)  Transmission of files: Upon receipt of the notice from the town clerk, the secretary of the board of appeals shall transmit the file containing all exhibits, testimony and evidence of whatsoever kind to the town clerk not later than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
(4)  Hearing: At the hearing the Gypsum Town Council shall examine the file and consider any additional evidence that it deems appropriate. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply, but all additional oral evidence shall be reduced to writing in summary form. 
(5)  Ruling: Within ten days from the date of the hearing the board shall issue its written ruling affirming, modifying, or reversing the ruling of the board of appeals. Copies of the ruling shall be mailed to the secretary of the board of appeals, the building official, and the appellant. The building official shall then take whatever action is indicated by the board's ruling. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.023 - Penalty. 
(a)  No person shall commence or continue any work in respect to any building, structure or mobile home, or any sewage disposal system in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is liable upon conviction for a fine of not more than $100.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ten days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The fire code official shall have authority to cite violations of the fire code to Gypsum Municipal Court. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, remodeled, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the board, building official, the town attorney, or any owner of real estate within the area, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute an appropriate action for other remedies provided by law, may institute an appropriate action for injunction, mandamus or abatement to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, remodeling, maintenance or use. (Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
(c)  Reinspection fees may be imposed for any required reinspection, in addition to any fines. 
15.04.024 - Waiver. 
    The building official may waive any permit requirements within this chapter only after a determination that the effect of such a waiver is minor and will not affect the health, safety and welfare of the persons occupying building in the Town of Gypsum. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.025 - Repeal. 
    Upon the approval and adoption of this chapter by the Gypsum Town Council, all existing or previously adopted building code provisions not reflected in this chapter are hereby repealed and superseded by this chapter. (Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.026 - Severability. 
    The Gypsum Town Council hereby declares that if any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter or of the Code as adopted by the town, is for any reason held to be invalid by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or of the Code. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.027 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after the date of the adoption hereof by council. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.028 - Closing. 
    The council determines and finds that this chapter is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Gypsum. 
(Ordinance 34, Series 1997) 
15.04.029 - Investigation, abatement, and enforcement procedures. 
    The building official shall have the power to investigate alleged violations of this chapter 15.04, issue notices of such violations and orders of abatement, take action to abate violations, and institute in courts of proper jurisdiction proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter 15.04, as those investigation, notice, abatement and enforcement procedures are outlined in section 8.05.050 of the Town Code. The building official shall also have the power to issue stop work orders, as set forth in section 18.16.040(d)(3). of the Code. Such enforcement, investigation and stop work procedures shall replace any enforcement procedures separately listed in the International Codes adopted by section 15.04.010 herein. 
Appendix A - Tables 

Table 1 
Table 1 
3.47  Town of Gypsum permit requirements. 
3.48  A project may require one or more of the following permits: 
(1)  Building; (2) Plumbing; (3) Electrical; (4) Mechanical; (5) Grading; (6) Individual; (7) Sign; (8) Manufactured Housing Hookup; (9) Fire Alarm System; (10) Fire Sprinkler System; (11) Construction Permit. 
3.49  Routing abbreviations: 
Building Department = BD 
Board = See Planning 
Planning Department = PD 
District Fire Code Official = DFCO 
Environmental Health = EH 
Electrical = E 
Engineering = EG 
Public Works = PW 
(Ord. 2009-28) 
(This Table is a Permit Requirement Guideline ONLY and does not take precedence over the International Codes as adopted by the Town of Gypsum.) 
Classification 
of Projects Specific Projects No Permit Req. Permit(s) Required Review Req. Site Plan Req. New Structures and Factory Built Structures and Manufactured On Private Land Building of New Residential Structures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 10 BD, PD, PW, E X Building of New Nonresidential Commercial Structure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 BD, PW, PD, E X Moving of Existing Structure to New Location 1, 3 BD, PW, PD, E X Moving of Manufactured Housing into a Mobile Home Park 1, 3, 8 BD, PD, E X Moving and Setting of Factory Built Structure on Bldg. Site 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 BD, PW, PD, E X Amended Attached Buildings One story detached buildings used as tool and storage sheds playhouses and similar uses provided the projected floor area does not exceed 120 s.f. and the height of said buildings does not exceed 10 ft. at peak of roof from finished grade. X Condemned Buildings Demolition of the Whole or Part of Building, Factory Built Structures, or Manufactured Housing 1 BD, PD X Additions and Alterations to Exterior Construction and On Site Accessory Construction Additions and alterations involving bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, living room, or other accessory rooms 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10 BD, PD, E X Additions and alterations involving an attached or detached garage or shop 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 BD, PD, E X Nonstructural sidewalks/slabs X Decks and Patios not over 30 inches above grade, 18" if built into set backs, with no permanent construction above the floor line other than guardrails. X Decks, Entry Porches, Etc. *, ** 1, 3 BD, PD X Additions, Decks, Exterior Construction and On Site Accessory Construction Retaining Walls, over 4 feet in height (Engineering Required) 1 BD, EG X Fences over 6 feet in height 1 BD, PD X Fences used for Agricultural purposes only or those fences under 6 feet in height. Agricultural Buildings as defined by the 1997 UBC X Erection of Exterior Signs (Except as Exempt in Zoning Resolution) 7 BD, PD X All Nonstructural Landscaping X Replacement of Roof 1 BD Repair or Replacement of Exterior Siding 1 BD Exterior Repair and Replacement and/or Additions Addition of Exterior Window 1 BD Repair or Replacement of Existing Exterior Window (of the same size) Note: If window is to be egress or tempered a permit is required. X 1 Addition of Exterior Door 1 BD, PD Repair or Replacement of Existing Exterior Door X Interior Repair and Replacement and/or Addition Repair or Replacement of Floor Covering X Painting, Papering or Similar Finish Work-Exterior or Interior X Installation of Wood burning Stove or Fireplace 4 BD Replacement of Furnace or Hot Water Heater (Except Electrical Appliance) 4, 2 BD Kitchen Remodel, i.e. Cabinet Replacement or Counter Replacement (adding a dishwasher requires a Plumbing Permit) X 1 BD, EH Comm'l Repair, alteration, replacement or addition of plumbing system 2 BD Repair, alteration, replacement or addition of electrical system 3, 11 E Demolition of Interior Wall 1 BD Addition of Interior Wall 1, 6 BD Repair of up to 144 square feet of drywall except fire resistive assemblies and other than residential construction X Addition or replacement of built-in cabinets or shelves X Water and/or Sewer Systems Installation of Private Sewer System 6 EH X Expansion of Private Sewer System 6 EH X Repair of Private Sewer System involving replacement of septic tank or repair/moving of leach field 6 EH X Disconnection of septic System and connecting to Public Sewer System (Contact Town of Gypsum) EG and PW X Installation of water and/or sewer distribution/collection lines and tap within Public Right-of-Way or Easement for Public Utilities EG and PW X Installation of public water system (contact Town of Gypsum) EG and PW X Plumbing Plumbing systems are defined in Section 103 of the UPC 2 BD Mechanical All Mechanical installations as described in Section 112 of the UMC 4 BD Fire Alarm or Fire Sprinkler Fire Alarm System installation, modification, or addition; fee based on valuation of system 9, 11 BD and for acceptance testing only, DFCO Fire Sprinkler System installation, modification, or addition; fee based on valuation of system 10, 11 BD and for acceptance testing only, DFCO Addition of interior walls 9, 1, 11 BD Culverts Installation of New, Repair or Replacement of Culvert (May require road cut permit thru Public Works Department 5 BD and PW Private lots Excavation, Grading and Filling of private lots 1, 5 BD, EG, PD X  
 Note: Decks of any height are not allowed in utility easements. 
** Note: Decks of any height may be allowed to be built into the setback but no closer than 10 feet of the property line. If over 18" above grade, a building permit would be required. (Ord. 2012-12) 
Note: For changes to table 2 (change all rebar to #5) if wall is over 48 inches tall. 
3.50  Building permit fees and related inspection fees. 
Total Valuation Fees $1.00 to $1,200.00 $47.00 $1,201.00 to $2,000.00 $47.00 for the first $500.00 plus $3.05 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 $2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.75 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.01 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 $1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.65 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof  
3.51  Plan check fee is 65% of the building permit fee. 
Other inspections and fees: 
1.  Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge 2 hours for weekends) at $75.00 per hour. 
2.  Reinspection fees will be assessed $47.00 per inspection. Repeat offenders (4 or more) will be assessed at a rate of $100.00 per inspection. 
3.  Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated $47.00 per hour. (minimum charge of one hour) 
a.  For moving or demolishing any building or structure $47.00 (per inspection). 
4.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to approved plans. (minimum charge 3 hours) at $47.00 per hour. 
5.  Additional inspections for which collected fees are not adequate. $47.00 per hour. 
6.  For Factory Built, Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home Base Fee Cost not on a foundation. (This is for Mobile Home type sets.) 
Single Wide Unit - 2 field inspections and 1-hour plan checking/office time $210.00.00. 
Double Wide Unit - 3 field inspection and 2 hour plan checking/office time $300.00. 
Note: The above included Plumbing and Mechanical inspections without separate permitting. Separate Electrical Permit is required. 
Note: All additional inspections will be $47.00 each. 
HUD and UBC homes on foundation 5 field inspections and 3 hour plan review fee. $550.00 (basement and garage will be figured per Table 3) 
Additional inspections will be $47.00 each. 
Note: An additional $70.00 fee will be added for the State required certification tag. 
7.  Requests for specialized reports will be charged $47.00 hourly with a 1-hour minimum. 
8.  Per Town of Gypsum Ordinance Section 15.04.013(5), if the building card becomes lost or unreadable, there will be a $20.00 fee to update or replace the card. 
9.  Grading permit fees and plan review fees: 
Plan review (2-hour minimum) $47.00/hour 100 cubic yards or less $47.00 101 to 1,000 cubic yards $47.00 for the first 100 cubic yards plus $10.50 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction thereof. 1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards $141.00 for the first 1,000 cubic yards, plus $9.00 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof. 10,001 cubic yards or more $611.00 for the first 10,000 cubic yards, plus $22.50 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof.  
Amendment of Section 15.04.029 Table 3 Section 3.52(9). (Ord. 2013-07) Section 15.04.015 Table 3 Section 3.52(9) is hereby amended to read: 
9.  Building permit fees for the replacement of the roof for one and two family structures is $47.00 and the permit fee for the replacement of siding for one and two family structures is $94.00. Both permits are also subject to Use Tax Fees. 
10.  Building Permit Site Plan Review and inspection fee for a single family dwelling unit shall be $150.00 to be paid with building permit application. (Ordinance 17, series 2010) 
11.  Building Permit Engineering Site Plan review and inspections for multi-family or commercial structures shall be $350.00 to be paid with building permit application. (Ordinance 17, series 2010) 
12.  Refund of fees: Pertains to all types of permits. No refund for plan check or permit fees, if plan check or construction has been started and discontinued for any reason. Not more than 80% refund of the permit fee when no work has commenced under a permit issued in accordance with the code. 100% refund of tap and use tax fees, providing taps have not been made and no construction has been started. All other refunds of collected fees will be on a case by case basis and approved by the Building Official. 
Table 4 
Table 4 Mechanical Permit and Related Inspection Fees 
A.  Residential Replacements. The following fees apply for the issuance of mechanical permits for the replacements of water heaters, furnaces and fireplaces in residential units, which permits must be obtained prior to such replacement. Fees include three inspections - underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C, below. 
Device Type Fee Water Heater $60 Furnace $60 Fireplace $60  
B.  Commercial and Residential Mechanical Installation. The following fees apply for the issuance of mechanical permits for the installation of any mechanical systems within a commercial or residential unit, and are based on the total dollar valuation of the work, including parts and labor, regardless of whether materials and services are provided by the property owner or a contractor. Fees include three inspections - underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C, below. Commercial structures are required to be designed and stamped by a Colorado licensed mechanical engineer. 
Valuation of Installation Fee Less than $2,000.00 $60 More than $2,000.00 $60 base fee, plus additional $16 per $1,000 valuation (rounded up to the next $1,000) * Additional work added to the project Additional fee calculated based on the additional valuation, per the formula above  
*Example: The mechanical permit fee for an installation with a total value of $8,400 would be $204. [$60 base fee + (9 x $16 additional fee)] 
C.  Additional Fees. The following fees apply to both commercial and residential projects, when applicable: 
Activity Fee Inspections outside of normal business hours $75 per hour, with a 2-hour minimum Permit transfers $20 Re-inspection fees $50 for the 1 st - 3 rd re-inspections $100 for each subsequent re-inspection Mechanical plan checks 25% of the mechanical permit fee Fire sprinkler permits and inspections Permits issued and fees collected by Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, pursuant to their fee schedule Fee when a permit is not filed in advance of the commencement of an installation Applicable inspection fee is doubled, per C.R.S. 12-23-117(3).  
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  1(Exh. A), 1-8-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-14,  1(Exh. A), adopted Jan., 8, 2019, amended Table 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Table 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 34, Series 1997; and Ord. 2013-01. 
Table 5 
Table 5 Plumbing Permit and Related Inspection Fees 
A.  Residential Plumbing Installations. The following fees apply for the issuance of residential plumbing permits for installations and replacements of the following fixtures. Fees include three inspections - underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C below. Residential plumbing permit applications must be submitted by a licensed plumber, except for occupancies described in the IRC may be submitted by a homeowner. 
Residential Plumbing Work Fee Installation of Plumbing Fixtures (i.e. tub, tub/shower, toilet, lavatory, sink, bidet, clothes washer, floor drain, hose bib etc.) $60 base fee, plus $18.50 per fixture Additional fee when fixtures not noted on the original permit application are discovered $18.50 per fixture Water Heater Replacement (Tank type or on-demand) $29.00 Water Conditioning Appliance Installation (Water Softener) $29.00 Backflow Preventer (replacement or new installation for yard or fire sprinkler system) $29.00 Manufactured Home-water, sewer, gas $60.00 Trim-Only Permit (only when rough inspection has been successfully completed) $60.00  
B.  Commercial Plumbing Installation. The following fees apply for the issuance of commercial plumbing permits and are based on the total dollar valuation of the work, including parts and labor, regardless of whether materials and services are provided by the property owner or a contractor. Fees include three inspections - underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C below. Commercial plumbing permit applications must be submitted by a licensed plumber. 
Valuation of Installation Fee Less than $2,000.00 $60 More than $2,000.00 $60 base fee plus additional $16 per $1,000 valuation (rounded up to the next $1,000) *  
* Example: The plumbing permit fee for an installation with a total value of $8,400 would be $204, calculated as a $60 base fee + (9 x $16 additional fee). 
C.  Additional Fees. The following fees apply to both commercial and residential projects, when applicable: 
Activity Fee Inspections outside of normal business hours $75 per hour, with a 2-hour minimum Permit transfers $20 Re-inspection fees $50 for the 1 st - 3 rd re-inspections $100 for each subsequent re-inspection Additional work added to the project Additional fee calculated based on the additional valuation, per the formula above Plumbing plan checks 25% of the plumbing permit fee Fee when a permit is not filed in advance of the commencement of an installation Applicable inspection fee is doubled, per C.R.S. 12-23-117(3)  
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  2(Exh. B), 1-8-19) 
Table 5A 
Table 5A Citation Fine Schedule Violation 1 st 2 nd 3 rd Failure of a journeyman to be licensed while engaging in plumbing work $150 $300 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of a master plumber to be licensed while engaging in plumbing work $200 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of a residential plumber to be licensed while engaging in plumbing work $100 $300 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of a plumbing contractor to register apprentice $150 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of an apprentice to work under the supervision of a licensed plumber $25 $100 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Employment by a plumbing contractor of unlicensed persons doing plumbing work $200 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to supervise an apprentice $250 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to pull a permit and/or failure to have an inspection $250 $600 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to correct plumbing code violations within a reasonable time (30 days) $300 $600 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Providing false or misleading advertising $250 $500 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Deception, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license (includes loaning a license) $1,000 $2,000 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to comply with other state law (safety, health, insurance, tax) $250 $500 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Other violations of the state plumbing statute Up to $1,000 Up to $2,000 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day)  
Table 6 
Table 6 Electrical Permit and Related Inspection Fees 
    Electrical permit applications must be submitted by a licensed electrician, with the exception of R4 residential occupancies, as described in the IRC, which may be submitted by the homeowner. 
A.  Residential Electrical Permit Fees. The following fees apply for the issuance of each residential electrical permit and related inspections based on the enclosed living area square footage for the construction of or the remodeling or addition to a single-family home, duplex, condominium, town house and remodel on a basement. Fees include three inspections - underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C below. 
Size of Enclosed Living Area Fee Up to 1,000 square feet $77.05 1,001 square feet to 1,500 square feet $116.00 1,501 square feet to 2,000 square feet $155.00 Greater than 2001 square feet $155 + ($7.00 x each additional 100 sq. ft.) *  
* Example: (2235 sq. ft.) first 2000 sq. ft. = $155.00 + (300(235 rounded up to next 100) x $7.00 = $176.00 
B.  Commercial Electrical Permit Fees. The following fees apply for the issuance of each commercial electrical permit. Fees include three inspections underground, rough-in and final inspections - and additional fees for re-inspections are as set forth in Section C below. Fees in this section are calculated based on the total dollar valuation of the work, including electrical. materials, items and labor, regardless of whether materials and services are provided by the property owner or a contractor. 
Valuation of Installation Fee Up to $2000 $77.05 (base fee) * Greater than $2000 $77.05 (base fee) plus $7.00 per $1,000 of job valuation, rounded up the next $1,000  
* Example: The fee on an installation with a value of $5,150 (round up to $6000) would be calculated as: $77.05 base fee + (6 x $7.00 fee for additional value) = $119.05 total fee 
C.  Additional Fees. The following fees apply to both commercial and residential projects, when applicable: 
Activity Fee Mobile/Modular/Manufactured Home set (per unit) $77.05 Temporary heat release $37.95 Inspections outside of normal business hours $75 per hour, with a 2-hour minimum Permit transfers $20 Re-inspection fees $50 for the 1 st - 3 rd re-inspections $100 for each subsequent re-inspection Temporary construction meters Separate permit and fee required Commercial electrical plan check 25% of the electrical permit fee Fee when a permit is not filed in advance of the commencement of an installation Applicable inspection fee is doubled, per C.R.S. 12-23-117(3).  
(Ord. No. 2018-14,  3(Exh. C), 1-8-19) 
Table 6A 
Table 6A Citation Fine Schedule Violation 1 st 2 nd 3 rd Failure of a journeyman to be licensed while engaging in electrical work $150 $300 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of a master electrician to be licensed while engaging in electrical work $200 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of a residential wireman to be licensed while engaging in electrical work $100 $250 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of an electrical contractor to register apprentice $150 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of an apprentice to work under the supervision of a licensed electrician $25 $100 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Employment by an electrical contractor of unlicensed persons doing electrical work $200 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of an electrical contractor to register $500 $1,000 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to supervise an apprentice $250 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure of an electrical contractor to maintain a supervisory ratio of one licensed electrician to three apprentices $250 $400 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Performing electrical work beyond the authorization of the electrical license or registration $250 $500 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to pull a permit and/or failure to have an inspection $250 $600 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to correct electrical code violations within a reasonable time (30 days) $300 $600 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Providing false or misleading advertising $250 $500 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Deception, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license (includes loaning a license) $1,000 $2,000 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Failure to comply with other state law (safety, health, insurance, tax) $250 $500 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day) Other violations of the state electrical statute Up to $1,000 Up to $2,000 Discretionary (up to $2,000 per day)  
Table 7 

Table 8 
Table 8 
Notice to Contractors 
As of June 1, 1997, an address sign board will be required at all building sites for construction permitted through the Town of Gypsum Building Department. 
  
This requirement will help Town of Gypsum building inspectors as well as subcontractors and suppliers find the job site. The sign board will also provide a place to mount the permit card (for sign off by the building inspector) and town approved building plans. 
  
The illustration is a guide line only. Your sign must be legible from the street and must provide weatherproof cover for the building permit. 
  
Inspections will not be done if sign board is not posted onsite. 
  

Table 9 

Table 10 
Table 10 
Climate Zone 6 Thermal Envelope Insulation Component Minimum R-Value 
Roofs 
Insulation entirely above roof deck - R-30ci / Group R R-30ci 
Metal building - R-25 + R-11 LS / Group R R-25 + R-11 LS 
Attic and other - R-49 / Group R R-49 
Walls above grade 
Mass - R-13.3ci / Group R R-15.2ci 
Metal Building - R-13 + R-13ci / Group R R-13 +R-13ci 
Metal Framed - R-13 + R-7.5ci / Group R R-13 + R-7.5ci 
Wood Framed and other - R-13 + R-7.5ci or R-20 + R-3.8ci / Group R R-13 + R-7.5ci or R-20 + R-3.8ci 
Walls below Grade 
Below-grade wall - R-7.5ci / Group R R-7.5ci 
  Surrounding walls of heated slabs below grade shall have the same exterior R-value of the heated slab. 
Floors 
Mass - R-12.5ci / Group R R-12.5ci 
Joist/Framing - R-30 / Group R-30 if wood R-38 if steel floor joist 
Slab-on-Grade Floor 
Unheated Slab - R-10 for 24" below / Group R R-15 for 24" below 
Heated Slab - R-15 below 36" / Group R R-20 below 48" 
Opaque Doors 
Non-swinging - R-4.74 / Group R R-4.75 
ci = Continuous insulation 
LS = Liner System 
(Ord. 2011-16) 
(Ord. No. 2015-03,  1, 1-27-15; Ord. No. 2017-12,  10, 9-26-17)) 
Chapter 15.05 - BUILDING AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 

15.05.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these requirements is to implement the goals stated in the Town of Gypsum Foundation Plan, as adopted by resolution on August 18, 1999, which provides that Gypsum will strive to: Manage the type, scale and density, location, and timing of growth so that community infrastructure, facility, and service expansions can accommodate new developments without compromising quality of service goals. These requirements are intended to define the desired scale and character of development within the community, while not dictating an architectural style. In applying these requirements, staff, planning commission and the town council shall focus on building mass, building coverage relationships, placement of new additions, visual compatibility with surroundings, and infill within existing neighborhoods. 
15.05.020 - Applicability. 
    These requirements shall apply to all building construction and exterior remodeling, excluding interior remodels and changes in use. These guidelines shall not apply to any nonconforming building existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter, unless such structure is visually altered, enlarged or expanded and such modification increases, enlarges, expands or results in the aggravation of the nonconforming feature or features. 
15.05.030 - Definitions. 
    The following design elements are defined as follows: 
(1)  Context: The relationship of the building to its surroundings in terms of size, form, color, character and site development; 
(2)  Mass/scale: The appearance of the building in terms of size, height, bulk, and building mass, its proportion to surrounding landforms, vegetation, and buildings; 
(3)  Orientation: The relationship of the structure to the streetscape, parking lots, sidewalks, surrounding structures, and landforms; 
(4)  Architectural treatment/function: Use of materials, colors, roof design, window treatment, trim, and details; 
(5)  Modulation/articulation: Variation of the building facade, i.e. stepping out or extending back the footprint/facade; variation in the roofline; addition of building elements such as balconies, decks, porches, window patterns/types; and variation in building materials/colors. 
15.05.040 - Design requirements. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all existing and proposed subdivisions: 
(1)  The construction of high quality buildings and designs that will maintain their quality over time and that are functional and respective of local climatic conditions shall be promoted by addressing these design elements, architectural materials and function. The following shall be considered: 
a.  Encourage the use of durable construction materials or treatment; 
b.  Roofs should be designed to minimize hazards such as snow or ice falling onto pedestrian walkways, entrances, decks, driveways, parking areas or other areas of public access; 
c.  Roof overhangs, projections, reveals, and awnings should contribute to the character of the building and create shadow patterns while aiding in protection of the structure and pedestrians; 
d.  Roof style should balance compatibility with the character of the area and snow shed considerations. Where pitched roofs are used, steeper roof pitches are preferred; however, whether the roof will hold or release snow should be considered. This requirement does not intend to preclude the use of flatter pitches; 
e.  Building design and materials should address energy conservation through consideration of solar exposure, appropriate insulation and other measures; and 
f.  Building design should provide for ease of pedestrian access. 
(2)  New construction, alterations, or remodels shall be compatible with the visual characteristics of the area and the streetscape and shall not overwhelm or contradict its surroundings to address the design elements of context and orientation. In addressing these design elements, the following shall be considered: 
a.  Buildings should be visually harmonious with their surroundings, by considering the scale, proportions, colors, and character of adjacent structures, where appropriate, and should be considerate of the natural landform and landscape; 
b.  Buildings should respect the character of "landmark" buildings in the area, while not restricting the construction of new "landmark" structures; and 
c.  Buildings and their related parking should maintain a similar setback and orientation along roads where it is a strong visual characteristic of the streetscape; and where appropriate, should be oriented so that the primary presence along the street frontage is the building, not the parking lot. 
(3)  Designs which break up or reduce the mass of large buildings and which create an attractive facade shall be promoted to address the design elements of mass and scale and articulation and modulation. The following shall be considered: 
a.  Building design should avoid blank walls and large unbroken expanses of walls where exposed to public view. It is understood that buildings housing certain uses may not be able to meet this criteria. In that instance, intense landscaping and proper siting may be utilized to mitigate the visual impacts of the large building; 
b.  Building design should mitigate the visual impacts of a large building mass through modulation in the facade to create offsets, projections, and recesses. It is understood that buildings housing certain uses may not be able to meet this criteria. In that instance, intense landscaping and proper siting may be utilized to mitigate the visual impacts of the large building; 
c.  The appearance of massive roofs should be avoided by variation in rooflines and height. The addition of dormers, balconies, deep eaves and overhangs may also create visual interest; 
d.  Decorative roof elements should not appear to be "tacked on," but should be combined with other roof or wall elements to work together to create an attractive facade from all sides of the building exposed to public areas; and 
e.  Building elevations should be articulated to provide visual interest without being overdone. This may include variation in shape or pattern of windows, variation in building materials, textures, and colors, additional building elements such as decks, balconies, rails, or incorporation of vertical elements, and detail elements. 
(4)  Roof top equipment and vents, trash disposal, service areas, through the wall mechanical equipment, utility facilities, and other such equipment should be located away from public view or should be concealed with a treatment that is complementary to the building architecture or landscape. 
(5)  Design of accessory structures and additions should be harmonious with the existing structures on the site through the use of complementary building materials and styles. 
(6)  Building design should be unique and appropriate to this community and should not be recognizable by its architecture as a standard trademark design. Generic "franchise" architecture shall not be acceptable. 
(7)  Buildings should be located to minimize negative visual impacts to the community such as skyline or ridgeline development, and respecting views of significant community features from public viewpoints or streets. This does not ensure the protection of private views. 
(8)  Conversions of residential structures to commercial uses should maintain character compatible with the area by considering roof style, building scale, building orientation, and lot coverage. 
15.05.050 - Landscaping. 
    All sites disturbed by construction and remodeling shall be revegetated and landscaped prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Xeriscape or other low water consumption designs shall be encouraged. 
15.05.060 - Subdivision specific design guidelines. 
    In lieu of the design requirements provided in section 15.05.040, the planning commission may adopt specific building and architectural design requirements for a particular subdivision. Such requirements shall be adopted by resolution following publication of notice and a public hearing. Such regulations shall meet the purposes set forth in section 15.05.010, and be generally consistent with the requirements of section 15.05.040. 
15.05.070 - Appointment of design review boards. 
    One or more design review boards may be appointed by resolution of the town council for review and approval of building plans with subdivision specific design requirements. 
15.05.080 - Design review. 
    Prior to issuance of a building permit, applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the design requirements contained in section 15.05.040, or if adopted, the subdivision specific requirements adopted pursuant to section 15.05.060. Alterations that do not require a building permit application or review shall also be required to conform with the design requirements of section 15.05.040. The town planning department and building department staff shall review applications for compliance with the design requirements of section 15.05.040. If a design review board or boards have been appointed pursuant to section 15.05.070, such board or boards shall review applications for compliance with the subdivision specific design guidelines as provided in the resolution appointing such board. All other applications shall be reviewed by the town planning department and building department staff. All applications shall be deemed approved if not acted upon within 30 days of submittal. Denial of a building permit based on the building and architectural guidelines may be appealed in accordance with the procedures described in section 15.04.019. 
Chapter 15.08 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 

15.08.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Colorado has in Title 29 Article 20 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
15.08.020 - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the Town of Gypsum are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These potential flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
15.08.030 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains, electric, and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
15.08.040 - Interpretation. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
15.08.050 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the Town of Gypsum. 
15.08.060 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
15.08.070 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
15.08.080 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations as depicted in the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) referenced in section 15.08.090 of this chapter. Larger floods can and will occur on occasion. Flood heights and damage may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create any duty, obligation or liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter, any administrative decision or action lawfully made hereunder, or the failure to take any action contemplated or authorized herein. 
15.08.090 - Flood insurance study and rate map adopted by reference. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Eagle County Colorado and Incorporated Areas", including the Town of Gypsum, effective December 4, 2007, with accompanying FIRMs and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
15.08.100 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on the FIRM with a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where flow velocity may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood or 100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred years. 
    Base flood elevation or BFE means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE and AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Conditional letter of map revision or CLOMR means a conditional FIRM revision for a proposed project approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community. 
    Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial FIRM, or September 16, 1981, for the Town of Gypsum . "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the original adoption of the floodplain management regulations. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means the official map of the town, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study or FIS is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the FIRMs. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flood or flooding). 
    Floodplain administrator means the town engineer. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the areas of special flood hazard and the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM). LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking, eating, recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a FIRM are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or September 16, 1981, for the Town of Gypsum, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use 
    Special flood hazard area or SFHA is the land in the floodplain of the town subject to the base or 100-year flood. The area is designated as Zone A on the FIRM; in the Town of Gypsum, zone A includes zones A, AE, and AO 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
15.08.110 - Flood hazards-General standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas and the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
15.08.120 - Flood hazards-Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazards areas where base flood elevation data has been provided the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer, architect, shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in sections 15.08.140(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the level of one foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A Colorado registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Below-grade residential crawlspace construction. In addition to the conditions set for in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this [section] chapter, new construction and substantial improvement of any below-grade crawlspace shall: 
a.  Not be constructed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional such as a registered architect or professional engineer; 
b.  Have the interior grade below the base flood elevation be no more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade; 
c.  Have the height of the below-grade crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall, not exceed four feet at any point; 
d.  Have an adequate drainage system that allows floodwaters to drain from the interior area of the crawlspace following a flood; 
e.  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
f.  Be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
g.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A, AE and AO on the FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A, AE and AO on the FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of previous paragraph of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are at one foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A, AE and AO on the FIRM shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 15.08.136, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
15.08.130 - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. Located within the special flood hazard, the floodway can be a hazardous area due to the high velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and cause substantial amounts of erosion. The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the town during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. A no-rise certification is required. 
(2)  If section 15.08.130(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 15.08.130. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the town may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the town first applies for a CLOMR through FEMA. 
15.08.135 - Subdivision standards. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks shall be consistent with sections 15.08.020, 15.08.030, and 15.08.040, G.M.C. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks shall meet development requirements of sections 15.08.110, 15.08.120 15.08.130, 15.08.135, 15.08.136, and 15.08.140, G.M.C. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks which are greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections 15.08.090 or 15.08.160(8), G.M.C. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
15.08.136 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard area are areas designated as zone AO, shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities defined in section 15.08.138, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, including ductwork, and other service facilities) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), or; 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the level of one foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 15.08.140, G.M.C., are satisfied. 
(4)  Within zone AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
15.08.137 - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and Town of Gypsum floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section 15.08.130 of this chapter. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
15.08.138 - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, including ductwork, and other service facilities, must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, including ductwork, and other service facilities, must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
15.08.139 - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the town to identify and confirm that specific structures in the community meet the following criteria: 
a.  Essential services. Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
2.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
3.  Designated emergency shelters; 
4.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
5.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution ( hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
6.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this ordinance, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. These facilities may include: 
1.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
2.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
3.  Refineries; 
4.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
5.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
1.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
2.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town engineer by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the town engineer) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
3.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this article. 
c.  At-risk populations. At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
2.  Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals ( day care and assisted living); 
3.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children); 
d.  Vital facilities. Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the town that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, protection shall include one of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the town, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
15.08.140 - Development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area. 
(1)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and shall include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 15.08.160(2), G.M.C.; 
d.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 15.08.160. 
(2)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Gypsum Foundation Plan. 
15.08.150 - Town engineer-Appointed administrator. 
    The town engineer is appointed the floodplain administrator, to administer, implement and enforce this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Regulations) by granting or denying floodplain development permit applications in accordance with these provisions. 
15.08.160 - Town engineer-Duties. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by section 15.08.140. 
(2)  Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by this chapter. 
(3)  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  Review development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(6)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazards area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(7)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Colorado Water Conservation Board, as the state coordinating agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(8)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 15.08.090, G.M.C., the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 15.08.110, 15.08.120, 15.08.130, 15.08.135, 15.08.136, 15.08.137, and 15.08.138, G.M.C. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the town may approve certain development in zones A or AE on the town's FIRM that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the town first applies for a CLOMR through FEMA. 
15.08.170 - Variances-Procedure by board of adjustment. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued by the town for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The procedures and criteria outlined in this section and section 15.08.180, G.M.C., are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
15.08.180 - Variances-Conditions. 
(a)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 15.08.140(2) of this article has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(e)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(f)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base floor elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
15.08.190 - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with permits issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be enforced in the Gypsum Municipal Court, and punishable as set forth in section 2.01.090, G.M.C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Gypsum from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2014-02) 
Chapter 15.09 - PUBLIC WORKS MANUAL 

15.09.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these requirements is to maintain uniformity in construction standards and promote safety in the construction of all public improvements and infrastructure within the town. 
15.09.020 - Adoption of public works manual. 
    The Town of Gypsum Public Works Manual dated February, 2009, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set forth in full, and shall apply as further provided in this chapter. 
15.09.030 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their definitions shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Director shall mean the director of the Gypsum Public Works Department, as appointed by the town manager or town council. 
    Excavation shall have the meaning provided in section 12.03.020. 
    Public works manual shall mean the Town of Gypsum Public Works Manual adopted by reference by this chapter. 
    Public works projects shall mean all land development construction activities, improvements, utilities, public works projects and infrastructure, including construction of water, sewer, road, lighting and other public improvements required, accepted or maintained by the town or used by the public, including street excavation, and subdivision and land use projects. 
    Town engineer is the town engineer of the Town of Gypsum. 
15.09.040 - Applicability. 
(a)  These requirements shall apply to the construction of all public works projects within, required by, or constructed by or for the Town of Gypsum. 
(b)  In the event the provisions of the public works manual conflict with the street excavation ordinance, the provisions of the street excavation ordinance shall prevail. 
15.09.050 - Director to enforce. 
    The provisions of the public works manual shall be carried out and enforced by the director. Any power, duty or action provided in this chapter to be carried out by the director may be delegated to the town engineer when, as determined by the director, it would beneficial to the town. 
15.09.060 - Violations. 
    Violations of this chapter or the public works manual shall be punishable as set forth in titles 1 and 2 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(Ordinance 2009-7) 
Title 17 - SUBDIVISION 
  
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

17.04.010 - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known and referred to as the "Town of Gypsum Subdivision Regulations". They shall apply to any proposed subdivision of land and creation of any common interest community created pursuant to  38-33.3-101, et sq., Colorado Revised Statues. 
17.04.020 - Authority. 
    These subdivision regulations have been enacted pursuant to and in accordance with Title 31, Article 23, Section 101 et seq., of the Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973. 
17.04.030 - Purpose. 
    These regulations are for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of present and future inhabitants of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, by: 
(1)  Ensuring that proposed subdivisions adequately mitigate potential hazard to health, safety and property. 
(2)  Recognizing the rights of both the subdivider and the residents of the community and ensuring that any proposed subdivision does not create an excessive burden of Town of Gypsum taxpayers as a whole. 
(3)  Encouraging good subdivision design in relation to topography and other natural features of the land, to existing streets and to expected improvements both on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, and to the master plan, as the same may be adopted and amended from time to time. 
(4)  Ensuring adequate provision for future traffic, utilities, access for fire fighting apparatus and other emergency services, civil defense, recreation, schools, and other public facilities, light and air, and relationships with adjoining lands. 
(5)  Regulating such other matters regarding land use and development as the town planning commission and the town council may deem necessary, in order to protect the best interests of the public. 
17.04.040 - Scope and enforcement. 
    No person shall transfer, sell, agree to sell, negotiate to transfer or sell any land by reference to or exhibition or use of a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been approved by the town council and recorded in the office of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder. The description of a lot or parcel by metes and bounds shall not exempt the transaction from these subdivision regulations. No plat of a subdivision of land within the town shall be recorded in any public office unless the same has been approved by the town planning commission and/or town council as required by these subdivision regulations. Additionally, no person shall engage in the development or subdivision of land in any way that does not comply with the subdivision regulations or violate the terms of any approval granted. 
(1)  These regulations shall apply to any proposed subdivision of land. 
a.  Any person who transfers legal or equitable title, sells or negotiates or agrees to transfer or sell any land by reference to or exhibition or use of a subdivision plat before a final plat for such land has been approved pursuant to this title and recorded or filed in the office of the county clerk and recorder shall pay a penalty of $100.00 as set by  31-23-216 C.R.S. for each lot or parcel or interest in subdivided land which is transferred, or sold, or agreed or negotiated to be sold. All fines collected under this paragraph shall be credited to the general fund of the town. 
b.  The town may provide for the enforcement of subdivision regulations by withholding building permits, withholding certificates of occupancy, approving permits with conditions, revoking or suspending permits, withholding water and sewer tap permits, suspending contractors licenses, issuing stop work orders, seeking injunctive relief in a court of law, seeking relief in the Gypsum Municipal Court, withholding any other necessary approvals for use or occupancy, and seeking any other penalties provided by Colorado law. 
c.  No plat proposed to subdivide land shall be approved unless at the time of approval of the plat the subdivider provides the certification of the county treasurer's office that all ad valorem taxes and assessments applicable to such land which are due and owing have been paid. 
d.  The town has the power to bring an action to enjoin any transfer, sale or agreement to transfer or sell land in violation of these subdivision regulations and may recover the penalty referenced in subject 1.4 1(a) by civil action. Further, the town may certify such penalty and any delinquent fees or charges imposed through the subdivision process to the county treasurer for collection with taxes and imposes a lien against the property for the same. 
(2)  No land shall be subdivided for any use where the land has limitations adversely affecting that proposed use unless proper mitigation procedures are sufficiently assured to satisfy the evaluation criteria outlined in subsequent sections of these regulations. Examples of such limitations include: 
a.  Natural hazards such as possible flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, wildfire hazards, potential avalanches, land slides, rock falls or mudflows, debris fans, unstable slopes, seismic effects, radioactivity, ground subsidence, expansive soils or rock, flow permeability, erosion susceptibility, and high groundwater table. 
b.  Lack of access by means of a public street providing all-weather travel and commensurate with town standards for streets. 
c.  Lack of assured water supply. 
d.  Other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants or users of the proposed development or of the town residents in general. 
The town council, in applying the provisions of this section shall recite in writing the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusions that the land is not suitable for certain uses. 
(3)  No final plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the planning commission or by the town council, unless it conforms to the provisions and intent of these regulations. 
(4)  All public improvements shall be constructed within a public right-of-way or other public dedications and accepted by the town council in writing prior to any duty being imposed on the town for operation and maintenance. 
17.04.050 - Land for public purposes. 
    Subdividing of land inherently brings about increased need for public facilities and services, such as schools, police and fire protection, recreation areas, etc. A new subdivision shall contribute toward meeting such increased general needs. 
(1)  At least five percent of the total area subdivided shall be provided for public purposes in one, or more, of the following ways and subject to the approval of the town council. Excessively steep land, swampy land, or other types of unsuitable land may not be accepted. Street rights-of-way shall not be included in this five percent area. 
a.  Land deeded to and accepted by the school district. 
b.  Land deeded to a legally established property owners association. Provision must be made for the continuing administration and maintenance of such land. Such land must be suitable for the intended purposes. 
c.  Land deeded to and accepted by a special district, such as a park, recreation, water, sewer, fire protection, or other type of district providing public services within the subdivision. 
d.  Land deeded to and accepted by the town. 
e.  Money, in lieu of land, paid to the town. The amount shall be equal to the base price amount of $1,174.00 per residential dwelling unit within the residential subdivision and/or the base price amount of $3,914.00 per acre within the entire commercial or industrial subdivision for the calendar year 2011. Commencing January 1, 2012, and for each succeeding one year period, the base price amount shall be adjusted to three decimal places to reflect the percentage change in the U.S. Department of Labor Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index. The base index rate for the 12-month period ending December 31, 2010, shall be deemed the base rate for the purposes of this section. The following example illustrates the calculation for the adjustment. 
Example Calculation of Based Index Adjustment 
Assume Consumer Price Index for period ending 12/31/09 = 208.55 
Assume Consumer Price Index for period ending 12/31/10 = 212.45 
Change of Index = 3.90 
(3.90/208.55)(100) = 1.870% increase, therefore, adjusted base price amount for money in lieu of fee = ($1,152.00 x 1.01870) = $1,173.54 for residential, and ($3,842.00 x 1.01870) = $3,913.89 for commercial and industrial. 
(2)  Other commensurate ways of providing for public needs acceptable to the town council. 
(3)  Open space, rights-of-way and easements for streets and utilities shall be dedicated to the public. 
(4)  Common interest communities which create no greater impacts on town services than existing allowed uses are exempt from this section. The planning commission at the time of application shall make such determination. 
Approval of a plat or other dedication shall not constitute acceptance of public improvements by the town for maintenance unless accompanied by a written acceptance by the town to such effect. 
17.04.060 - Fees and charges. 
    Applications and processing fees necessary to defray the costs of administering these subdivision regulations shall accompany every application for subdivision. The town council shall by resolution set and adjust fees as necessary and appropriate. (See chapter 17.60) 
17.04.070 - Fire protection and emergency medical service impact fees. 
    Every land development activity requiring additional fire protection services or additional emergency medical services shall pay a fire protection or emergency medical service impact fee pursuant to chapter 17.50. 
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 

17.08.010 - Base flood. 
    A flood having a one-percent chance of occurring in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood, a 100-year storm and a base storm. 
17.08.020 - Town council, or council. 
    The town council of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado. 
17.08.030 - Common interest community. 
    Any subdivision of land created pursuant to  38-33.3-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
17.08.040 - Consolidation. 
    The combining of two or more lots, tracts, or parcels in a platted subdivision which removes the common boundary lines and forms a single lot, tract or parcel. 
17.08.050 - Easement. 
    An interest in land owned by another that entitles easement holder to a specific use of the described land. 
17.08.060 - Flood hazard area. 
    Area subject to inundation by the "base flood" as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency reports and maps identified as flood insurance rate maps for the area, or as identified under chapter 15.08 herein. 
17.08.070 - Improvements. 
    Any changes, additions, or deletions made to property which did not naturally exist thereon. 
17.08.080 - Parcel of land. 
    A tract of land existing outside the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, also a lot or tract of land delineated as part of a recorded subdivision plat. 
17.08.090 - Planned unit development (P.U.D.). 
    An area of land, controlled by one or more land owners to be developed under unified control or unified plan of development for a number of dwellings units, commercial, educational, recreational or industrial uses or any combination of the foregoing, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, or type of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other restrictions of the subdivision regulations. 
17.08.100 - Planning commission. 
    The duly appointed individuals who make up the town planning commission and carry out the duties provided for in these subdivision regulations. The planning commission shall be comprised of seven regular members, all residents of the Town of Gypsum, appointed by the town council to serve for a term of four years. 
17.08.110 - Plat. 
    A map of subdivided land prepared according to applicable laws of the State of Colorado and these regulations having the necessary affidavits for filing, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land. 
17.08.120 - Replat. 
    A map redefining either the internal boundaries, the external boundaries, or both, of previously subdivided land. 
17.08.130 - Resubdividing. 
    The process of redefining the boundaries or conditions of previously subdivided land. 
17.08.140 - Right-of-way. 
    An area of land designated for public use or access across property, including streets, roads, alleys, walkways, etc. 
17.08.150 - Roadway. 
    The portion of a right-of-way surfaced for vehicular traffic, including curb and gutter, when required. 
17.08.160 - Streets or roads. 
    Any way or place for passage of vehicular traffic. In these regulations streets and roads are classified as follows: 
(1)  Major highways - Any right-of-way designated as a numbered state or federal route. 
(2)  Major collector street - Any right-of-way designed to carry traffic volumes greater than 2,500 vehicles per day. 
(3)  Minor collector street - Street designed to carry traffic volumes in the range of 400 to 2,500 vehicle per day. 
(4)  Local street, class I, class II and class III - Street designed to directly serve residential area of less concentrated activities and having traffic volumes in the range of 200 to 400 vehicles per day for a class I, 100 to 199 vehicles per day for class II and less than 100 vehicles per day for class III. 
(5)  Alley - A way for service or access to the rear or sides of properties, also abutting a street. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac - A dead end street terminating in a circular turn-around. 
17.08.170 - Subdivider or developer. 
    Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer, seller, or authorized agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale, or lease of subdivided land. 
17.08.180 - Subdivision or subdivided land. 
    Any parcel of land which is to be used for condominiums, apartments or any other multiple dwelling units unless such land was previously subdivided and the filing accompanying such subdivision complied with the town regulations applicable to subdivisions of substantially the same density, or the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate of future, of sale or building development. It includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing of the land or territory subdivided. Excluded from review and approval of a subdivision plat are subsurface mineral interests, division of land by condemnation, cemetery lots, dedication, conveyance or vacation of land to or from the town for right-of-way or other public use, and division of land by a contract for sale that is contingent on subdivision approval. 
Chapter 17.12 - SKETCH PLAN 
  
The First Step in the Subdivision Review Process 

17.12.010 - Submission. 
    The sketch plan approval shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year; or, if vested property rights are sought for the sketch plan, sketch plan approval shall be valid for the applicable vested, extended, or reinstated time period approved by the town council pursuant to chapter 17.36. If a preliminary plan for the proposed subdivision is not presented to the town within such time period, to renew the application the applicant shall submit an updated sketch plan application to the planning commission for review and comparison with the original application. For good cause, at the request of the subdivider, the town may extend the period that a sketch plan approval is valid in one year increments and not to exceed three years total of extensions, only if the subdivider is in compliance with all obligations to and agreements with the town, the property and subdivider have no outstanding or delinquent taxes, assessments, or fees, and the town determines that the sketch plan is still viable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may extend or reinstate a sketch plan for which vested property rights have been obtained pursuant to section 17.36.045 of the Town Code, for the period permitted under section 17.36.045(d). 
(Ord 2014-04) 
17.12.020 - Required exhibits for sketch plan submission. 
(a)  A plan drawn to approximate scale, showing access to and the layout of the subdivision, and indicating the relationships of various usages, such as residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, public facilities, the street network, topographic, natural, and manmade features, and uses of adjoining lands as related to the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Information on topography, hazard areas which may exist (such as flood prone areas, concentrated runoff areas, inadequate drainage areas, wildfire areas, steep slopes, etc.), and lakes, streams, and vegetation. 
(c)  Reports concerning geologic characteristics of the area which might significantly affect the proposed land use and explaining the impact of such characteristics on the proposed subdivision. Any hazard areas, such as landslides, avalanches, rock falls, mud flows, debris fans, unstable or potentially unstable slopes, seismic effects, ground subsidence, expansive soils or rock, radioactivity, etc., must be specifically shown, evaluated, and explained. 
(d)  Reports and explanatory information concerning the types of soil in the proposed subdivision and the suitability for the expected uses, in accordance with the National Cooperative Soils Survey. 
(e)  Recorded proof of ownership of the land to be subdivided, and ownership of the surrounding lands, within a radius of 300 feet of the boundary. Applicant must submit proof of applicant's right to apply if applicant is not the present owner. 
(f)  Total acreage of land to be subdivided and the number and approximate size of proposed lots and tracts. 
(g)  Identification of the existing and proposed zoning of the subdivision and evidence that the property currently complies with existing zoning. 
(h)  Reasonable evidence that an adequate water supply, from the town municipal water system, can physically be provided to the proposed subdivision. 
(i)  Type of sewage disposal and treatment system proposed for the subdivision. The sewage collection system shall be connected to the town system unless otherwise approved by the town council. Onsite sewage disposal systems will be considered and may be approved for use in large lot, low density developments where domestic water service is provided by the town municipal water system, lots are a minimum of one acre, each lot has sufficient physical space to construct two complete leach field systems and soil conditions are compatible to onsite disposal systems. 
(j)  Information concerning providing services and amenities, such as fire protection, solid waste disposal, telephone, electricity, recreation, schools, etc. Such information shall include a public safety impact plan, which will address the impacts of the proposed subdivision on the availability of fire protection and emergency medical services to town residents. 
(k)  Assurance of all-weather access to the proposed subdivision from an existing town, county or state street or road (See section 17.24.020). 
(l)  Proposed method of complying with section 17.04.050, land for public purposes. 
(m)  Description of vegetation (types, density and distribution) and wildfire hazard potential as assessed by the Colorado State Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, or Eagle County. 
(n)  Application and deposit fees per chapter 17.60. 
(o)  Certification from the Eagle County Treasurer's Office that all ad valorem taxes and assessments due and owing have been paid. 
(p)  A list of all special districts and taxing entities serving the property. 
(q)  An estimate of the traffic count which may be generated by the subdivision and the proposed methods of mitigation of impact on existing transportation facilities. 
(r)  The planning commission may waive required exhibits for common interest communities rendered unnecessary because the request creates no greater impacts on town services than the existing allowed uses. 
(s)  Name and address of adjacent property owners, within 300 feet of subject property, as indicated by Eagle County Property Records, to be printed on mailing labels for the purpose of town notification of public hearings pursuant of chapter 17.70. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  1, 1-12-16) 
Chapter 17.16 - PRELIMINARY PLAN 
  
The Second Step in the Subdivision Review Process 

17.16.010 - Submission. 
(a)  In accordance with comments resulting from review of the sketch plan, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan and supplemental data for consideration by the planning commission. The submission must be adequate to show compliance with the intent and requirements of these subdivision regulations to the satisfaction of the planning commission. Thorough analysis and resolution of problems at this stage will expedite approval of the final plat. 
(b)  Preliminary plan submission accompanied by the appropriate fees as per chapter 17.60 shall be made to the planning department at least 60 days prior to the date of a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission to permit the necessary processing and review prior to consideration by the planning commission. One original hard copy and one digital copy on disk of all submission materials must be provided. Additional originals may be requested by the planning department based upon the complexity of the preliminary plan. 
17.16.020 - Required exhibits for preliminary plan submission. 
(a)  The preliminary plan map and supplemental data shall set forth the following information and shall conform to the requirements of chapter 17.24, design standards. 
(1)  A vicinity map prepared at an appropriate scale covering a one-half mile area around the proposed subdivision (or farther if necessary to show all influencing factors) and showing existing roads, streams, municipal boundaries, platted areas, adjoining ownerships, utilities, and similar major natural or man-made features of the area. As a minimum, the nearest section lines shall be indicated for reference purposes. 
(2)  The preliminary plan map shall be prepared at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet, although larger scale maps are acceptable if all details are clearly legible and the entire subdivision can be shown on one sheet. 
(b)  The preliminary plan map and supplemental data shall include or show: 
(1)  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
(2)  Date of preparation, north arrow, graphic scale, and person responsible for the map preparation. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the landowner, the subdivider, and the designer of the subdivision. 
(4)  An accurate survey of the perimeter boundary of the land to be subdivided with ties to the Town of Gypsum's permanent location markers, such as existing section corner markers, or other suitable points acceptable to the town engineering department. Total acreage must be specified. 
(5)  Topography, indicated by contour lines at two-foot intervals on land of less than six percent slope, five-foot intervals on land seven percent to 20 percent slope, or ten-foot intervals on land greater than 20 percent slope, providing the same contour intervals are used throughout. 
(6)  Location and principal dimensions for all existing and proposed public and private easements, street rights-of-way (including street names and addresses), alleys, buildings, street lights, water and sewer lines, gas and other utility lines, water courses, and other important features within and adjacent to the property being subdivided. 
(7)  Principal dimensions to the nearest foot (which may be scaled values) and the approximate area (square feet or acres) of all proposed lots, parcels, or tracts, the total area of the proposed subdivision, the total area devoted to street rights-of-way and each other type of use. 
(8)  The proposed type of use for each lot, parcel, or tract. 
(9)  Lots shall be numbered consecutively, either throughout the subdivision or block by block. Other parcels or tracts shall also be individually identified by number or letter. 
(10)  Departing property lines and the names and mailing and physical addresses of owners of record of all nearby and adjoining properties within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision, including those separated only by a public right-of-way. 
(11)  Delineation of any area subject to a base flood and the flood water elevations at representative cross sections. Easements for storm drainage shall be provided as necessary. 
(12)  Reasonable access shall be provided to adjoining public and private lands by suitable rights-of-way or easements where such access is desirable or appropriate for present or future use of adjoining lands. 
(13)  Condominiums, apartments, multifamily, and planned unit developments have special requirements which must be addressed. (See chapter 17.28.) 
(14)  Information showing the proposed phasing of the subdivision, by filing area and sequence. 
(15)  The general location of potential building envelopes, number of units, non-residential floor area, off-street parking and the locations and anticipated grades of driveways. 
(16)  Delineation of proposed public and private open space dedications. 
(17)  Documentation demonstrating that proposed building(s) or structure(s) will comply with the design requirements described in section 15.05.040 or the subdivision specific design guidelines adopted by the planning commission pursuant to section 15.05.060. 
(c)  Supplemental requirements: 
(1)  Payment of preliminary plan application and deposit fees as per chapter 17.60. 
(2)  Evidence to establish that a connection will be made for a water supply system that is provided by the town municipal water system. The design of the connection and distribution system shall demonstrate the ability to provide sufficient flow and pressure for domestic and fire protection needs. This must be in the form of a report signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado, and must include the following information: 
a.  The expected water requirements of the subdivision, in terms of flow and pressure, at full development, including various water uses to be permitted. 
b.  The estimated consumptive use of water by the subdivision. 
c.  Design drawings and specifications of the proposed system showing sufficient detail for construction of the system. 
(3)  Evidence to establish that a connection will be made to the town sewage disposal system. The design of the connection and sewage collection system shall demonstrate the ability to provide for sewage flow which may be generated by the subdivision. This must be in the form of a report signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado, and must include the following information: 
a.  The expected sewage disposal requirements of the subdivision, in terms of organic and hydraulic loading, at full development. 
b.  Design drawing and specifications of the proposed system showing sufficient detail for construction of the system. 
c.  In the even that on-site sewage disposal has been approved by the town, evidence of the ability for the subdivision to be served with suitable on-site sewage treatment facilities. This shall include evidence that all applicable local, state, and federal requirements will be met. 
(4)  If the subdivision does not adjoin an existing town, county or state road right-of-way in order to provide direct access, evidence of how public all-weather access is to be provided and maintained. The subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and maintaining such access road(s) unless otherwise agreed to by the town. 
(5)  Information explaining how the required land for public purposes will be provided (See section 17.04.050). 
(6)  Proposed covenants and/or restrictions to control activities or land uses, which will be recorded with the final plat. Covenants may not be less restrictive than town regulations. Covenants are required to include: 
a.  The property owners association shall be established before the homes, non-residential units, or lots are sold; 
b.  Membership shall be mandatory for each lot or unit and any successive buyer, with the town being excepted or allowed to opt out for any property conveyed or dedicated to it for public purposes; 
c.  Any open space restrictions shall be permanent, not just for a period of years; 
d.  The association shall be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance or recreational and other facilities not conveyed or dedicated to the town or another local government approved by the town; 
e.  Property owners shall pay their pro rata share of the costs of the association, and the assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the property if allowed in the master deed establishing the homeowners association; and 
f.  The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs and demands. 
(7)  If the proposed subdivision lies within an identified flood hazard area, or is suspected by the planning commission or planning department to lie in a flood prone area, the subdivider shall submit the following certified by a professional engineer: 
a.  On the preliminary plan map show the area which would be covered by a base flood and flood water surface elevations at representative cross sections. 
b.  On the preliminary plan map show the minimum finished floor elevation, size, and location of all proposed and existing structures and improvements. The location and elevations of existing and proposed streets, water supply systems, and sewage facilities shall be shown, as well. 
c.  Proposed flood prevention measures, if any. 
d.  Specifications for building construction and materials, filling, dredging, grading, channel changes, storage of materials, water supply systems, and sanitary facilities. 
e.  Descriptions of any construction activity which would reduce the hydraulic capacity of the flood-way. 
(8)  If the proposed subdivision lies in an identified geologic hazard area, or is suspected by the planning commission or planning department to lie in a geologic hazard area, the subdivider shall submit the following maps, reports, or data prepared by a qualified geologist: 
a.  Map or maps illustrating the geologic conditions of the area, with particular attention given to the applicable geologic hazard. Subsurface geologic cross sections shall also be utilized to show conditions at depth, if applicable. The geologic maps shall be at the same scale and in the same format as the preliminary plan maps. 
b.  A geologic report explaining the above maps and cross sections, with particular emphasis on evaluating and predicting the impact of such geologic disturbances on the proposed land use changes and developments. It shall also include recommended procedures to be employed in meeting the purposes of these regulations. 
c.  The applicant shall explain the nature, density, and intensity to the proposed development or land use change in narrative, pictorial, and/or graphic form, and shall explain procedures that will be needed and are planned to carry out the objectives of these regulations. 
(9)  If the proposed subdivision lies within an identified wildfire hazard area, or is suspected by the planning commission or planning department to lie in a wildfire hazard area, the subdivider shall submit the following information certified by a qualified professional forester: 
a.  Maps or overlays portraying the existing wildfire conditions of the area, with particular attention given to the effects of slope, topographic, and vegetative (living and dead) conditions. Such maps shall be on a scale sufficiently detailed to meet and objective of these regulations. 
b.  The procedures proposed to reduce or control conditions of wildfire hazard. 
c.  The fire protection plan for the proposed land use including all fire suppression facilities necessary to meet the objectives of these regulations. 
(10)  If the proposed subdivision lies in an identified mineral resource area, or is suspected by the planning commission or planning department of lying within a mineral resource area, the subdivider shall submit the following information prepared by a qualified geologist: 
a.  Ownership of the mineral right affected. 
b.  Type and location of mineral resources under the property. 
c.  An analysis of the commercial feasibility of extracting the mineral resource. 
d.  A map or maps showing the geologic conditions of the area with particular attention given to the applicable mineral resource deposit. Subsurface geologic cross sections shall also be utilized to illustrate such conditions at depth. The geologic maps shall be at the same scale and in the same format as the preliminary plan maps. 
e.  Evidence that the development plan will present no obstacle to extraction of the mineral resources on or under the subject property, or evidence that the proposed development will be of greater economic value than the minerals present. 
(11)  Evidence shall be submitted to establish that the site of the proposed subdivision is geologically suitable for development. Such evidence shall be in the form of a report from a Colorado registered professional engineer and shall describe bedrock lithology and the stratigraphy of overlaying unconsolidated material in sufficient detail to indicate any potential development problems resulting from groundwater, subsidence, instability in road excavations and fills, expansive soils, drainage patterns, structural bearing strength, grading, underground utilities and other development activities. 
(12)  A grading and drainage plan and report, prepared by a Colorado registered professional engineer, shall be submitted and shall depict plans and specifications conforming to the town design standards for drainage, storm runoff peak discharge control and detention control. 
(13)  A lighting and landscaping plan shall be submitted illustrating the proposed locations of street lights and location and vegetation type of all landscape materials. Lighting shall comply with section 17.24.070. 
(14)  Any changes in information which was submitted with the sketch plan application shall be delineated and the reason for change explained. 
(15)  A list of all proposed deviations (if any) from the subdivision regulation requirements and design standards, and written requests for variance including reasons therefore. 
(16)  Name and address of adjacent property owners, within 300 feet of the subject property, as indicated by Eagle County Property Records, to be printed on mailing labels for the purpose of town notification of public hearings pursuant of chapter 17.70. 
(d)  Common interest community exemption. The planning commission may waive required exhibits for common interest communities rendered unnecessary because the request creates no greater impacts on town services than the existing allowed uses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  2, 1-12-16) 
17.16.030 - Preliminary plan processing. 
(a)  One hard copy and one electronic copy on disk of the preliminary plan and all exhibits (or more, if requested by the planning department) shall be submitted by the subdivider 60 days prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(b)  Copies of the submission may be distributed to the following agencies for review and comment: 
(1)  Each municipality within a two-mile radius of any portion of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  The school district in which the proposed subdivision lies. 
(3)  Any utility, local improvement or service district, or ditch company, when applicable. (Electric company, telephone company, gas company, etc.) 
(4)  The town planning department to review the submittal for conformance with these regulations. 
(5)  The local department of health for their review of any individual sewage disposal system. 
(6)  The Town of Gypsum Public Works Director to review the submittal for compliance with provisions for municipal services, including water and sewer service. 
(7)  The town engineer to review the submittal for compliance with town specification and design criteria. 
(8)  The Gypsum Fire Protection District or Greater Eagle Fire Protection District for review and comment regarding fire protection and emergency services. 
(9)  Any other agencies or parties who, in the opinion of the town council or the planning commission, may be affected by the proposed subdivision (such as the U.S. Bureau of Land Management, Colorado Division of Wildlife, Colorado Department of Highways, U.S. Forest Service, Colorado State Forest Service, Eagle County, etc.) may be given the opportunity for to review and provide comments to the town regarding the preliminary plan. Although Eagle County may be considered a reviewing agency by the town, the town shall not be required to send notice of a proposed subdivision to either Eagle County or to the state geologist. 
(10)  The planning commission may waive distribution of the preliminary plan to certain agencies for common interest communities rendered unnecessary because the request creates no greater impacts on town services than the existing allowed uses. 
(c)  The agencies named in the preceding section may make recommendations within 30 days after the date of mailing to them of the proposed subdivision information, unless a necessary extension of not more than 30 days has been consented to by the subdivider and the town. The failure of any agency to respond within the allocated time frame shall, for the purpose of the hearing on the preliminary plan, be deemed as acceptance and approval of such plan. 
(d)  At a regular or special meeting the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, for which public notice has been given pursuant to chapter 17.70, review the preliminary plan and after considering the comments and recommendations of the agencies specified herein, comments of the general public, and impacts on adjoining areas and the town as a whole considering factors such as natural resources, natural hazards, erosion, and town needs and benefits, the planning commission shall recommend to the town council, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the preliminary plan. 
(1)  In the event the planning commission recommends conditional approval, the commission shall submit to the town council, the list of conditions which must be met to cause approval. 
(2)  In the event the planning commission disapproves a preliminary plan, the subdivider may request a hearing with the town council and present the preliminary plan for its disapproval, conditional approval, or approval as submitted before proceeding to prepare a final plat. 
(e)  At a regular or special meeting the town council shall review the preliminary plan and the recommendations of the planning commission, hear comments and recommendations from the general public, and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the preliminary plan. At this meeting, the council may set conditions for compliance with section 17.04.050, "Land for Public Purposes," dedication of water rights or money in lieu of water rights, phase schedule for filing final plats and any other conditions appropriate to the proposed subdivision, or it may designate an authorized representative to negotiate proposed conditions with the applicant. Such negotiated conditions shall not be binding on the town until accepted by the town council. 
(f)  Consideration factors shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The required preliminary plan exhibits; 
(2)  The evidence and information supplied as supplemental requirements; 
(3)  Compliance with all applicable federal, state and municipal laws and regulations; 
(4)  Utility services in remote areas; 
(5)  Preserving and creating scenic views; 
(6)  Promoting compatibility with existing neighborhood uses and goals; 
(7)  Preserving and protecting public lands from impacts of incompatible development; 
(8)  Compatibility with the town's master plan; 
(9)  The arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets; 
(10)  Adequate and convenient open spaces for parks, traffic, utilities, and access of fire fighting apparatus; 
(11)  Adequate recreational facilities; 
(12)  Adequate access to light and air; 
(13)  Avoidance of congestion of population; 
(14)  New burdens on the town's existing public facilities and services; 
(15)  Any other factors deemed appropriate. 
(g)  Preliminary plan approval shall be valid for no longer than one year; or, if vested property rights are sought for the preliminary plan, preliminary plan approval is valid for the applicable vested, extended, or reinstated time period approved by the town council pursuant to chapter 17.36. An extension of one year may be applied for at any time prior to expiration; however, the town may extend or reinstate a preliminary plan for which vested property rights have been obtained pursuant to section 17.36.045 of the Town Code, for the period permitted under section 17.36.045(d). In the event a final plat is not submitted to the planning commission within this time, the preliminary plan approval shall automatically expire and become null and void and of no further force or effect. If the applicant intends to complete the subdivision in phases, the final plat for the first phase must be submitted before the expiration of the preliminary plat and subsequent phases must be submitted in accordance with the phase schedule negotiated in section 17.16.030(e), above. For good cause, at the request of the subdivider, the town may extend the period that a preliminary plan approval is valid only if the subdivider is in compliance with all obligations to and agreement with the town, the property and subdivider have no outstanding or delinquent taxes, assessments or fees, and the town determines that the preliminary plan is still viable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may extend or reinstate a preliminary plan for which vested rights have been obtained pursuant to section 17.36.045 of the Town Code for the period permitted under section 17.36.045(d). 
(h)  Appeals of decisions of the town council shall be made to the Gypsum Municipal Court, as provided by law. (Ord 2014-04) 
Chapter 17.20 - FINAL PLAT 
  
The Last Step in the Subdivision Review Process 

17.20.010 - Submission. 
    Not more than one year after approval of the preliminary plan (or within such time extensions, including phased development schedules, as may have been granted), the subdivider shall submit to the planning department an original, reproducible copy, and one digital copy on disk, of the proposed final plat and the required supplemental information. 
(1)  Submission shall be made 60 days prior to the date of a regular meeting of the planning commission to allow sufficient time for adequate review by the town staff and commission members. 
(2)  Such application shall be reviewed by the town staff and town engineer for compliance with all regulations, design standards, State of Colorado Land Survey Laws and conditions of preliminary plan approval. 
17.20.020 - Final plat preparation. 
    The subdivision design shall conform to section 17.24, design standards, and to the preliminary plan as approved. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that phase of the approved preliminary plan proposed for immediate approval. 
(1)  The plat shall be made durable and reproducible, at a scale no less than one equals 200 feet, on a sheet or sheets with external dimensions of 24 inches by 36 inches. In the case of multiple sheets, a map key shall be provided on each sheet showing the relationship of the individual sheet to the overall plan. All information shall be accurate and legible. The plat shall be made from a dimensionally stable polyester sheet such as Mylar at least three mills thick. It shall also include nonfading permanent ink with margins a minimum of two-inches on the left side and one-half inch at the top, bottom, and right side of the plat. 
(2)  The final plat shall contain the following information and shall be prepared and signed by a registered Colorado land surveyor. 
a.  Subdivision name, graphic scale, north arrow, date of preparation, and statement by the professional land surveyor explaining how bearings were determined; 
b.  Section, township, range, and principal meridian; or for grants and unsurveyed parcels of land, information relating to the system of indexing the county assessor already has in place, to be included in the title block; 
c.  Legal description of property being subdivided and the total acreage. This should be part of the dedicatory language (See section 17.20.020(2)k.); 
d.  Complete scale drawing of the survey data, including all information necessary to establish all boundaries in the field and a description of all corner monuments, found and/or set; 
e.  Subdivision boundary lines, street and other right-of-way lines, lot, parcel, and tract lines, showing in all cases accurate distances, bearings, and curve data consisting of radii, central angels, arc lengths, and chord information; 
f.  All recorded and apparent rights-of-way and easements, and if research for the recorded rights-of-way and easements is done by someone other than the professional land surveyor who prepares the plat, the source from which such recorded rights-of-way and easements were obtained; 
g.  Street names and/or easement descriptions and widths of each right-of-way or easement (See section 17.24.020 and 17.24.040); 
h.  A number or other means to identify each lot, parcel, or tract and the area in square feet or acres of each; 
i.  The type of use to be permitted (other than single family residential) for each lot, tract, or parcel; 
j.  The street address of each lot, tract, and/or parcel, determined by the town address system; 
k.  The following certifications and dedications shall appear on the final plat and shall be substantially as indicated by the examples as shown in Appendix A: 
1.  Dedication and waiver by the subdivider. 
2.  Surveyor's certificate. 
3.  Planning commission certificate. 
4.  Town council certificate. 
5.  Approval to record certificate. 
6.  Lienholder certificate. 
7.  Title company certificate. 
8.  Eagle County Treasurer certificate. 
l.  Vicinity map showing the platted area, accesses, adjoining ownership/subdivisions (including mailing and physical addresses), section lines, and other relevant information to easily ascertain the location of the proposed subdivision to individuals unfamiliar with the area; 
m.  Finished floor elevations shall be indicated; 
n.  Any conflicting boundary evidence; 
o.  A statement defining the lineal units used including but not limited to meters, chains, feet, and U.S. survey feet. 
p.  Information on avigation easements in place. 
17.20.030 - Supplemental requirements-Final plat. 
    The following shall be submitted with an application for approval of final plat: 
(1)  Tax certificate from the county treasurer indicating all taxes and assessments are current on property being subdivided. 
(2)  Statements from applicable utility companies concerning the extent to which service can and will be provided to the subdivision, costs to supply the utility, and who is responsible for utility installation. 
(3)  A current title report showing the names of all surface owners, lien holders, mineral owners, and lessees of mineral rights in the platted area, as the names appear upon records in the county clerk and recorder's office: 
a.  Evidence that notices specifying the date and time of the planning commission meeting and public hearing at which the final plat will be considered have been sent by certified mail to said mineral owners or lessees at their most recent addresses, as they may appear in a telephone or other directory of general use in the area of the proposed subdivision or on the county tax records. Said notices shall be sent not less than ten days prior to date of said meeting pursuant to chapter 17.70. 
(4)  The restrictions and/or protective covenants to be recorded controlling the use of land and activities in the subdivision. 
(5)  Subdivision summary reflecting all changes from original submittal at preliminary plan. 
(6)  When a proposed street will intersect with a state or federal highway, a copy of the applicable access permit issued by the state highway department. 
(7)  Construction plans, profiles, and typical cross sections of streets, bridges, culverts, and other required structures showing that each will comply with Town of Gypsum road standards. 
(8)  Design plans and specifications illustrating that suitable and adequate water supply will be provided to all lots, parcels, and tracts. 
(9)  Design plans and specifications illustrating that suitable and adequate sanitary sewer facilities will be provided for all lots, parcels and tracts. 
(10)  Design plans and specifications illustrating that suitable and adequate drainage facilities will be provided for the subdivision. 
(11)  Assurance that there will be all-weather access to the subdivision via public roads conforming to Town of Gypsum standards from existing town, county or state roads and that maintenance, including snow removal, is assured for said access road. 
(12)  Assurance that the subdivider will cause electrical power, telephone, cable T.V. and natural gas services to be brought to and throughout the subdivision to serve all lots, parcels and tracts requiring said services 
(13)  Wildfire control plan, when required as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(14)  Erosion control plan, when required as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(15)  Flood control plan, when required as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(16)  Geologic hazard mitigation plan, when required as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(17)  Environmental mitigation plan, when required as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(18)  Appropriate deeds or arrangements conveying land for public purposes or money in lieu thereof in accord with section 17.04.050. 
(19)  Common interest community exemption. The planning commission may waive required exhibits for common interest communities rendered unnecessary because the request creates no greater impacts on town services than the existing allowed uses. Final plans shall be prepared in conformance with section 17.28.040 of this title. 
(20)  Documentation demonstrating that proposed building(s) or structure(s) will comply with the design requirements described in section 15.05.040 or the specific subdivision design guidelines approved by the planning commission pursuant to section 15.05.060. 
(21)  Detailed cost estimate to construct required improvements. 
17.20.040 - Subdivision improvements. 
(a)  Except where required improvements are existing prior to consideration of the final plat application by the town council and approved by the town council as being sufficient, no final plat shall be considered fully approved nor shall it be recorded until the completion of the required improvements is assured by the posting of security, consisting of an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow, bond, cash or other financial security that is easily convertible into cash in a form acceptable to the Town of Gypsum. Security shall be in the amount of 110 percent of the approved estimated construction costs for the required improvements. No construction of the required improvements shall commence until security has been approved and the final plat has been recorded. 
(b)  Required improvements shall include streets with accompanying structures, drainage systems and signs, domestic water systems, fire hydrants, street lights, survey monuments, sanitary sewer system, perimeter fencing (if applicable), electricity, telephone, CATV, erosion control, and other facilities as required by the town, in accordance with town standard specifications, as conditions for final plat approval. The planning commission shall advise the town council of their recommendations regarding improvements deemed necessary and appropriate for each subdivision on an individual basis. 
(c)  Required improvements must be completed within two years after final plat approval by the town council or all previous approvals become null and void and shall be considered withdrawn for good and justifiable cause. 
(d)  Subdivisions without a specific subdivision improvement agreement with the town are required to comply with the following conditions regarding subdivision improvements: 
(1)  All public improvements shall be constructed in compliance with the Gypsum Municipal Code and/or public works manual. 
(2)  Any contractor or subcontractor employed by the subdivider shall be licensed by the town before the contractor or subcontractor commences work on any of the improvements. 
(3)  Every reasonable effort shall be made by the subdivider to maintain all streets located within the subdivision in which the improvements are to be installed in a reasonably safe and passable condition during the course of work contemplated. 
(4)  All improvements constructed by the subdivider in public rights-of-ways, easements, streets or alleys shall be dedicated to another local government acceptable to the town, or shall become the property of the town immediately upon acceptance of said improvements by the town, and the subdivider warrants the improvements for three years from the date of acceptance by the town. 
(5)  The subdivider, or their heirs, successors, assigns or transferees, including any property owners association created by the subdivider, or another local government acceptable to the town, shall maintain into perpetuity all installed landscaping and fencing that is required by a final approved subdivision plat, development plan or site plan. 
(6)  The subdivider shall escrow funds for any landscaped vegetation. Such escrow will be released upon the town determining that such vegetation is successfully established. 
17.20.050 - Final plat processing. 
(a)  At a regular meeting, the planning commission shall review the proposed final plat and, taking into consideration all pertinent factors, including but not limited to compliance with all conditions of the approved preliminary plan and the town subdivision regulations, shall thence approve or disapprove the proposed final plat as submitted. Approval shall constitute recommendation for approval to the town council and shall be evidenced by the signing of the planning commission certificate affixed to the face of the final plat by the chairman. 
(b)  Upon approval no changes, revisions, modifications, erasures, or additions shall be allowed on the final plat and it shall be held by the planning department for presentation to the town council. 
(c)  The planning department shall schedule the final plat for public hearing and consideration by the town council at a regular or special meeting action and shall so notify the planning commission. At the public hearing a representative of the planning commission, or the planning department, will present the final plat and all supplementary information to the town council. 
(d)  The town council shall review the subdivision proposal, and after considering testimony and commentary from any and all interested persons, the subdivider, and the planning commission, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plat. Conditional approval shall include specific arrangements for providing the required land for public purposes or money in lieu of, and a list of required improvements to be completed by the subdivider. conditional approval shall be evidenced by the signing of the town council certificate on the final plat. 
(1)  This plat approval assures the subdivider that upon satisfactory completion of the listed improvements or submittal and acceptance by the town council of approved security to cause said improvements and required dedications or in-lieu fees, the final plat will be accepted for recording. 
(e)  Consideration factors shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The required preliminary plan exhibits; 
(2)  The evidence and information supplied as supplemental requirements; 
(3)  Compliance with all applicable federal, state and municipal laws and regulations; 
(4)  Utility services in remote areas; 
(5)  Preserving and creating scenic views; 
(6)  Promoting compatibility with existing neighborhood uses and goals; 
(7)  Preserving and protecting public lands from impacts of incompatible development; 
(8)  Compatibility with the town's master plan; 
(9)  The arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets; 
(10)  Adequate and convenient open spaces for parks, traffic, utilities, and access of fire fighting apparatus; 
(11)  Adequate recreational facilities; 
(12)  Adequate access to light and air; 
(13)  Avoidance of congestion of population; 
(14)  New burdens on the town's existing public facilities and services; 
(15)  Any other factors deemed appropriate. 
(f)  No alterations of any kind shall be made to the final plat after this approval by the town council. 
(g)  Upon approval by the town council the final plat shall immediately be returned to the planning department to be held until such time as the requirements for acceptance for recording have been satisfactorily completed. 
(h)  Upon submittal and acceptance of approved securities therefore, arrangements for land or money for public purposes, or other conditional requirements are satisfied, the subdivider may notify the town council and request final approval and recording of the final plat. 
(i)  The town council, after acceptance of securities, and of the arrangements for land or money for public purposes, shall approve the final plat for recording, and the mayor shall sign the approval to record certificate on the final plat. 
(j)  The town clerk shall then have the final plat and all supplemental documents recorded with the county clerk and recorder's office with no undue delay. 
(1)  The cost of recording the final plat and supplemental instruments shall be paid by the subdivider from deposit fees. 
(k)  An autocad file of the finalized plat shall be submitted to the town prior to recording of the final plat. 
(l)  Appeals of decisions of the town council shall be made to the district court, as provided by law. 
17.20.060 - Withdrawal of approval. 
    The town council may withdraw approval of a final plat if and when it is determined that information provided by the subdivider, upon which approval was based, is false or inaccurate. 
17.20.070 - Changes to a recorded plat. 
(a)  Changes to a recorded plat. Changes to a recorded plat may be accomplished only by recording a properly prepared and approved amended plat of all or a portion of the subdivision. Applications for changes to a recorded plat shall be made in writing to the planning department giving the details of the proposed changes and the reasons necessitating the changes. The application and deposit fees shall accompany the submittal of the amendment and all of the costs incurred in a plat amendment procedure shall be paid for according to chapter 17.60 of this Code. The planning department shall review the amended plat for completeness within eight days of submittal and advise the applicant whether the requested changes may be accomplished by a minor, major, or an administrative plat amendment pursuant to this section 17.20.070. 
(1)  Minor plat amendment. Minor plat amendments include minor changes in configuration of elements of a subdivision, such as consolidation of two or more lots into a single lot in a previously recorded subdivision plat and lot line adjustments to one or more lots within a single subdivision which do not significantly change the layout or size of the lot or the number of lots, and do not significantly change road configurations. The procedure for the review and approval of an amended plat with minor changes is as follows: 
a.  Application for minor changes to a recorded plat shall be made in writing to the planning department giving the details of proposed changes and the reasons they are necessary. The applicant shall be present to discuss the application for changes at a regular meeting of the planning commission. The application shall include maps and any other information necessary to clearly explain the existing conditions and the proposed changes. 
b.  Any request for changes to a recorded plat shall be required to comply with the following for any portion of the subdivision which will be affected by the proposed change: 
1.  A tax certificate from the county treasurer indicating all taxes and assessments on the property are paid and current. 
2.  A current title report from a licensed Colorado title company shall be provided showing the names of all surface owners, lien holder, mineral owners, and lessees of mineral rights in the platted area as they appear upon records in the county clerk and recorder's office. 
3.  All utility easements shall remain on the subject property unless the utility companies having said easements agree in writing to release said easements to the property. 
4.  The changes proposed shall not increase the total number of dwelling sites of the subdivision, shall have no significant impact on the adjoining property or the town as a whole, and shall not require any changes in infrastructure (i.e., roads, utilities, etc.) unless paid for by the subdivider. 
5.  The changes proposed shall in no way violate the existing zoning of the area. 
6.  The applicant must provide names and addresses of property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, as indicated by Eagle County Assessor's records, and printed on mailing labels for the purpose of town notifications of the public hearing pursuant to chapter 17.70. 
c.  At a regular or special meeting for which public notice has been given pursuant to chapter 17.70, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, review the amended plat and after considering the comments and recommendations of the town staff, comments of the general public and impacts on adjoining areas and the town as a whole, the planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the amended plat. 
d.  No alterations of any kind shall be made to the amended plat after approval by the planning commission. 
e.  Upon approval by the planning commission, the mayor shall sign the amended plat and it shall immediately be returned to the town clerk to be recorded. 
(2)  Major plat amendment. Major plat amendments include major changes in configuration of elements of a subdivision of property. The procedure for the review and approval of an amended plat with major changes is as follows: 
a.  The applicant shall be present to discuss the application for changes at a regular meeting of the planning commission and town council. The application shall include maps and any other information necessary to clearly explain the existing conditions and the proposed changes. 
b.  Any request for changes to a recorded plat shall comply with the following for any portion of the subdivision which will be affected by the proposed change: 
1.  A tax certificate from the county treasurer indicating all taxes and assessments on the property are paid and current. 
2.  A current title report from a licensed Colorado title company shall be provided showing the names of all surface owners, lien holder, mineral owners, and lessees of mineral rights in the platted area as they appear upon records in the county clerk and recorder's office. 
3.  All utility easements shall remain on the property unless the utility companies having said easements agree in writing to release said easements to the property. 
4.  The changes proposed shall in no way violate the existing zoning of the area. 
5.  The subdivision shall show how it will mitigate all impacts for services including but not limited to emergency services, schools, land for public purpose, traffic, recreation, water dedication and tap fees, and sewer tap fees. 
6.  The subdivision shall be responsible for any new or revised infrastructure necessary as a result of the subdivision. 
7.  The applicant must provide names and addresses of property owners within the subject property, as indicated by Eagle County Assessor's records, and printed on mailing labels for the purpose of town notifications of the public hearing pursuant to chapter 17.70. 
c.  At a regular or special meeting the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, for which public notice has been given pursuant to chapter 17.70, review the amended plat and after considering the comments and recommendations of the town staff, comments of the general public, and impacts on adjoining areas and the town as a whole, the planning commission shall make recommendation to the town council for approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. 
d.  At a regular or special meeting for which public notice has been given pursuant to chapter 17.70, the town council shall conduct a public hearing, review the amended plat and after considering the planning commission's recommendations, comments and recommendations of the town staff, comments of the general public and impacts on adjoining areas and the town as a whole, the town council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
e.  No alterations of any kind shall be made to the amended plat after the approval of the town council. 
f.  Upon approval by the town council, the amended plat and an autocad file of the amended plat shall be submitted to the planning department. Once all other requirements are met, the amended plat shall be recorded by the town. 
(3)  Administrative plat amendment. Administrative plat amendments are available for the subdivision of a previously-approved multi-family, commercial, light industrial, or mixed use building into separate individually-owned lots. The procedure for the review and approval of an administrative plat amendment is as follows. 
a.  Requirements. To qualify for an administrative plat amendment, the following requirements must be met: 
1.  All real property involved must be part of an existing, recorded subdivision. 
2.  The real property involved must meet all code requirements and have no outstanding subdivision or zoning requirements or conditions. 
3.  The real property must have previously been zoned and platted for such uses. 
b.  Application. An application for an administrative plat amendment shall be made in writing to the planning department, giving the details of the proposed plat amendment and the reasons such amendment is necessary. The application shall include all information required by section 17.20.070(a)(l)(b), G.M.C., and the planning department may require the applicant to also submit any or all of the supplemental requirements set forth in section 17.20.030, G.M.C. 
c.  Final amended plat. The final amended plat shall comply with the requirements of section 17.20.020, G.M.C. 
d.  Notice. The applicant must give public notice to adjacent property owners in the same manner as required for minor plat amendments pursuant to chapter 17.70, G.M.C. 
e.  Administrative approval or denial. The senior planner, or his/her designee, has authority to approve or deny an administrative plat amendment. If the senior planner approves the plat, the mayor may sign town council certificate and the chairman or vice chairman of the planning commission may sign the planning commission certificate, and the amended plat will be recorded upon completion of any conditions imposed by the senior planner. If the senior planner denies the administrative plat amendment, the proposed change may be pursued through the major plat amendment process as described in section 17.20.070(a)(2), G.M.C., or appealed as set forth in this section. 
f.  Appeal. Appeals of the senior planner's decision to deny or impose conditions on an administrative plat amendment shall be to the planning commission. 
(b)  Security requirements. Except where required improvements are existing prior to consideration of the amended plat application by the town council and/or planning commission and are approved by the town council and/or planning commission as being sufficient, no amended plat shall be considered fully approved nor shall it be recorded until the completion of the required improvements is assured by the posting of security, consisting of an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow, bond, cash or other financial security that is easily convertible into cash in a form and amount acceptable to the Town of Gypsum. No construction of the required improvements shall commence until security has been approved and the amended plat has been recorded. 
(c)  Correction plat. If it is discovered that there is a minor survey or drafting error on a recorded plat, the subdivider shall be required to submit a corrected plat which specifically indicates the revisions made from the original plat. Such a correction plat may be approved by the town council without the otherwise required review or hearing procedures if the corrections are consistent with the approved preliminary plan, and after approval may be recorded. If correction of the error results in conditions which do not comply with these regulations or results in changes affecting parties other than the subdivider, the revised plat shall then be reviewed as a final plat by the planning commission before the town council review or recording. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  3, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 2016-04,  1, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 2016-11,  1, 11-8-16) 
Chapter 17.24 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

17.24.010 - Design standards. 
    Each new subdivision platted within the town will, to some degree, influence the character, the environment, the cost of services and maintenance, and other factors pertaining to the subdivided land and surrounding areas. Each lot should provide a desirable setting for the construction proposed, so that natural features of the land will be preserved, views protected, privacy permitted, and undesirable conditions minimized. Provision for flood channels, open spaces, parks, schools, transportation, fire and police protection, and similar community facilities may be required depending on the location and density of each development. The following design standards must be complied with unless deviations are approved by the town council after review by the planning commission. 
17.24.020 - Special site considerations. 
(a)  Perimeter fencing shall be of "see through" design and no higher than 42 inches, as not to impede the movement of deer and elk. Recorded covenants or restrictions shall require individual owners to maintain said fence. 
(b)  Steep land (30 percent or greater slopes), unstable ground, and land subject to hazards such as landslides, rock fall, ground subsidence, wildfire, or flooding shall not be platted for residential or other uses which may endanger life and limb or improvements, unless appropriate provisions are made to eliminate or control the hazard. 
(c)  The subdivider shall provide all-weather access to the subdivision via a road or roads commensurate with Town of Gypsum street and roadway classification and design standards connected to town, county or state road(s). 
(d)  Provisions shall be made to preserve natural features of the site, such as unusual rock formations, lakes, rivers, streams, and trees. The determination of which existing site trees are to be saved, replaced, or relocated shall be made by the town. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision or any change of grade of the land affected until approval of the plat has been granted. 
(e)  Flood hazard area. The town engineering department shall keep on file and available to the public, a set of maps clearly showing all known and identified flood hazard areas in the town, as such become available. The town shall not approve any proposed subdivision in either one of these identified flood hazard areas or in an area suspected of being in a flood hazard area, unless the subdivider can submit adequate evidence, prepared by a registered professional engineer, that the proposed subdivision is not in a flood hazard area or meet the following conditions within said flood hazard area: 
(1)  It allows no storage or processing of materials that, in times of flooding, are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life. 
(2)  It allows no disposal or accumulation of garbage or other solid waste materials. 
(3)  It prevents any substantial solid debris from being carried downstream by floodwater. 
(4)  It allows no alteration which would diminish the flood-carrying capacity or increase the flood water elevation, the stream, or the flood plain. 
(5)  It allows no human occupation of structures, either permanent or temporary, which are not elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and are located in the "floodway fringe" area and not in the "floodway" area. The area of a 100 year flood plain is divided into a "floodway" and a "floodway fringe". The "floodway" is the channel of a stream, plus any adjacent flood plain areas, that must be kept free of encroachment so that the 100-year flood can be carried without substantial increases in flood heights. Minimum federal standards limit such increases to 1.0 foot, provided that hazardous velocities are not produced. The "floodway fringe" encompasses the portion of the flood plain that could be completely obstructed without increasing the water-surface elevation of the 100-year flood by more than 1.0 foot at any point, and wherein the water velocity does not exceed two feet per second. 
(6)  It must require proposed construction or placement of structures, to be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(7)  Trailer parks, mobile homes and similar uses shall not be permitted in a floodway or floodway fringe. 
(8)  It allows no utility or sewage facilities, which are not flood-proofed, to be constructed at or below the level of the base flood. 
(f)  Geologic hazard areas. The town engineering department shall keep on file and available to the public, a set of maps clearly showing all known and identified geologic hazard areas in the county, as such become available. The town shall not approve any subdivision plan if the proposed subdivision is either in one of these identified geologic hazard areas or is in an area suspected of being in a geologic hazard area, unless the subdivider can submit adequate evidence, prepared by a registered professional geotechnical engineer, that the proposed subdivision meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Provision is made for the long term health, welfare, and safety of the public from geologic hazards to life, property, and improvements. 
(2)  The proposed development will not create an undue financial burden on the existing or future residents of the area or community as a result of damage due to geologic hazards. 
(3)  Structures designed for human occupancy or use shall be constructed to prevent danger to human life or property. 
(4)  Permitted land uses, including public facilities serving such use, shall avoid or mitigate geologic hazards at the time of initial construction. 
(5)  Man-made changes shall not initiate or intensify adverse natural conditions within a geologic hazard area. 
(g)  Wildfire hazard areas. The town planning department shall keep on file and make available to the public, a set of maps clearly showing all known and identified wildfire hazard areas in the town, as such become available. The town shall not approve any subdivision plan if the proposed subdivision is either in one of these identified wildfire hazard areas or is an area suspected of being in a wildfire hazard area, unless the subdivider can submit adequate evidence, prepared by a qualified professional forester, that the proposed subdivision meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Any subdivision in which residential activity is to take place shall be designed to minimize significant hazards to public health, safety, and property. 
(2)  A subdivision shall have adequate roads for emergency service by fire trucks and fire fighting personnel, and fire breaks or other means of alleviating conditions conducive to wildfire hazard 
(3)  Precautions required to reduce or eliminate wildfire hazards shall be provided at the time of initial development. 
(4)  The subdivision will adhere to the Guidelines and Criteria for Wildfire Regulations of Eagle County as adopted by the Town of Gypsum. 
(5)  Consideration shall be given to recommendations of the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District or Gypsum Fire Protection District resulting from review of a proposed subdivision in a wildfire hazard area. 
(h)  Street names and addresses shall conform to guidelines within Appendix B. 
17.24.030 - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities not less than 20 feet total width shall be provided along rear and side lot lines and in other areas that will be needed for practical extensions of utilities serving or passing through the subdivision. This 20 feet can be divided between adjacent properties or will be required to be all on one lot if adjacent property does not possess an existing easement. A ten-foot easement for utilities shall be provided along all lot, parcel, or tract boundaries adjoining a street or road right-of-way. Recommendations for easements from the various utility companies involved shall be obtained and given full consideration by the subdivider. 
(b)  Easements for runoff, storm drainage, or flood control may be required as deemed necessary by engineered drainage systems. 
(c)  Easements for existing utilities shall be maintained or provided as necessary in the appropriate locations. 
(d)  Easements for snow storage may be required as necessary. 
17.24.040 - Lots. 
(a)  Lot dimensions and sizes shall exclude street, alley, or pedestrian rights-of-way. 
(b)  Minimum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the zoning applicable to the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Each lot shall have frontage on a public street right-of-way not less than 25 feet. 
(d)  Single family residential lots with double street frontage (does not apply to corner lots) shall be avoided, if at all possible, except where essential to provide separation from major highways or incompatible land uses. 
(e)  Side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to right-of-way lines, insofar as is consistent with topography and the overall design of the subdivision. 
(f)  Lots platted as part of a P.U.D. may vary from the preceding specifications provided the P.U.D. is acceptable as a whole. 
17.24.050 - Survey monuments. 
    Town of Gypsum survey reference monuments shall be set for perimeter boundaries, blocks, lots, tracts, and parcels in compliance with Title 38 Article 51, C.R.S. 
17.24.060 - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Parking spaces will be provided for each use in the following sizes and amounts: 
(1)  Minimum parking space dimensions: 
Width Length a. Outside, uncovered spaces: Ten feet 20 feet b. Inside, covered spaces: Nine feet 18 feet c. Off-street parking for compact cars may take up to ten percent of the required parking spaces in a parking area with ten or more spaces. The minimum size of a compact car parking space is eight feet by 16 feet. If compact spaces are approved, designated areas shall be clearly marked by above-grade signage for small or compact cars only. d. Off-street spaces for parallel parking shall be a minimum of 22 feet by nine feet. e. Where required, all ADA parking requirements shall be met.  
(2)  Parking cannot dominate yard: Residential driveway and parking areas may not exceed 30 percent of unimproved lot area. 
(3)  Residential-Studios and one bedroom: A minimum of two spaces per unit for studios and one-bedroom units. There is also a requirement for an additional one guest parking space per every eight units in addition to the owner's parking spaces. Required guest parking shall not be used for storage of vehicles, boats, campers, etc. A separate, screened area shall be provided if the developer desires this type of storage. 
(4)  Residential-Two-bedroom multifamily units: A minimum of three spaces per unit for two-bedroom multifamily units. There is also a requirement of an additional one guest parking space per every eight units, in addition to the owner's parking spaces. Required guest parking shall not be used for storage of vehicles, boats, campers, etc. A separate, screened area shall be provided if the developer desires this type of storage. 
(5)  Residential-Single family, duplex and multifamily: a minimum of four spaces per unit for all single-family, duplex and multifamily units, up to three bedrooms per unit. An additional one space per bedroom for any unit with more than three bedrooms, regardless of the zoning. Spaces located in front of garages can be counted only if the spaces are assigned this type of storage. 
(6)  Mobile homes: a minimum of two spaces per mobile home. 
(7)  Recreational vehicle: a minimum of one space per campsite in an RV park. 
(8)  Lodgings: Including hotel, motel, lodge, boarding house, and similar facilities)-A minimum of one space per room and one space for every 20 rooms for employee parking. 
(9)  Office space: A minimum of one space per 200 square feet. 
(10)  Retail and service commercial: a minimum of one space for every 300 square feet of floor area, except storage. (See (11) below). 
(11)  Warehouse storage: a minimum of one space per employee (minimum of four, unless applicant can prove that four employee spaces are not needed) and one space for every 1,000 square feet of storage area. 
(12)  Combination storage: If a project is a combination of storage, commercial and service offices, a minimum of one space for every 300 square feet of floor area will be required, if there is even a remote possibility that the storage could be converted into commercial or service office space. 
(13)  Commercial/light industrial: (excluding retail, service and warehouse storage) a minimum of one space per each employee (minimum of four per each business or office) plus one space per every 400 square feet of floor area. 
(14)  Vehicle repair or maintenance facility: (no overnight vehicle storage) a minimum of one space per 100 square feet of retail or office floor area, plus three spaces per service bay. 
(15)  Restaurant and tavern: a minimum of one space for each employee, minimum of four spaces, plus one space for every four seats or 100 square feet of eating area, whichever is greater. 
(16)  Bowling alley: a minimum of four spaces per bowling lane, plus the additional spaces required for the restaurant and/or bar. 
(17)  Auditorium and public assembly (Movie theatre, churches, funeral homes, etc.): a minimum of one space per 100 square feet of floor area used for seating or assembly. 
(18)  Public and health facilities (except auditorium and public assembly): a minimum of one space per 300 square feet of floor area (except storage area), one space per every two patient beds, plus one space per three full-time employees, plus one space per staff doctor; whichever is greater. 
(19)  Industrial: 
a.  Manufacturing facility-One space per 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
b.  Wholesale, warehouse, rail or truck freight terminals-One space per 2,000 square feet of floor area, in addition to one space per employee. 
(20)  More than one use: In those cases where a lot is to be occupied by more than one of the above uses, the minimum off-street parking requirement shall equal the sum of the requirements of each of the individual uses. 
(21)  New use or change in use: Whenever there is a new use or change in use, the parking requirements for the proposed use must be met, without violating the parking space requirement for the total project. 
(22)  Owners of two or more uses: Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same parking spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap. The owners must present proof to staff that the request will not result in shortage of parking at any time. 
(23)  Use restrictions: Required parking spaces shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in the conducting of the business or use. These types of spaces shall be an additional requirement and shall be considered on an individual basis. 
(24)  Snow removal storage: Adequate space on the property shall be provided for storage of snow removed from pedestrian ways, vehicular ways, parking or loading areas. 
(b)  The parking requirements listed above are the minimum required. The town's planning department staff, at its discretion, may require additional parking spaces if warranted. 
(c)  A site plan, drawn to scale of one inch equals 20 feet or to a scale approved by the town's planning department staff, shall accompany all applications for building permits. This site plan shall indicate how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled. It shall also indicate traffic circulation patterns, including access for deliveries and emergency services, drainage, snow storage, landscaping and irrigation, lighting and signage, grades of driveways, structures, locations, existing and proposed contours, geologic hazards, location and size of existing and proposed utility connections. 
17.24.070 - Lighting standards. 
    The town is experiencing a significant expansion in population and construction, resulting in increased use of exterior illumination on an urban scale. This section is intended to help maintain the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town through regulation of exterior lighting as reflected by the following goals: 
  Promote safety and security. 
  Help preserve the small town character. 
  Control the escalation of nighttime light pollution. 
  Reduce glaring and offensive light sources. 
  Provide clear guidance to builders and developers. 
  Encourage the use of improved technologies for lighting; and 
  Conserve energy. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Height , as related to light fixtures, means the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the fixture to the lowest direct light emitting part of the fixture. 
    Fully shielded , as related to light fixtures, means light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are directly emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. The fixture must also be properly installed to effectively down direct light in order to conform with the definition. Exemptions from this definition may be allowed for aesthetic lighting elements such as shades with perforated patterns and translucent diffusers. 
    High intensity discharge light source (HID) means light sources characterized by an arc tube or discharge capsule that produces light, with typical sources being metal halide, high pressure sodium and other similar types which are developed in accordance with accepted industry standards. 
    Light trespass means the shining of light produced by a light fixture beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Point light source means the shining of light produced by a light fixture beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
(2)  Lighting plans. 
a.  An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted in conjunction with any subdivision, planned unit development application, site plan development review, site plan development exemption, special review application and building permit application for all commercial, mixed uses, or multifamily (three units or more) building. Said plan shall show the following: 
1.  The location and height above grade of light fixtures. 
2.  The type (such as incandescent, halogen, high pressure sodium) and luminous intensity of each light source. 
3.  The type of fixture (such as floodlight, full-cutoff, lantern, coach light; see Appendix C. 
4.  Other information deemed necessary to document compliance with the provisions of this section such as covenants, pictures, etc... 
b.  Applications for single-family and duplex building permits shall not be required submit a lighting plan, but will be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Nonresidential lighting standards. The following lighting standards shall be applicable to all nonresidential properties including mixed uses: 
a.  Outdoor lighting used to illuminate parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering areas or buildings shall be designed, arranged and screened so that the point light source shall not be visible from adjoining lots or streets. Exemptions may be requested where the applicant can demonstrate that the intent of this section is satisfied with alternate lighting fixtures or standards. 
b.  Outdoor lighting shall be ten feet or less in height unless it is: 
1.  Fully shielded with a nonadjustable mounting; 
2.  Lighting for parking and vehicle circulation areas in which case heights up to a maximum of 28 feet may be allowed; 
3.  Building-mounted lighting directed back at a sign or building faade; or 
c.  Lighting on above-grade decks or balconies which shall be fully shielded. 
d.  All light sources which are not fully shielded shall use other than a clear lens material as the primary lens material to enclose the light bulb to minimize glare from a point light source (see Appendixes C and D). Exceptions may be allowed where there is a demonstrated benefit for the community determined through the exemption process. 
e.  HID light sources are allowed with a maximum wattage of 250 high pressure sodium (HPS) and 250 watt metal halide. Standards for other HID light sources may be established by the town for new technology consistent with the above restrictions. 
f.  Pole-mounted fixture spacing for security and parking lot light fixtures shall be no less than 75 feet. Fully shielded decorative fixtures are allowed to maintain a 50-foot fixture spacing. Wall-mounted fixture spacing for security lighting shall be no less than 50 feet measured horizontally. Aesthetic fixtures directed back toward a building face shall be exempt from this spacing requirement when fully shielded. Aesthetic fixtures that are not fully shielded shall maintain a minimum spacing of 25 feet. Where security lighting is a combination of lamp posts and wall fixtures, minimum spacing shall be 75 feet. 
g.  Pole-mounted fixtures shall be limited to two light sources per pole. Decorative fixtures may be exempted from this requirement up to a maximum of three light sources per pole. 
h.  Mixed use areas that include residential occupancies shall comply with the residential standards on those floors or areas that are more than 50 percent residential based on square footage of uses. 
i.  Up-lighting is only permitted if the light distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging architectural or landscaping element. Such elements may include awnings, dense shrubs or tree canopies, which can functionally reflect illumination back to the ground. 
j.  Up-lighting of flags is permitted with a limit of two fixtures per flag pole with a maximum of 150 watts each. 
k.  Flood lights and security lights shall be restricted as follows (see Appendix D): 
1.  The point light source shall not be visible from neighboring lots or streets. 
2.  Lights must be fully shielded, down directed and screened from adjacent properties in a manner that prevents light trespass. 
(4)  Residential lighting standards. The following lighting standards shall be applicable to residential properties: 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall be ten feet or less in height unless fully shielded. 
b.  Lighting on above-grade decks or balconies shall be fully shielded. 
c.  All light sources shall use other than a clear lens material as the primary lens material to enclose the light bulb to minimize glare from a point source. 
d.  Flood lights and security lights shall be restricted as follows (see Appendix D): 
1.  The point light source shall not be visible from neighboring lots or streets. 
2.  Lights must be fully shielded, down directed and screened from adjacent properties in a manner that prevents light trespass. 
e.  Motion sensor lights may be permitted, but only where the sensor is triggered by motion within the owner's property lines. 
f.  Up-lighting is only permitted if the light distribution from the fixture is effectively contained by an overhanging architectural or landscaping element. Such elements may include awnings, dense shrubs or tree canopies, which can functionally reflect illumination back to the ground. 
g.  HID light sources are allowed with a maximum wattage of 75 high pressure sodium (HPS) and 75 watt metal halide. Standards for other HID light sources may be established by the town for new technology consistent with the above restrictions. 
(5)  Municipal/public recreational lighting. Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis courts, entertainment events, and other similar outdoor active recreational uses are exempt from the outdoor lighting standards stated in this section and shall only be required to meet the following standards: 
a.  Limits on cutoff angle: Cutoff from a lighting source that illuminates an outdoor active recreational use may exceed an angle of 90 degrees from the pole, provided that the light source is shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent residential properties. 
b.  Limits on hours of illumination: Exterior lighting for an outdoor active recreational use shall be extinguished within one-half hour of the events completion but no later than 11:30 p.m. 
(6)  Prohibited lighting (See Appendix C). 
a.  Flood illumination of buildings shall be prohibited from ground or pole-mounted lights or lights mounted on adjoining structures. 
b.  Lights which flash, move, revolve, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, change color or use intermittent electrical pulsation are prohibited unless specifically approved as an exemption pursuant to subsection (7) of this section. 
(7)  Exemptions. Exemptions from the lighting regulations of this Section may be granted subject to the following procedures. Exemptions may be granted for the following types of lighting in addition to conditions allowing for exemptions contained herein. 
a.  Winter holiday lighting which is of a temporary nature and which is illuminated only between November 1 and April 15 of each year. Other holiday lighting temporary in nature may request exemption from the town. 
b.  Municipal lighting installed for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare and temporary in nature with a maximum duration of not more than 90 days. 
c.  Mercury vapor and low pressure sodium lighting. 
d.  Linear lighting (including neon, fluorescent, rope-lighting and low-voltage strip-lighting) primarily intended as an architectural highlight to attract attention or used as means of identification or advertisement. 
e.  Exemption requests shall be formalized by submittal of a lighting plan and exemption request letter to the planning department. The request will be considered and may be granted by the planning commission. For more complex or significant reviews, the planning commission may refer the request to the town council for action, or an applicant may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the town council. Exemptions shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
1.  Compliance with the purpose and intent of this section submittal of a complete lighting plan in accordance with this section. 
2.  Review by the town may include recommendations by a professional lighting consultant selected by the town, funded by the applicant. 
3.  Any special conditions, circumstances or hardships that warrant the exemption and/or appropriate conditions of approval. 
(8)  Interpretations. The lighting code exemption procedures shall be utilized in regard to any interpretation or clarification of the lighting code necessary or requested by an applicant. 
(9)  Nonconforming lighting and enforcement. (See Appendices C and D.) 
a.  Nonconforming lighting. 
1.  As of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, all outdoor lighting that does not conform to every requirement of this section shall be legal nonconforming lighting unless determined under the Gypsum Municipal Code to be a nuisance. Nonconforming lighting shall not be moved in any direction, nor shall there be any change in use or light type, or any replacement or structural alteration made to the nonconforming lighting without conforming to all applicable requirements of this section. 
2.  At such time as a building permit application for a remodel or new structure is submitted to the town, or any type of rezoning, subdivision or site plan development application is filed with the town, all lighting on the site and building shall be required to conform with all applicable requirements of this section unless an exemption request is filed and approved. 
b.  Enforcement. The town shall enforce the provisions of this section. In the case of repetitive zoning enforcement for repeat offenses, the town may proceed to remedy the situation under section 8.05.050 for nuisances. 
Chapter 17.28 - SUBDIVISION VARIANCES 

17.28.010 - Variances. 
(a)  Subdivision variances may be granted from portions of these regulations where the subdivider can clearly demonstrate that because of peculiar conditions, the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impractical or will exact undue hardship. Such variances shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of these regulations and shall not be detrimental to the general welfare of the Town of Gypsum and its residents. 
(b)  The conditions, reasons, and justification for granting any variance shall be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission and the town council. 
17.28.020 - Exemptions. 
(a)  A subdivision exemption may be granted to a subdivision applicant or an applicant for approval of a common interest community if the land to be subdivided or approved as a common interest community has existing streets and utilities and further subdividing or creation of a common interest community will not create any negative impacts on existing conditions, adjacent properties, or any jurisdiction such as Eagle County, Gypsum Fire Protection District, Greater Eagle Fire Protection District, and Eagle County School District RE 50-J. 
(1)  The subdivider must still meet all the requirements provided in sketch, preliminary and final plats, however, this can be combined into a final plat form, provided all conditions for a final plat have been met, a subdivision exemption may be approved following review and comments by the planning commission at a regular or special meeting and consideration by the town council at a public hearing. 
(2)  At the planning commission and/or the town council's discretion the subdivider may be requested to go through the full subdivision process and pay all fees as set forth, if regulations and requirements are not being met to the town's approval, or the subdivision will result in negative impacts. 
(3)  The fee and deposit for a subdivision exemption shall be as set forth in chapter 17.60. 
17.28.030 - Planned unit development. 
    These regulations may be modified by planning commission recommendations and town council approval to allow flexibility and variety in land development, more efficient and appropriate use of land and open space, and more efficient design for utilization of utilities and public utilities where a comprehensive, integrated plan is proposed for subdividing and developing a tract of land. 
(1)  Water supply and distributions, sewage collection and treatment, electric supply, all other utilities and streets must be included in the P.U.D. plan and must be constructed/installed by the developer in accordance to Town of Gypsum standards. 
(2)  Open space shall be included as part of the P.U.D. platted area and shall be protected by suitable arrangements against future residential, commercial, or industrial uses. 
a.  The amount of open space, exclusive of street rights-of-way, parking lots, individually owned yards, utility sites, school sites, fire station sites, commercial sites, and industrial sites, shall not be less than 25 percent of the total platted area. Of this required open space, not more than half may be water surface (lakes, ponds, rivers, etc.), or land having a natural slope in excess of 30 percent. Single activity facilities, such as a golf course, shall not comprise the total required open space land area. 
(3)  There shall be a method, assured by deed restriction, covenant, or otherwise, binding the owners in perpetuity to a method of maintenance of the common space areas and other common facilities. 
(4)  Each lot, parcel, or interest within the P.U.D. shall be deeded as a unit, and shall grant to that unit owner a proportionate undivided interest in the common open areas and common facilities, except for those areas and facilities conveyed to a governmental entity to be owned and operated for the benefit of the owners within the P.U.D. 
(5)  A P.U.D. proposal may be considered as a subdivision concurrently with a P.U.D. zone amendment application submitted pursuant to chapter 18.08 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. A P.U.D. applicant must comply with all of the subdivision requirements of this title 17, unless expressly modified or waived by planning commission or the town council. 
17.28.040 - Multiple dwelling unit projects (condominiums, townhouses, apartments, etc.) 
    Developments proposing multiple dwelling unit structures may be approved as part of a planned unit development pursuant to sections 17.28.020 and chapter 18.32, and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Driveways shall provide convenient access to all buildings, allow a circulatory traffic pattern with no less than two accesses to a public road, and have a paved surface. 
(2)  Parking spaces shall be as set forth in section 17.24.060, additional parking for clubhouses, service facilities, etc. shall be provided as needed. Parking spaces shall be located in a manner that prevents backing out into public rights-of-way. 
a.  Any parking to be provided along driveways shall cause the paved surface to be widened eight feet minimum on the side(s) where parking is to be allowed. 
(3)  Provision shall be made for driveways, grounds, open spaces, and other common facilities to be maintained by the owners of the living units in the development. 
(4)  Construction on these types of projects shall not be started until the final plat is fully approved and recorded. 
17.28.050 - Common interest community plat processing. 
    Creation of common interest communities shall be in conformance with the subdivision provisions of this title. The planning commission may waive certain required exhibits for common interest communities rendered unnecessary because the request creates no greater impacts on town services than the existing allowed uses. For such subdivisions, the town is primarily concerned with land use, as pertaining to suitable design of the development evidenced by the plot plan. The plot plan will be reviewed and must be approved by the town council in place of a final plat and will be referred to as a final plat hereinafter. Additional drawings, declarations and other documents not subject to town review are necessary to comply with the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Sections 38-33.3-101, et. seq., C.R.S. At the developer's request, the final plat can be held for recording until other associated documents are also ready for recording, but no longer than six months. 
Chapter 17.32 - VACATING SUBDIVISIONS 

17.32.010 - Petitions for vacating. 
    Requests to vacate all or a portion of a recorded subdivision shall be in the form of a petition approved by and filed with the planning department for review. 
17.32.020 - Title reports-Notices. 
(a)  The petitioner for vacation of a recorded subdivision shall, at their expense, provide a current title report provided by a licensed Colorado title insurance company showing the names of all surface owners and lienholders for all affected properties, as they appear in the records in the county clerk and recorder's office. 
(b)  The planning commission and town council shall consider the petition at a public hearing held at a regular meeting. Public notice shall be given, at the petitioner's expense, as follows: 
(1)  Publish three times beginning at least 30 days prior to the scheduled hearing in a general circulation newspaper within the town. Such notice shall include the petitioner's desire to vacate the recorded subdivision, with an invitation to comment, and the time and place of the public hearing at which it will be considered. 
(2)  The same notice along with a vicinity map shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than 30 days prior to the meeting to all owners and lienholders of record within the subdivision that is the subject of the petition. 
(3)  The same notice along with a vicinity map shall be sent to all owners within 300 feet of the outer perimeter of the subdivision to be vacated by certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than 30 days prior to the meeting, as ownership is indicated in the county tax assessor's records. A printout must be obtained from said county records showing current owner's names address, and legal description of property and must be turned over to the town clerk. 
(c)  The petitioner shall provide written approval by notarized signature of 100 percent of all owners and equitable and legal lienholders of the property for which the subdivision vacation is requested. Such approval is not required for properties within the subdivision for which the recorded plat will remain applicable. Such approval by owners and lienholders shall be in a form approved by the town. 
17.32.030 - Taxes. 
    The petitioner shall provide a current tax certificate from the county treasurer indicating all taxes are currently paid and up to date on all the properties to be vacated. 
17.32.040 - Conditions. 
(a)  The approval of a subdivision vacation shall be dependent upon the holders of all easements on, over or under the property for which the vacation is requested which were granted by the current plat vacating or conveying to the petitioner all interest in such easements, or petitioner consenting in writing and granting replacement easements for the continuation of such easements. 
(b)  A petition to vacate all or a portion of a subdivision will not be approved if such vacation eliminates rights-of-way or easements servicing or potentially servicing adjoining properties, unless the petitioner provides for continuation of such rights-of-way or easements. 
(c)  At the discretion of the town council, if alternate means of access or easements crossing the subject property can be made to service adjoining properties the town may allow such alternatives in granting the petition for vacation. 
(d)  The approval of a subdivision vacation shall not create any negative impacts on special districts or property owners associations of which the subdivision is a part. 
Chapter 17.36 - VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 

17.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. 
17.36.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Site specific development plan. For all developments, the "site specific development plan" shall mean the final plat approved pursuant to the Town of Gypsum Subdivision Regulations and this chapter 17.36, provided, however, that if requested in writing by the landowner, the town council may designate a sketch plan, preliminary plan, or other approval to serve as the site specific development plan. A landowner requesting an approval to have the effect of creating vested rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended, must so request at least 30 days prior to the date on which said approval is to be considered. Failure to so request renders the approval not a "site specific development plan" and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created. 
17.36.030 - Notice and hearing. 
    No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing for which public notice has been given. Such notice may, at the option of the town, be combined with the notice given for other public hearings regarding the final plat and/or zoning of the subdivision. 
17.36.040 - Approval-Effective date-Amendments. 
    A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of approval by the town council of such site specific development plan. In the event amendments to the site specific development plan are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the town council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(Ord 2014-14) 
17.36.045 - Extension and reinstatement of vested property rights. 
(a)  An owner of real property that has received vested property rights pursuant to this chapter 17.36 may request an extension, or reinstatement if the vested property rights have been expired for not more than six years, of the vested property rights by the town council. Such request shall be made in writing to the town planning department at least 30 days prior to the date on which said approval is to be considered by the town council. The request shall be considered at a public hearing before the town council for which notice has been provided pursuant to section 17.36.030 of the Code. Reinstatement or extension of vested property rights shall be by action of the town council, either by ordinance or resolution, consistent with the type of approval which granted the original vested property rights. 
(b)  Vested property rights may only be extended or reinstated if the subdivider is in compliance with all obligations to and agreements with the town, the property and subdivider have no outstanding or delinquent taxes, assessments or fees, and the town determines that the original site specific development plan is still viable. If those requirements are met, the town shall then consider all relevant circumstances when deciding whether to extend or reinstate vested property rights, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The size and phasing of the development; 
(2)  Economic cycles; 
(3)  Market conditions; 
(4)  The ability of such extension or reinstatement of vested rights to stimulate economic growth; and 
(5)  The likelihood of the landowner to secure investment for development of the property within the extended or reinstated vesting period. 
(c)  The town council may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, the extension or reinstatement of vested rights, or approve the extension or reinstatement of only a portion of the vested rights. 
(d)  Any extended or reinstated vesting period shall not exceed three years. The approval date shall be the effective date of approval by the town council. A property may receive no more than two extensions or reinstatements of vested property rights. 
(e)  The applicant seeking an extension or reinstatement of vested property rights shall pay all costs occasioned by the town as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, hearings and review by consultants. 
17.36.050 - Notice of approval. 
    Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: 
"Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of the use approved, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than 14 days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
17.36.060 - Payment costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this regulation, the applicant seeking for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned by the town as a result of the site specific development plan review including publication of notices, hearings, and review by consultants. 
17.36.070 - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this regulation pertaining to the development and use of the property. 
17.36.080 - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this section is intended to create any vested property right, but is only intended to implement the provision of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this section shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
Chapter 17.38 - SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION 

17.38.010 - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that whenever there is a subdivision of land or other proposed land use that requires approval by the town for residential use or partial residential use, the owner of the land shall reserve and dedicate land for school needs generated by the proposed residential use. It is the purpose of this chapter to require the dedication of sites and land areas for schools or the payment of fees in lieu thereof or both to fulfill such needs. 
17.38.020 - School land dedication or cash in lieu thereof. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer of land in each residential subdivision or any portion of subdivision or land which is intended for residential use, shall allocate and convey sites and land areas for school facilities when such are reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents thereof, by the application of the formulas set forth below: 
Single family and duplex or primary secondary: 
Number of units x .014495 = dedication requirement in acres. 
Multi-family: 
Number of units x .002676 = dedication requirement in acres. 
(b)  When the Eagle County School District RE50J determines that sites and land areas for school facilities are not reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents thereof, the council, upon the recommendations of the school district, shall require, in lieu of a conveyance of land, the payment in cash by the subdivider or developer to the town for the school district of an amount equal to the fair market value of such sites and land areas for schools. The expenditure of any moneys in lieu of a conveyance of land collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for acquisition, development, or expansion of public school sites in the town or for capital facilities planning, site acquisition, or school site capital outlay purposes that are reasonably necessary to the future residents of the dwelling units for which the contribution of cash in lieu of land dedication was paid. Contributions of cash in lieu of land dedications shall be subject to the requirement of  29-1-803, et seq., C.R.S. and shall not constitute revenue of the town under the provisions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. Such dedications, conveyances, or payments shall be deemed exempt from the town's calculation of fiscal year spending under Article X, Section 20(2)(e) of the Colorado Constitution as "collections for another government." 
(c)  Fair market value shall mean the current fair market value of unimproved land suitable for residential use in the Town of Gypsum. The determination of the fair market value on a per acre basis shall be made by the school district and communicated to the town in writing at least 20 days prior to any public hearing concerning the preliminary plan for a subdivision or planned unit development by the planning and zoning commission. If the subdivider or developer does not accept such determination of fair market value by the school district, it may submit a report by a qualified appraiser. If one is submitted, the council shall review the report and determine the fair market value of the land and the amount of the payment of moneys in lieu of conveyance of such land to the school district that shall be due, which determination shall be final. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the payment of monies in lieu of school land dedication, the town shall transfer the monies to the school district. Upon request, the school district shall provide an accounting to the town of all expended monies collected pursuant to this chapter. 
17.38.030 - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply only to land annexed to the Town of Gypsum after June 1, 1994. The town council hereby finds and determines that adequate school sites have been dedicated to serve all land located within the town on that date. 
17.38.040 - Town exempted. 
    Lands owned by the town are exempted from the requirements of this chapter. 
Chapter 17.40 - MISCELLANEOUS 

17.40.010 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these subdivision regulations the following criteria shall govern: 
(1)  Whenever both a provision of these subdivision regulations and any provision in another law, resolution, regulation, rule, or ordinance contains restrictions covering the same subject matter, the more restrictive or higher standard shall be enforced. 
(2)  Rules of construction. The particular controls the general. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the plural include the singular, unless the context clearly indicated otherwise. 
(3)  These subdivision regulations shall not abrogate or annul any plat, easement, covenant, or agreement of record prior to the effective date of acceptance by the town planning commission and/or the town council. 
(4)  Nothing in these subdivision regulations is meant to give the planning commission veto power of any kind over the town council. The subdivider may submit a preliminary plan or final plat that has been rejected by the planning commission to the town council for a final decision. 
17.40.020 - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the provisions of these subdivision regulations shall be severable as set forth below: 
(1)  If any provision of these subdivision regulations is declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision or provisions which are expressly stated in said decision to be invalid. Such decision shall not affect, impair, or nullify these subdivision regulations as a whole and the unaffected regulations shall continue in full force and effect. 
(2)  If the application of any provision of these subdivision regulations to any tract of land is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared that the effect of such decision shall be limited to only the tract of land immediately involved in such proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered, and such decision shall not otherwise impact these regulations as a whole or the application thereof to any other tract of land. 
Chapter 17.50 - FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE IMPACT FEES 

17.50.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this section to: 
(1)  Adopt a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth-related costs incurred to provide for new and expanded fire protection and emergency medical services and facilities made necessary by expanded population and economic activity levels. The town desires to adopt a fee structure to insure that facilities and equipment needed to support new development meet or exceed the adopted LOS standards provided in chapter 13.24, G.M.C., for fire protection and emergency medical services. 
(2)  Ensure that the fees established by this chapter are based upon, and do not exceed, the cost of providing additional capital improvements necessitated by new land developments for which the fees are levied. 
(3)  Implement the methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for, and cost of, additional capital improvements, as contained in the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District's Study of Fiscal Impact, dated September, 1999, and the Western Eagle County Ambulance District's Study of Fiscal Impact, dated September, 1999 and the Gypsum Fire Protection District's Study of Fiscal Impact dated March 2000, and as such studies may be updated. 
(4)  Regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a roughly proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide adequate fire protection and emergency medical services within the Town of Gypsum. 
(5)  Assure that the system of fees implemented herein will be linked to an implementable capital improvements program designed to provide the facilities and equipment for which the fees are imposed. 
17.50.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Capital improvement includes fire protection or emergency medical service planning, preliminary architectural and engineering services, architectural and engineering design studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements and off-site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities; the construction of buildings and facilities; and the purchase of fire suppression or emergency medical apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useable life of at least three years, necessary to adequately protect and defend new development and its inhabitants, while maintaining the current ISO rating and LOS for the land being developed. "Capital improvements" do not include periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and equipment, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
    Developer is a subdivider or developer as defined by section 17.08.170 that commences a land development activity, requiring the availability of additional fire protection services and which requires a development approval. 
    Development approval means the approval following the effective date of this section of any final subdivision plat except lot lines adjustments pursuant to chapter 17.20, a zoning variance pursuant to chapter 18.52, or a special use pursuant to chapter 18.46. 
    Emergency medical services means the provision of services engaged in providing initial emergency medical assistance, including, but not limited to, the treatment of trauma and burns and respiratory, circulatory, and obstetrical emergencies, the provision of advanced life support services, and the transportation of sick, disabled, or injured persons to and from facilities providing medical services. 
    Fee means a fire protection service impact fee or an emergency service medical impact fee established by this chapter. 
    Fire protection means the prevention and extinguishment of fire, the protection of life and property from fire, and the enforcement of municipal, county, district and state fire prevention codes. 
    ISO means insurance services organization. 
    Land development activity requiring additional fire protection services" means any activity requiring a development approval that requires additional capital improvements. When a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use requires development approval, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
    LOS means level of service for fire protection or emergency medical services as established by chapter 13.24, G.M.C. 
17.50.030 - Imposition of impact fees. 
    Any person who seeks approval of a land development activity requiring additional fire protection or emergency medical service is required to pay a fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
17.50.040 - Fee amount. 
(a)  Fire protection service impact fee. At the option of the developer, the amount of the fire protection service impact fee may be determined in accordance with the following year 2010 fee schedule, as adjusted for subsequent years as further provided in this chapter: 
(1)  For development activities within the Greater Eagle Fire Protection District: 
Use Fee Residential $1,144.59/dwelling unit Commercial, except temporary and extended stay lodging facilities $572.29/1,000 sq. ft. Industrial $572.29/1,000 sq. ft. Temporary and extended stay lodging facilities $1,430.74/1,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  For development activities within the Gypsum Fire Protection District: 
Use Fee Residential $962.66 per unit Commercial, except temporary and extended stay lodging facilities $481.33/1,000 sq. ft. Industrial $481.33/1,000 sq. ft. Temporary and extended stay lodging $1,203.32/1,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  Emergency medical service impact fee. At the option of the developer, the amount of the emergency medical service impact fee may be determined in accordance with the following year 2010 fee schedule, as adjusted for subsequent years as further provided in this chapter: 
Use Fee Residential $240.97/dwelling unit Commercial, except temporary and extended stay lodging facilities $120.48/1,000 sq. ft. Industrial $120.48/1,000 sq. ft. Temporary and extended stay lodging facilities $301.21/1,000 sq. ft.  
(c)  Criteria. In calculating the fee amount, the following criteria shall be applied: 
(1)  Fees for commercial and industrial uses are calculated by dividing the total square footage by 1,000 and multiplying by the above fee amount. Example: Retail store of 3,600 square feet divided by 1,000 = 3.6 x (fee amount) = (total) fee owed. 
(2)  If the development approval requested is for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined through using the applicable schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
(3)  For applications for an amendment or change to a development approval previously obtained, but not constructed, the amount of the fee is the difference between the fee applicable to the amended application and any amount previously paid pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, expansion or modification of an existing use which requires a development approval, the fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
(5)  If for any reason, the amount of the fee cannot be calculated at the time of development approval, such as for subdivisions containing unknown nonresidential development, the town may defer computation and payment of all or a part of the fee until approval of building permits, or the town may require that an estimated fee be paid. If an estimated fee is paid, any underpayment shall be recovered at the time of building permit approval. In the event an over-payment is made, such over-payment shall be refunded, without interest, within 30 days following the date the fee can be completely computed. 
(d)  Fiscal impact and fee calculation study. In lieu of computation of the fee in accordance with subsections (a) or (b) above, the developer may prepare and submit to the town planner a site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study for the development approval which is requested. The site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats established by the town planner following consultation with the applicable fire protection or emergency medical service provider. The fiscal impact study submitted shall show the basis upon which the site-specific fee calculation was made. The site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study shall be prepared and presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The town planner shall consider the documentation submitted by the developer but is not required to accept such documentation reasonably deemed to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the developer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable site-specific fiscal impact and fee calculation study is not presented, the developer shall pay the fee based upon the schedule shown in subsections (a) or (b) above. Determinations made by the town planner pursuant to this paragraph may be appealed to the town council by filing a written request with the town manager within ten days of the town planner's determination. Following the submittal of such request, the town board shall hold a public hearing to determine the amount of the fee which shall be paid prior to the development approval. 
17.50.050 - Time for payment of fee. 
    A developer requesting approval of a land development activity requiring additional fire protection or emergency medical services shall pay the fee, in the case of a subdivision approval, prior to the recording of a final plat for residential units. In the case of a special use permit, uses determined by square footage, or zoning variance, the developer shall pay the fee prior to the issuance of the permit, except as otherwise provided in this chapter when the total fee cannot be calculated. 
17.50.060 - Use of fees. 
(a)  All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred to the applicable fire protection or emergency medical service provider within 60 days following payment to the town in accordance with the applicable intergovernmental agreement. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for in the manner required by section 29-1-801, et. seq., C.R.S., and other applicable law. 
(b)  Fees shall be used exclusively for capital improvements. 
(c)  No fees shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance, personnel costs or operational expenses. 
(d)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are used for the advanced provision of capital improvements for which fees may be collected and expended, such fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments. 
(e)  The town shall be entitled to retain up to two percent of the fees it collects as an administrative fee to offset the cost of administering this chapter. 
17.50.070 - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  If a development approval expires without commencement of construction or development, the developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the fee paid as a condition for development approval, except when the fee has been expended or encumbered in advance of and anticipation of development, and except that the town shall retain two percent of the fee to offset a portion of its costs of collection and refunding. The developer must submit an application for such refund to the town manager within 30 days of the expiration of the development approval. The town shall have no obligation to refund any fee that has been expended or encumbered by the applicable fire protection or emergency medical service provider in advance of anticipation of the development for which the development approval expired. 
(b)  Any fire protection impact fee not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten years from the date the fee was paid by a developer shall, upon application of the then current landowner to the town manager, be returned to the landowner with interest earned on the fee, within 180 days of the expiration of such ten-year period. Provided, however, the applicable fire protection service provider may, for good cause shown, request the town to extend the ten-year period of time specified in this paragraph. Such request shall be determined at a public hearing held by the town council. The town council, in its discretion, for good cause shown, may extend such period of time for an additional period as the town council deems reasonable and necessary. 
17.50.080 - Credit for improvements. 
    Upon approval by the town council, any developer obligated to pay a fee shall receive a credit against the amounts due or to become due for capital improvements installed, purchased and paid for by such developer when such capital improvements offset the need or amount of the fee that would otherwise be required. 
17.50.090 - Exemption from payment of fee. 
    The town council may, by resolution, grant an exemption from all or any part of the fee upon a finding that such waiver is in the best interest of the public by encouraging activities that provide significant social, economic or cultural benefits. 
17.50.100 - Lien for unpaid fees. 
    All fees shall constitute a prior, perpetual lien upon each lot or parcel of land within a development from the due date thereof, until paid. If such fee is not paid when due, in addition to any other means provided by law, the town clerk shall certify such delinquent fee to the Treasurer of Eagle County and the fee shall be collected in the same manner as though it were part of the taxes. The town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates or other approvals for any land for which payment of fees is delinquent. 
17.50.110 - Adjustment and review of fee. 
    The fee amount shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows: 
(1)  The fee shall be adjusted annually for inflation, effective January 15 of each year. The adjustment shall be based upon the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index. 
(2)  The town manager shall, annually, in conjunction with the presentation of the town's proposed budget, recommend any further adjustments to the fee, following consultation with the applicable fire protection or emergency medical service provider. 
Chapter 17.60 - LAND USE REVIEW FEES 

17.60.010 - Land use review fees. 
    Each submission to the town shall be accompanied by a fee and deposit as described in the schedule below. If the actual out-of-pocket costs of Gypsum are greater than the amount of the deposit paid, the town council will condition the granting of the submission contingent upon the payment of the additional out-of-pocket costs incurred by Gypsum. The fees and deposits required by this subsection are intended to reimburse Gypsum for its cost of reviewing, considering and processing the submission, and are in addition to any other fees, charges, impositions or requirements that Gypsum may impose as a condition of granting the submission. 
  
Land Use Schedule of Fees 
Fee       + Deposit Sketch Plan Residential (less than 20 units) $500.00 (plus $20.00 per unit) $3,000.00 Residential (more than 20 units) $1,000.00 (plus $20.00 per unit) $5,000.00 Commercial/Industrial (0-5 acres) $500.00 $3,000.00 Commercial/Industrial (more than 5 acres) $1,000.00 $5,000.00 Mixed Use (0-5 acres) $500.00 $3,000.00 Mixed Use (more than 5 acres) $1,000.00 $5,000.00 Preliminary Plan Residential (less than 20 units) $1,000.00 (plus $20.00 per unit) $5,000.00 Residential (more than 20 units) $2,000.00 (plus $20.00 per unit) $7,000.00 Commercial/Industrial (0-5 acres) $1,000.00 $5,000.00 Commercial/Industrial (more than 5 acres) $2,000.00 $10,000.00 Mixed Use (0-5 acres) $1,000.00 $7,000.00 Mixed Use (more than 5 acres) $2,000.00 $10,000.00 Final Plat Residential (any number of units) $500.00 (plus $10.00 per unit) $3,000.00 Commercial/Industrial (any no. of acres) $500.00 $5,000.00 Mixed Use (any number of acres) $500.00 $5,000.00 Amended, Exemption, Condo, Townhome Plat Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $200.00 (plus $50.00/unit/lot) $3,000.00 PUD Amendment Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $250.00 $3,000.00 Lot Line Adjustment or Dissolution Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $250.00 $1,000.00 Location and Extent $250.00 $500.00 Annexation Residential/Comm./Ind./Mixed Use (less than 50 acres) $1,250.00 $15,000.00 Residential/Comm./Ind./Mixed Use (more than 50 acres) $2,500.00 $40,000.00 Zoning (Rezoning or New Zoning) Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $250.00 $250.00 Zoning Variance Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $250.00 $250.00 Conditional Use Permit Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $150.00 Not unless 
required; 
see below Special Use Permit Residential/Commercial/Industrial/Mixed $250.00 $500.00 1041 Permit $500.00 $500.00 Other Land Uses To be determined (TBD) TBD Payment of fees:  1. Town manager, or their authorized designee, has authority to increase or decrease the deposit amount required according to project complexity and estimated costs required for outside services, including but not limited to, general counsel and water attorney fees, engineering fees, plat check fees, recording fees, and publication fees.  2. Deposits may be required to be increased prior to proceeding with processing of application if it is determined costs will exceed said deposit.  3. All fees incurred above deposit amounts are still the responsibility of the applicant as required by the Gypsum Municipal Code even if approval is denied or application is withdrawn.  4. Permits fees cover town planning staff review time and all planning commission and town council hearings.  5. Deposits cover items, including but not limited to, town engineer review times, outside engineer review times, general counsel and water attorney fees, publication notices, postage/mailing notices, plat check fees, updates to GIS system, and updates to the town zoning map.  6. Any outstanding fees due to the town must be paid before any additional land use applications will be accepted.  7. Combined submissions, such as annexation and sketch plans, or preliminary and final, shall be accompanied by a combined fee.  
Chapter 17.70 - NOTICE AND POSTING 

17.70.010 - Notice requirements. 
    Certain subdivision actions require a public hearing, notice of which shall be given in the manner and within the times set forth in the following notice requirements. 
Type of Action Hearing 
Requirement Notice in 
Newspaper Service or 
Mailing Posting Sketch Plan Planning Commission 10 days 10 days 10 days Preliminary Plan Planning Commission and Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days Final Plat Planning Commission and Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days Minor Plat Amendment Planning Commission 10 days 10 days Optional Major Plat Amendment Planning Commission and Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days Vacating Subdivision Planning Commission and Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days Vesting Property Rights Planning Commission and Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days  
17.70.020 - Posting. 
(a)  Responsibility. Posting of a sign on the property giving notice of any public hearing shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Staff shall advise the applicant in writing within five business days of receipt of the application of this posting requirement and the location and number of signs required for the application. All signs must be prepared by or for the applicant at the applicant's expense. All signs must be posted on the property not less than ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing as set forth in section 17.70.010. The applicant must take a clear and distinct photograph of the sign(s) and submit the photograph(s) to the planning department immediately upon posting the property. No later than noon on Friday prior to the scheduled public hearing, the applicant shall present a certificate of posting in the following form to the planning department. 
(b)  Certificate of posting. 
Certificate of Posting 
    I hereby certify under oath that a sign (or signs (___)) was posted on the property known by street and number as _______ on _______, 20___, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing on the Application for _______ for this property as shown in the photograph(s) submitted in support of this Certificate as notice of this public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission/Town Council on _______, 20___, at ___ p.m. 
Dated this ___ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Applicant 
State of Colorado   ) 
)  ss. 
County of Eagle    ) 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of _______, 20    by ___________ as Applicant. 
    My commission expires ___________ 
___________ 
Notary Public 
Failure to present the certification of posting and submit the photograph(s) will result in a rescheduling of the public hearing and require a new posting of the property. 
(c)  Sign specifications. Applicants shall post notice by a sign not less than three feet by four feet in size erected on posts no lower than four feet above natural grade and legible from the nearest dedicated public right-of-way. The title of the sign shall be in letters not less than five inches high. Said sign shall be removed by the applicant within two weeks of the conclusion of the public hearing. A sample format for the sign is as follows: 

Appendices 

Appendix A - SAMPLE STATEMENTS FOR PLATS 
DEDICATION LANGUAGE FOR PUBLIC STREETS 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That ___________ being owner or lienholder of the following described real property, to wit: 
(((Insert complete legal description of the platted area and total acreage))) 
and has caused the same to be surveyed, laid out, subdivided, and designated as (subdivider name) Subdivision and has caused this plat to be made, filed, and further declares: 
1.  The street rights-of-way and easements shown hereon are dedicated to the public forever for the purpose of ingress & egress, vehicular movement, utility lines and facilities, drainage, and other public facilities as may be described hereon together with the right to construct, maintain, and operate such lines and facilities as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
(Insert any other appropriate dedicatory statements as necessary) 
DEDICATION LANGUAGE FOR PRIVATE STREETS 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That ___________ being owner or lienholder of the following described real property, to wit: 
(((Insert complete legal description of the platted area and total acreage))) 
has caused the same to be surveyed, laid out, subdivided, and designated as ___________(subdivider name) Subdivision and has caused this plat to be made, filed, and further declared: 
1.  Permanent easements are hereby dedicated in all streets, roads, and alleys ("streets") identified on this plat as follows: (1) an easement to be held by the Town of Gypsum for the use of the surface of such streets by the Town for municipal purposes and during emergency circumstances and for access by emergency service agencies and providers, including but not limited to access by state and local police, fire, rescue, and medical service providers; and (2) a subsurface easement to be held by the Town of Gypsum for the benefit of the Town of Gypsum and for the benefit of public utility service providers (including but not limited to gas, electric, sewer, water and telecommunications) for the purpose of access to and construction, installation, maintenance and repair of public utilities and utilities improvements, together with an associated surface access and use easement for such purposes. Subject to the foregoing dedicated easements, all streets identified on this plat are hereby dedicated in fee simple ownership to the _______[homeowner association] or its successor in interest for the private use of the property owners and residents of the _______[subdivision], who shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance thereof, including surface and drainage maintenance and snowplowing in compliance with the standards of the Town of Gypsum for equivalent public streets located within the Town. 
WAIVER: 
In consideration of the approval of this subdivision plat, the owner and lienholder hereby waive any and all claims of damages against Town of Gypsum occasioned by the alteration of land surfaces to conform to this subdivision plat. 
In witness thereof, this instrument is executed this ___ day of _______, ___. 
(Note: Signature must be properly notarized. The wording above will usually need to be altered for condominium approvals.) 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
I, (surveyor's name) , a duly Registered Professional Surveyor in the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that this plat of (subdivision name) Subdivision was prepared under my direction, truly and correctly represents a field survey of the same, and was monumented in accordance with sections 38-51-101, et seq., C.R.S. (seal) 
___________ 
(surveyor's name and license number) 
PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE 
This plat and the statements hereon are approved this ___ day of _______, ___ by the Planning Commission of Town of Gypsum, Colorado. This approval does not extend to the design of utilities, sewage disposal, roads, or any other service facility. 
By:  (signature)        
Chairman 
TOWN COUNCIL CERTIFICATE 
This plat and the statements hereon are conditionally approved, pending completion of specified improvements, this ___ day of ___________, ___ by the Town Council of Town of Gypsum, Colorado. This approval does not extend to the design of utilities, sewage disposal, roads, or any other service facility and does not constitute acceptance of roads, utilities, or services by the Town for maintenance or operation. 
By:  (signature)        
Mayor 
APPROVAL TO RECORD 
Having ascertained that the conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed on this ___ day of ___________, ___ the Town Council approves this plat for recording by the County Clerk and Recorder. 
By:  (signature)        
Mayor 
Appendix B - GUIDELINE FOR NAMING SUBDIVISION STREETS 
    Road - This suffix should be applied to roads comprising the basic network throughout the Town. 
    Boulevard - This suffix should be used sparingly and applied only to principal arteries through a subdivision. 
    Avenue - This suffix may be used broadly, generally "avenues" should run approximately at right angles to "streets". 
    Street - This suffix may be used broadly. Generally "streets" should run approximately at right angles to "Avenues". 
    Drive - This suffix should be used for a minor roadway starting at one roadway and ending at another. 
    Circle - This suffix should be used for roadways that start and end at the same roadway. 
    Place - This suffix should be used for relatively long roadways ending in a cul-de-sac or a turnaround.* 
    Court - This suffix should be used for relatively short roadways ending in a cul-de-sac or a turnaround.* 
    ** These suffixes should not be used where the turnaround or cul-de-sac is temporary and the roadway is expected to be extended in the future. 
    Mall, Terrace, Lane, and other suffixes are generally not appropriate and should not be used. 
    A logical, systematic pattern of street names should be developed for each subdivision or development to assist in locating a desired street. For instance, names starting with progressive letter of the alphabet might be assigned to streets taking off from the principal streets running through a subdivision. Prefixes of North, South, East, and West could be helpful in many circumstances. A name assigned to a "street" or "avenue" should not be used for a "court" or "drive". 
    Street names must be sent to Eagle County 911 Services for authorization. Duplicate names or names not distinctive enough from others within Eagle County will be required to be changed. Address numbers shall be numbered based on distance from nearest main intersection. 
Appendix C - [LIGHT TRESPASS DIAGRAMS] 

Appendix D - [LIGHTING FIXTURE TYPES] 

Title 18 - ZONING 
  
Chapter 18.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

18.01.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    This zoning code is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado ("town") and to accomplish a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the town consistent with its established character. To these ends, the zoning code is intended to provide for adequate air, light, sanitary drainage, and aesthetics; to secure safety from fire, flood, accumulation of snow and other dangerous conditions; to promote safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation and thereby lessen traffic congestion, accidents and maintenance costs; to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and protect the Eagle River, Gypsum Creek and other streams, forests, open space, natural landscapes and other amenities conducive to the establishment of human ambience and preservation of property values; and to otherwise provide for the growth, development and maintenance of an orderly, efficient and viable community. 
    The Town of Gypsum recognizes that zoning is ultimately a local and municipal matter, and intends with this title to supersede within the territorial limits and other jurisdiction of the town any general law of the State of Colorado in conflict herewith. This zoning code is enacted to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town and for such purpose to divide the town into zone districts of such number, shape, location and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and to provide for administration, enforcement, amendment and judicial review. 
(Ord. 2010-01) 
18.01.020 - Construction. 
    The provisions of this title shall be liberally construed as remedial provisions in order to eliminate existing conditions inconsistent with the provisions of this title. 
18.01.030 - Compliance. 
    The zoning code applicable to each zone district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class of use. Except as provided in this title, the use of any parcel shall be in compliance with all of the zoning code. 
Chapter 18.02 - DEFINITIONS 

18.02.010 - Construction and usage. 
    When used in the land use code, words used in the present tense include the future, and vice versa; words used in the singular include the plural, and vice versa. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. Whenever reference is made to any portion of the land use code or zoning code, the reference applies to all subsequent amendments to the land use code or zoning code. 
18.02.020 - Generally. 
    Unless otherwise indicated by the context of their use, when used in the land use code, the words and phrases set forth in this chapter shall have the specific meaning as herein defined. 
18.02.030 - Accessory building or accessory use. 
    Accessory building or accessory use means a building or use that is: 
(1)  Located on the same parcel as the principal building or use to which it is accessory; 
(2)  Clearly incidental, subordinate, secondary and devoted to the principal building or use; the floor area of any accessory building shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the principal building; 
(3)  Customarily found in conjunction with the principal building or use; and 
(4)  Not designated in any table of uses as being prohibited in the zone district in which it is located. 
18.02.040 - Accessory dwelling unit. 
    Accessory dwelling unit ("ADU") means a subordinate residential unit located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit and may either be attached or detached, including but not limited to above an attached or detached garage, integrated into any floor of the primary residential unit, or a separately detached unit on the side of or behind the main dwelling structure. Accessory dwelling units typically have separate bathrooms, eating facilities, living areas, and entrances from the primary unit and may or may not have separate utility services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04,  3, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-04,  3, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former  18.02.040 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  18.02.040 pertained to accessory dwelling. 
18.02.050 - Adjacent. 
    Adjacent as used in describing parcels or uses means the parcels or uses touching any part of the subject parcel or use. If an adjacent parcel or use is a public road, trail, right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, easement, stream or river, the adjacent parcel or use shall also be the parcel or use on the opposite side of such intervening parcel or use. 
18.02.060 - Adjacent property owner. 
    Adjacent property owner means an owner of record of any real property abutting and within 300 feet of the subject property. 
18.02.070 - Adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment which conducts as a principal use of the premises or as a significant or substantial adjunct to another use of the premises, the sale, rental, display or other offering of live entertainment, dancing, or material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on depicting, exhibiting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Adult bookstore means any establishment which sells or rents adult materials including, but not limited to: books, magazines, newspapers, movie films, slides or other photographic or written material, or any visual representation, video tapes and/or devices. 
(2)  Adult cabaret, restaurant or place of business means a cabaret, restaurant or place of business which features topless and/or bottomless waitresses, waiters, dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
(3)  Adult hotel or motel means any hotel or motel in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
(4)  Adult mini-motion picture theater means any fully enclosed theater with a capacity of less than 50 persons in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
(5)  Adult motion picture arcade means any establishment in which the primary or principal attraction is the presentation of adult material by image-producing devices, typically limited to viewing by five or fewer persons per device. 
(6)  Adult motion picture theater means any fully enclosed theatre with a capacity of 50 or more persons in which the presentation of adult material is the primary or principal attraction. 
(7)  Adult novelty store means any establishment which as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade sells or rents adult materials including, but not limited to: apparel, bakery products, novelties, gifts, or any visual representation, and/or devices. 
18.02.080 - Agriculture. 
    Agriculture means farming or ranching uses, including buildings for shelter of farm or ranch animals or property primarily employed in farming or ranching, including the grazing or raising of livestock (except in feedlots). An agricultural use may include those activities necessary to operate the agricultural business, however, it does not include processing of agricultural products, which shall only be permitted pursuant to the underlying zone district for the subject property. 
18.02.085 - Alcoholic beverage and medical marijuana operations. 
    Alcoholic beverage and medical marijuana operations means the manufacturing, production, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages, except as provided in Section 12-47-106, C.R.S., and the cultivation, manufacturing, distributing or selling of medical marijuana, except by a patient registered pursuant to Section 25-1-5-106, C.R.S., and in compliance with Section 14, Article XVIII, of the Colorado Constitution and Article 43.3, Title 12, et seq., C.R.S. 
(Ord. 2010-21) 
18.02.090 - Alteration. 
    Alteration, as applied to a building, means any change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy or use. 
18.02.100 - Amphitheater. 
    Amphitheater means a theater, including outdoor theaters, arenas and band shells for outdoor music concerts, circuses, carnivals, rodeos and productions that may or may not be lighted. 
18.02.110 - Automotive sales and repair, major. 
    Automotive sales and repair, major means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale, servicing, maintenance or repair of commercial and heavy truck oriented vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical, farm or construction equipment, including paint, body and fender and major engine and engine part overhaul, provided it is conducted within a completely enclosed building. Such use shall not include the retail sale of fuel, gasoline or petroleum products. 
18.02.120 - Automotive sales and repair, minor. 
    Automotive sales and repair, minor means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale, servicing, maintenance or repair of passenger and light truck oriented motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune ups and transmission work, car washing, detailing, polishing or the like, provided it is conducted in a completely enclosed building. 
18.02.130 - Bar or tavern. 
    Bar or tavern means a licensed establishment providing or dispensing fermented malt beverages, and/or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises and in which the sale of food products such as sandwiches or light snacks is secondary. 
18.02.140 - Bed and breakfast. 
    Bed and breakfast means a lodging establishment operating as an overnight guest facility for a fee in a private residence or a portion thereof, which is occupied by the owner or a resident manager. Kitchen and dining facilities serve only residents and overnight guests and are not operated in the manner of a commercial restaurant, and facilities are not used for any commercial activities such as catered private parties or receptions, retail sales or similar activities. 
18.02.150 - Building. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. For purposes of the zoning code, the term "building" refers to structures that although movable, are designed primarily to remain in one place once constructed or attached to the ground or a foundation; mobile homes are not buildings; however, manufactured homes are considered buildings. 
18.02.160 - Bulk storage of dangerous materials. 
    Bulk storage of dangerous materials means the bulk storage of dangerous materials for delivery and sale, including but not limited to petroleum products, LPG (wholesale), natural gas, fertilizer, methane, or other volatile, explosive, hazardous or dangerous materials that may create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-13, 9-24-13) 
18.02.165 - Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). 
    Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas means the bulk storage of LPG used for retail purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 2013-13, 9-24-13) 
18.02.170 - Child care center. 
    Child care center means a licensed facility, by whatever name known, which is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of five or more children who are 18 years of age or younger and who are not related to the owner, operator or manager, whether the facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated educational purposes, but specifically excluding a family child care home as defined in this zoning code. Operating a child care center without proper licensure as required by the Colorado Child Care Licensing Act shall constitute a zoning violation. Reference: Section 26-6-102(1.5), C.R.S. 
18.02.180 - Code. 
    Code shall mean the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
18.02.190 - Common property. 
    Common property means a parcel of land, an area of water, or a combination of land and water, including easements, private streets, roads and parking areas and trails and pedestrian areas, within the site designated for a planned unit development (PUD) designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and owners of the planned unit development. 
18.02.200 - Conditional use permit. 
    Conditional use permit means a permit that must be obtained prior to initiating certain uses as noted in the tables of uses for various zone districts contained herein. It also refers to a permit that must be obtained prior to initiating a use which imposes no greater impacts on the need for services and adjacent properties and is consistent with a permitted use, but which is not listed as a permitted use in the tables of uses. Conditional use permits are issued administratively and may contain conditions designed to minimize the adverse effects of the proposed use on neighboring properties. No notice or hearing is required prior to issuance of a conditional use permit. 
18.02.210 - Covenants. 
    Covenants means a private written agreement outlining regulations specific to a development. As private restrictions, they are not enforced by the town. In the event of conflict between the covenants and this zoning code, the zoning code controls. 
18.02.220 - Developable area. 
    Developable area means the area of a parcel that is capable of being receptive to construction without major grading, draining or flood plain alterations. Areas that would not be considered as developable include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Areas within a 100-year flood plain; 
(2)  Areas within any geological hazard zone; 
(3)  Areas where the slope is greater than 30 percent; 
(4)  Wetlands, as determined by the US Army Corps of Engineers; and 
(5)  Easement areas or designated setbacks. 
18.02.230 - Development plan. 
    Development plan means the written and graphical documents that detail the provisions for development of a planned unit development (PUD). These provisions may include, but need not be limited to, easements, covenants and restrictions relating to use; location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity of use or density of development; utilities, private and public streets, ways, roads, pedestrian areas, and parking facilities; common open space, and other public facilities. 
18.02.240 - Duplex. 
    Duplex means a dwelling designed for or used for two families, each family living as an independent housekeeping unit, in separate parts of the building. 
18.02.250 - Dwelling. 
    Dwelling means a building or mobile home used for human residential occupancy. 
18.02.260 - Dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family as an independent housekeeping unit, and having its own cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. 
18.02.270 - Easement. 
    Easement means a right to use land generally established in a real estate deed or on a recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for specified uses. 
18.02.280 - Family. 
    Family means: 
(1)  A single individual, doing his or her own cooking, and living upon the premises as an independent housekeeping unit; or 
(2)  A collective body of persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as an independent housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption, cohabitation, guardianship or employment as domestic servants; or 
(3)  A group of no more than four persons doing their own cooking and living together on the premises as an independent housekeeping unit, pursuant to a mutual housekeeping agreement, and having a least one bedroom for each such person, excepting therefrom a group occupying a lodge, group home, or hotel. 
    From time to time, the town council may adopt residential occupancy regulations limiting the number of occupants in a residence. Such regulations shall be enforced as provisions of this zoning code. 
18.02.290 - Family child care home. 
    Family child care home means a licensed facility for child care in a place of residence of a family or person for the purpose of providing less than 24-hour care for children under the age of 18 years who are not related to the head of such home. Operating a family child care home without proper licensure as required by the Colorado Child Care Licensing Act shall constitute a zoning violation. Reference: Section 26-6-102(4), C.R.S. 
18.02.300 - Floor area. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building, including habitable penthouses, attic space and basements, but not including vent shafts, courts, or uninhabitable areas below ground or in attics. 
18.02.310 - Front. 
    Front, when used in reference to a building or parcel, means the side providing the primary access, whether by public or private street, road or driveway. 
18.02.320 - Frontage. 
    Frontage means the length of the property line of a parcel which abuts a legally accessible street. 
18.02.330 - Funeral home. 
    Funeral home means a building or establishment used for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation, for the display of the deceased and/or for ceremonies or services related thereto, including cremation and the storage of caskets, funeral urns, funeral vehicles and other funeral supplies. 
18.02.340 - Gas station. 
    Gas station means any establishment, building, land area, premises or portion thereof, where gasoline and or other petroleum products or fuels are sold or where light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, brake services, tire services, transmission services and minor repairs may be conducted. 
18.02.350 - Group home, aged. 
    Group home, aged means an owner-occupied or nonprofit group home for the exclusive use of not more than eight persons 60 years of age or older and the appropriate staff. 
18.02.360 - Group home, developmentally disabled/mentally ill. 
    Group home, developmentally disabled/mentally ill means a group home, licensed by the state, for the exclusive use of not more than eight developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons and the appropriate staff. 
18.02.370 - Heavy industrial. 
    Heavy industrial means uses engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing process using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous conditions. Heavy industrial shall also mean solid waste or sanitary waste transfer stations, and recycling processing facilities. 
18.02.380 - Height. 
    Height means the average distance measured vertically from the mid-point between the eave and the ridgeline within the building footprint, on a proposed or existing roof or eave to the existing or finished grade (whichever is more restrictive) located directly below said mid-point. 
18.02.390 - Home occupation. 
    Home occupation means any occupation, trade or business carried on as a secondary use of property devoted primarily to residential use. 
18.02.400 - Hospital. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as an emergency room, laboratories, out-patient departments, rehabilitation departments, training and central service facilities and staff offices, medical office buildings or a satellite facility operated by a hospital located outside the Town of Gypsum. 
18.02.410 - Hostel. 
    Hostel means a lodging establishment with an owner, manager or staff member required to be present on the premises, that provides overnight accommodations and in which the guests may share bedrooms or dormitory facilities, bathrooms, a kitchen and a lounge. Such accommodations may be provided for a fee or in exchange for services by the guest at the facility. 
18.02.420 - Hotel/motel/lodging establishment. 
    Hotel/motel/lodging establishment means a building or group of associated buildings designed for occupancy as a temporary lodging place which is operated under a single management providing the occupants thereof the usual accommodation services and facilities. 
18.02.430 - Intermediate health care facility. 
    Intermediate health care facility means a health-related institution or establishment planned, organized, operated and maintained to provide facilities and services which are supportive, restorative or preventative in nature, with related social care, to individuals who because of a physical or mental condition, or both, require care in an institutional environment but who do not have an illness, injury or disability for which regular medical care and 24-hour per day nursing services are required. 
18.02.440 - Land use code. 
    Land use code shall mean the provisions of Titles 15, 17, 18, 20 and 21 of the Code. 
18.02.445 - Light industrial. 
    Light industrial means uses engaged in the manufacturing, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales or distribution of such products. Light industrial shall also mean uses such as the manufacture of electronic instruments; preparation of food products; the operation, parking and maintenance of vehicles; pharmaceutical manufacturing; research and scientific laboratories or the like; and transport terminals (truck terminals, public works yard, container storage). Light industrial shall not include uses such as asphalt batch plants, mining and extracting industries, petrochemical industries, rubber refining, primary metal or related industries. 
18.02.450 - Lot. 
    Lot means a legally subdivided parcel of land which is recognized as a separate legal parcel for the purpose of transferring of legal title. 
18.02.460 - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage means the portion of a lot covered by a building or buildings including roof overhangs, covered porches, covered walkways or other similar covered areas. 
18.02.470 - Manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling that is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory after June 15, 1976; is not less than 12 feet in width and 32 feet in length; is built on a permanent chassis; and complies with regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Newly installed manufactured homes must be no older than five years at the time of installation on a vacant lot or if it is older than five years at the time of installation it must be replacing an older mobile or manufactured home and visually improving the existing location. (Ord. 2011-3) 
18.02.480 - Medical and dental offices and clinics. 
    Medical and dental offices and clinics means an establishment operated by one or more duly licensed members of the human health care professions including, but not limited to, physicians, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists and osteopaths, where patients are not lodged overnight but are admitted for examination and/or treatment. 
18.02.490 - Mobile home. 
    Mobile home means a structure that is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory prior to June 15, 1976; is not less than twelve feet in width and thirty-two feet in length; is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to required utilities; and complies with labeling certification compliance to the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, in effect at the time of manufacture. A mobile home is not a building, but shall be subject to regulations governing lot coverage and use, floor area, setbacks, height and occupancy limitations. 
18.02.495 - Modular home. 
    Modular home means a dwelling that is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory, is not built on a permanent chassis, and is constructed in conformance to the International Residential Code. 
18.02.500 - Multifamily. 
    Multifamily, when referring to a dwelling, means a building containing duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses, row houses, condominiums or apartments designed or used as two or more dwelling units, the total number of families in residence not exceeding the total number of dwelling units. 
18.02.510 - Nightclub. 
    Nightclub means a bar, tavern or restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and containing more than 100 square feet of dance floor area. 
18.02.520 - Nonconforming. 
    Nonconforming means a use, building, structure, lot, parcel or condition that was lawful when initiated, created or constructed, but which does not currently comply with the requirements of the land use code. 
18.02.530 - Nursing care facility. 
    Nursing care facility means a health institution or establishment planned, organized, operated and maintained to provide facilities and health services with related social care to inpatients who require regular medical care and 24-hour per day nursing services for illness, injury or disability, which meets the state nursing home licensing standards and the requirements in federal regulations for certification as a qualified provider of nursing facility services. Each patient shall be under the care of a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Colorado. The nursing services shall be organized and maintained to provide 24-hour per day nursing services under the direction of a registered nurse employed full time. 
18.02.540 - Official zoning district map. 
    Official zoning district map means the official zoning district map of the town, together with all ordinances adding to or amending the official zoning district map adopted from time to time by the town council. 
18.02.550 - Office. 
    Office means a building or portion of a building used for the transaction of administrative, executive, business, professional or clerical operations, such as offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, musicians, teachers, accountants, real estate agents, insurance agents, brokers, corporate offices, financial institutions, development companies, insurance companies, design companies, government offices and other similar businesses and professions and services where there is limited storage, sale or display of merchandise for retail sale on the premises accessory to the business, profession or services offered. 
18.02.560 - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking means the area on a parcel designed to accommodate a parked motor vehicle as an accessory use of the parcel. 
18.02.570 - Open space. 
    Open space means any specifically designated or dedicated parcel or portion thereof that may be used for park, agricultural, recreation or conservation opportunities. Construction within open space is limited to foot paths, bridges, irrigation structures, erosion protection devices, underground utilities, outdoor recreation facilities, and similar type uses, unless further restricted by conservation easement. Ownership of open space may be deeded to a property owner's association, dedicated to the public, or protected in other forms deemed acceptable to the town council. Indoor recreation facilities shall not be included in open space. 
18.02.580 - Open space, usable. 
    Usable open space means open space designed for use as common areas, including, but not limited to parks, recreation areas, gardens, paths, walkways and trails. The term shall not include space devoted to streets and parking and loading areas, areas with slopes greater than 30 percent, land under water, lands within critical wildlife habitat areas, lands within riparian areas and 100-year floodplains that are preserved as open space, unless specifically designated as usable open space by the town council because of its recreation, wildlife or other aesthetic value. 
18.02.585 - Outside storage. 
    Outside storage means the accumulation or storage of parts, appliances, materials, equipment and merchandise not kept within an approved structure; the storage of trailers, whether abandoned or used for business or commercial purposes, as an office, or for the storage of items; the overnight storage of inoperable motor vehicles, motor vehicles needing repair, or those which have had valid license plates or other identifying marks removed; the overnight storage of motor vehicles that have been left unattended or unmoved for more than seven days; and the storage of vehicles that are available for rent. "Outside storage" does not include vehicles for sale (including automobiles, ATV's, snowmobiles, recreational vehicles, motorcycles), the storage of materials within a garage or other fully enclosed structure, and the temporary display of outdoor seasonal merchandise for retail operations for no more than 12 consecutive weeks per year. Outside storage is prohibited, except by conditional use permits in the LI, HI and ID zone districts. All conditional use permits shall require the screening of any outside storage so that such items are not visible from any adjacent public street, alley, or sidewalk, or from the shared property line of abutting properties, in addition to any other site-specific conditions imposed by the town. 
(Ord. 2014-01) 
18.02.590 - Parcel. 
    Parcel means any separately described or conveyed parcel of land that has been created by conveyance, subdivision or otherwise, whether legally subdivided or not, and includes lots, tracts, parcels, outlots, and parcels designated by other names. 
18.02.600 - Park. 
    Park means a park equipped with improvements or facilities for particular leisure, pastime, and recreational use, such as tennis, basketball, swimming, baseball, batting cages, skateboard parks, soccer, football, horseshoes, ice skating, athletic fields, playground equipment, snow sledding, climbing, walking and other similar and related activities which may or may not be lighted. Parks are usually available to the use by the general public. 
18.02.610. - Person. 
    Person means any individual, entity, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, governmental entity, or informal association of the same. 
18.02.620 - Pet animal facility. 
    Pet animal facility means an establishment required to be licensed by the Colorado Department of Agriculture for the keeping of pet animals for the purpose of adoption, breeding, boarding, grooming, handling, selling, sheltering, trading, or otherwise transferring such animals. Reference: Pet Animal Care and Facilities Act, C.R.S.  35-80-101, et seq. 
18.02.630 - Planned unit development. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a project of a single owner or a group of owners acting jointly, involving a related group of residences, businesses, or industries and associated uses. Planned as a single entity, the project is subject to development and regulation as one land use unit rather than as an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate lots. The planned unit development does not correspond in lot size, bulk, or type of use, density, lot coverage, open space, or other restriction to the existing land use regulations set forth in this zoning code. The planned unit development shall include usable, functional open space for the mutual benefit of the entire tract and is designed to provide variety and diversity through the variation of normal zoning and subdivision standards so maximum long-range benefits can be gained, and the unique features of the development or site preserved and enhanced while still being in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. A planned unit development is a separate zone district that may be approved by the town council in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18.09. Notwithstanding the approval of a PUD zone district, a final plat must be approved pursuant to title 17, subdivision regulations, prior to any subdivision or separate conveyance of land within the planned unit development. Any application for a planned unit development shall be submitted and processed simultaneously with the processing of the subdivision application for the same property. 
18.02.640 - Public hearing. 
    Public hearing means a meeting called by a public body for which notice has been given and which is held in a place at which the general public may attend to hear issues and to express their opinions. 
18.02.650 - Playground. 
    Playground means a parcel used for outside recreation use. Playgrounds may be unimproved or improved with playground facilities, picnic areas, riding or hiking trails, recreation fields, swimming pools and similar facilities. Playgrounds may or may not be available for use by the general public. 
18.02.660 - Public meeting. 
    Public meeting means any meeting of the town council, planning and zoning commission or the board of adjustment open to the public pursuant to Part 4 of Article 6 of Title 24, C.R.S., or any other law of this state. 
18.02.670 - Recreation center. 
    Recreation center means a building or portion thereof designed for recreational uses, including nonspectator and spectator games, events, sports, and other recreational activities and programs including organized leagues and programs, and individual or unorganized programs. Recreational use includes all uses generally associated with a recreation center, gymnasium or other indoor recreation or sports complex, including basketball, racquetball, swimming, gymnastics, weight-lifting, dancing, volleyball, court games and sports, board games, gym, indoor climbing, boxing, martial arts, theater, art, education programs, and other similar and related activities. 
18.02.680 - Recreation facility, indoor. 
    Recreation facility, indoor means an establishment providing completely enclosed recreation, training or fitness activities, including but not limited to bowling, electronic games, roller skating or ice skating, billiards or pool, theater, motion picture theater, dance studio, equestrian center, health club, spa, boxing, martial arts, climbing, swimming, tennis and related amusements. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food and/or sale of clothing and equipment related to such uses. 
18.02.690 - Recreation facility, outdoor. 
    Recreation facility, outdoor means an outdoor establishment or enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an entertaining activity, where tickets are sold or fees are collected, including but not limited to miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, go-kart tracks, water parks, children's rides, outdoor arcades, skateboard parks, rodeo arena or a fairground. 
18.02.700 - Recreational vehicle park. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a parcel of land specifically developed for locating recreational vehicles, travel trailers, mounted camper units, motor homes, tiny houses, and camping trailers and may also include tents erected for periods not exceeding 30 days for recreational or vacation purposes. Within such a park, a sanitary waste station may be allowed by a conditional use permit for the purpose of removing and disposing of waste from a self-contained camping vehicle's sewage holding tanks. All recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the Colorado Department of Health Standards and Regulations for campgrounds and recreation areas in addition to the requirements set forth in the Gypsum Municipal Code, except that where the two conflict, the Gypsum Municipal Code shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13,  1, 10-10-17) 
18.02.710 - Recycling facility. 
    Recycling facility means a building or lot used for the collection and/or processing of recyclable material including, but not limited to glass, metal, paper, plastic and oil. Processing shall mean the preparation of material for efficient shipment by such means as baling, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting or cleaning. Such a facility, if entirely enclosed within a building or buildings with no outside storage, shall be considered a warehouse. 
18.02.720 - Restaurant. 
    Restaurant means any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of food and beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state; that may be licensed to produce and sell fermented malt beverages as an accessory use, or to sell fermented malt beverages, vinous and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises; and from which service of food and beverages may be made from a drive-through facility, at a counter or at a table. 
18.02.730 - Retail establishment. 
    Retail establishment means the transaction of sales or leasing or rendering of services directly to ultimate consumers, as distinguished from wholesale sales or services for subsequent resale. 
18.02.740 - Salvage or wrecking yard. 
    Salvage or wrecking yard means a place where motor vehicles and parts are wrecked, disassembled, repaired and resold; a place where secondhand goods including waste paper, bottles, automobile tires, clothing, other scrap materials and salvage are collected to be stored; and a place where used lumber and used building materials are stored for sale or resale. 
18.02.750 - Self-service storage facilities. 
    Self-service storage facilities means a building or a group of buildings containing separate, individual self-storage units divided from the floor to ceiling by a wall with an independent entrance from the exterior of the building, designed to be rented or leased on a short-term basis to the general public for private storage of personal goods, materials and equipment. If sold by condominium plat, assigned parking and signage for each unit shall be a condition of plat approval. 
18.02.760 - Setback. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between the parcel boundary and the nearest point of any structure measured at right angles to the property line, excepting roof overhangs not to exceed 24 inches. 
18.02.770 - Single-family. 
    Single-family, when referring to a dwelling, means a detached dwelling designed for or used by one family as an independent house-keeping unit. 
18.02.780 - Special use permit. 
    Special use permit means a permit issued by the planning and zoning commission following notice and a public hearing, to undertake a use enumerated as "s" or not included in the zone district tables of uses, and which may only be granted upon a showing that the proposed use will not unreasonably adversely affect neighboring parcels. In the staff's discretion, it may also refer to a permit that must be obtained prior to initiating a use which is not listed as a permitted use in the table of uses. Special use permits, if granted, may contain conditions necessary or appropriate to prevent or mitigate adverse effects on neighboring properties. 
18.02.790 - Structure. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected that is not primarily intended to be mobile, but not including poles, lines, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities, mailboxes and light fixtures. 
18.02.800 - Studio apartment. 
    Studio apartment means an attached dwelling unit not greater than 650 square feet in size consisting of a single room for cooking, eating, sleeping and living, and a separate room for bath and toilet facilities. 
18.02.810 - Truck stop. 
    Truck stop means an establishment engaged primarily in the fueling, servicing, repair or parking of tractor trucks or similar heavy commercial vehicles, including the sale of accessories and equipment for such vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers or restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. 
18.02.820 - Variance. 
    Variance means authorization for an applicant to depart from the requirements of this zoning code. The purpose of a variance is to allow a property owner to initiate or maintain a use that would otherwise constitute a violation of this zoning code. 
18.02.830 - Veterinary facilities, small animal clinic. 
    Veterinary facilities, small animal clinic means any establishment maintained by or for the use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of animal diseases wherein the animals are limited to dogs, cats or other comparable household pets and wherein the overnight care of animals is allowed when necessary for the medical treatment of the animal. A pet animal facility may be allowed as an accessory use by special use permit. 
18.02.840 - Veterinary clinic. 
    Veterinary clinic means any establishment which is maintained by or for the use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of animal disease. A pet animal facility may be allowed as an accessory use by special use permit. 
18.02.850 - Warehouse and distribution. 
    Warehouse and distribution means a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution or delivery of manufactured products, supplies, equipment or packages, including accessory offices or showrooms, including incidental retail sales. 
18.02.860 - Wireless telecommunications equipment. 
    Wireless telecommunications equipment means any equipment used to provide wireless telecommunications services, but which is not affixed to or contained within a wireless telecommunications facility, but is instead affixed to or mounted on an existing building or structure that is used for some other purpose. Wireless telecommunications equipment also includes a ground mounted base station used as an accessory structure that is connected to an antenna mounted on or affixed to an existing building. 
18.02.870 - Wireless telecommunications facility. 
    Wireless telecommunications facility means any freestanding facility, building, pole, tower or structure used to provide only wireless telecommunications services, and which consists of, without limitation, antennae, equipment and storage and other accessory structures used to provide wireless telecommunication services. 
18.02.880 - Wireless telecommunication services. 
    Wireless telecommunication services means services providing for the transmission of wireless communications utilizing frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for paging systems, enhanced specialized wireless telecommunications, personal communication services or cellular telephone. 
18.02.890 - Yard. 
    Yard means the area of a lot or parcel not included within a structure, parking area, or driveway, except fences, which is generally landscaped or left in native vegetation. For fencing structures, the front yard is the area straight out to the side of the front corners of the structure and towards the street frontage while the rear and side yard is measured straight out to the side of the front corners of the structure to the back. Corner lots are subject to street frontages on both sides. 
(Ord. 2012-13(1) 
18.02.900 - Zoning code. 
    Zoning code means the regulations contained in title 18 of the Code. 
Chapter 18.03 - ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

18.03.010 - Map adopted. 
    The official zoning district map, together with all explanatory material thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this zoning code. 
18.03.020 - Map location and identification. 
    The official zoning district map shall be located in the office of the town planner and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested to by the town clerk, and shall bear the seal of the town under the following form of certification: 
"CERTIFICATION: This is the Official Zoning District Map of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado, adopted pursuant to Ordinance No. 14 (Series 2015), on the 12 th day of January, 2016, and referred to in Title 18 of the Gypsum Municipal Code." 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, 1-12-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-14, adopted Jan. 12, 2016, repealed the former  18.03.020 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  18.03.020 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2012-14. 
18.03.030 - Map changes. 
    No change shall be made in the district boundaries or other matter shown on the official zoning district map except by ordinance. Changes shall supplement the previously adopted official zoning district map. 
18.03.040 - Map replacement. 
    In the event that the official zoning district map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the town council shall, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning district map which shall supersede the prior official zoning district map. 
18.03.050 - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning district map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries approximately following the centerline of streets or roads shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries approximately following parcel lines shall be construed as following such parcel lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the town limits shall be construed as following town limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section shall be construed consistent with those subsections. 
(5)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning district map or in circumstances not covered by this section, the planning and zoning commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
18.03.060 - Significance of districts-Listing of uses. 
    No use shall be permitted within any zone district unless it is specifically enumerated in the zone district tables of uses contained in this title as a permitted use. Uses not listed which are consistent with the listed uses and which impose no greater impacts on the need for services and adjacent properties, are permitted upon issuance of a conditional use permit. Uses not listed which the staff determines are not consistent with the listed uses may be permitted upon issuance of a special use permit. 
18.03.070 - Key to tables. 
    The permission codes listed for uses enumerated in the tables of uses for each of the zone districts have the following meanings: 
(1)  "P" means permitted. Uses designated "P" are uses by right which are permitted anywhere within the zone district. 
(2)  "C" means conditional use permit. Uses designated "C" are permitted in the zone district indicated subject to conditions contained in a conditional use permit to be issued administratively by the town manager or the town manager's designee. 
(3)  "S" means special use permit. Uses designated "S" may be allowed in the zone district indicated only upon issuance of a special use permit by the planning and zoning commission following notice and hearing. 
(4)  "*" means not allowed. Uses designated "*" are not permitted within that zone district. 
Chapter 18.04 - ZONE DISTRICTS 
    This chapter of the zoning code describes each type of zone district to establish a foundation for the uses which are permitted or not allowed. 

18.04.010 - Commercial historical district (CH). 
    The commercial historical district is intended to reflect the character of the original downtown and to provide for a mixture of uses that will strengthen and expand the core community by: 
1.  Encouraging the redevelopment and expansion of the existing historical town area; 
2.  Providing a concentration and mixture of civic, office, retail, restaurant, housing and cultural land uses; 
3.  Maintaining and enhancing the historic character of the original downtown; 
4.  Facilitating pedestrian movement; 
5.  Permitting the construction or rehabilitation of attached apartment, civic and storefront building types in close proximity to each other. 
6.  Dwelling units within the commercial historical district may be allowed by special use permit with the following restrictions or provisions: 
a.  Livable area of dwelling unit cannot be less than 650 square feet, nor more than 1,000 square feet, or more than two bedrooms. 
b.  Residential uses cannot exceed two-thirds of the total commercial area of the structure. 
c.  Dwelling units may be condominiumized and sold separately from the associated commercial portion of the building. 
d.  In addition to the criteria generally applicable to special use permit applications, the following criteria shall also be considered: 
1.  Proximity to parks and open space or other amenities; 
2.  Overall parking on site; 
3.  Benefit to the town (retail uses will have preference); and 
4.  Traffic circulation throughout the neighborhood. 
Individual buildings are encouraged to be mixed vertically with office and commercial uses required to be at street-level; upper levels may contain office and commercial uses or residential dwellings. 
18.04.020 - Interstate commercial district (IC). 
    The interstate commercial district identifies lands located along Interstate 70 at the existing Gypsum interchange or any future interchange and is intended to be a setting for development of a wide range of businesses catering to the needs of interstate travelers. Secondarily, it can accommodate a wide range of other uses including community and regional retail uses, offices and personal and business services. The interstate commercial district is intended to integrate various commercial uses while transitioning from the interstate highway to adjacent lower density neighborhoods. The interstate commercial district is intended to complement rather than compete with the downtown area. 
    Dwelling units within an interstate commercial district may be allowed by special use permit with the following restrictions or provisions: 
(1)  Livable area of dwelling unit cannot be less than 650 square feet, nor more than 1,000 square feet, or more than two bedrooms. 
(2)  Residential uses cannot exceed one-half of the total commercial area of the structure. 
(3)  Dwelling units must be a part of a vertically mixed use building, with street level office and commercial uses required; upper levels may contain office and commercial uses or residential dwellings; but do not have to be accessory to the commercial use. Dwelling units may be condominiumized and sold separately from the associated commercial portion of the building. 
(4)  In addition to the criteria generally applicable to special use permit applications, the following criteria shall also be considered: 
a.  Proximity to parks and open space or other amenities; 
b.  Overall parking on site; 
c.  Benefit to the town (retail uses will have preference); and 
d.  Traffic circulation through neighborhood. 
18.04.030 - Commercial/professional district (CP). 
    The commercial/professional district identifies lands located along both sides of Highway 6 and along Cooley Mesa Road that are suitable for commercial development. The commercial/professional district is intended to provide for the location of auto-oriented and auto-dependent uses and/or uses which provide a wide range of general retail goods and services for residents of the local community and the region, as well as businesses and highway users, primarily inside of enclosed structures. Locations for this zone district require good access to major arterial streets and adequate water, sewer and power. 
    Dwelling units within a commercial/professional district may be allowed by special use permit with the following restrictions or provisions: 
(1)  Livable area of dwelling unit cannot be less than 650 square feet, nor more than 1,000 square feet, or more than two bedrooms. 
(2)  Residential uses cannot exceed two-thirds of the total commercial area of the structure. 
(3)  Dwelling units must be part of a vertically mixed use building, but do not have to be accessory to the commercial use. Dwelling units may be condominiumized and sold separately from the associated commercial portion of the building. 
(4)  In addition to the criteria generally applicable to special use permit applications, the following criteria shall also be considered: 
a.  Proximity to parks and open space or other amenities. 
b.  Overall parking on site. 
c.  Benefit to Town of Gypsum (retail business will have preference). 
d.  Traffic circulation through neighborhood. 
18.04.040 - Light industrial (LI). 
    The light industrial district is intended to provide locations for a variety of workplaces including light industrial uses, service businesses, research and development offices and institutions. This zone district is intended to encourage the development of planned office and business parks; to promote excellence in the design and construction of buildings, outdoor spaces, transportation facilities and streetscapes. 
    Studio apartments within a light industrial district may be allowed by special use permit, but only as an accessory use to the commercial use located on the same lot. The minimum lot size for a studio apartment in a light industrial district is two acres. Only one studio apartment shall be allowed for each lot, even if the lot is subdivided into separate units. Occupancy of the studio apartment shall be limited to the owners or employees of the associated commercial use. Such studio apartments cannot be condominiumized or sold separately from the associated commercial use and the studio apartment shall not be subdivided from the remainder of the building. The following restrictions shall also apply to any special use permit issued for such studio apartment: 
(1)  Livable area of the studio apartment shall not be greater than 650 square feet. The combined minimum square footage of the studio apartment and the portion of the building devoted to commercial use shall not be less than 1,300 square feet. 
(2)  In addition to the criteria generally applicable to special use permit applications, the following criteria shall also be considered: 
a.  Overall parking on site. 
b.  Traffic circulation within the lot and through the neighborhood. 
c.  Access to the studio apartment by the fire department, law enforcement authorities, and emergency service providers. 
d.  Benefit to the Town of Gypsum. 
18.04.050 - Heavy industrial (HI). 
    The heavy industrial district is intended to provide a location for a variety of employment opportunities such as manufacturing, warehousing and distributing, indoor and outdoor storage and a wide range of industrial operations, in locations where conflicts with residential, commercial and other land uses can be minimized. The heavy industrial district may also accommodate complementary and supporting uses such as convenience shopping and child care centers by special use permit. Locations for the heavy industrial district require good access to major arterial streets and adequate water, sewer and power. 
18.04.060 - Institutional district (ID). 
    The institutional district is intended to identify and perpetuate the existence of public parks, recreation facilities, playgrounds and public and quasi-public buildings, whether publicly owned or leased. In certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to allow and encourage institutional uses to develop on-site housing for some of their employees. 
18.04.070 - Mobile home park district (MHP). 
    A mobile home park district is a high-density residential district on a parcel of land under single ownership or control on which two or more manufactured homes or two or more mobile homes are occupied as residence; or a recreational vehicle park whether a single parcel of land under single ownership or multiple adjacent parcels of land under single or multiple ownership on which recreational vehicles, travel trailers, tiny houses, mounted camper units, motor homes, camping trailers, or tents may be occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13,  2, 10-10-17) 
18.04.080 - Multifamily district (MF). 
    The multifamily district is a high-density residential zone intended primarily for multifamily uses on individual lots. In order to facilitate higher densities near viable business centers, multifamily buildings are generally encouraged near a neighborhood commercial center. Street and open space designs in these areas shall be used to create compatibility among frontages, which encourage pedestrian interaction and discourage high automobile speeds. Multifamily residential developments shall be designed around or adjacent to open space. 
18.04.090 - Single-family high density (SF/HD). 
    The single-family high density district is intended to provide for higher density single-family residential development within the town on individual lots of not less than 6,500 square feet. 
18.04.100 - Single-family medium density (SF/MD). 
    The single-family medium density district is intended to provide for moderate density single-family residential development within the town on individual lots of not less than 10,001 square feet. 
18.04.110 - Single-family low density (SF/LD). 
    The single-family low density district is intended to provide for lower density single-family residential development within the town on individual lots of not less than 20,001 square feet. 
18.04.120 - Rural residential (RR). 
    The rural residential district is a very low density single-family residential development within the town on individual lots of not less than two acres. The purpose of the rural residential district is to serve as a transition area between the denser residential development found in town and the lower densities of agricultural (AG) and Eagle County Resource Districts. 
18.04.130 - Agricultural (AG). 
    The agricultural district is an ultra low-density district intended for the pursuit of farm activities and limited animal raising and grazing activities or for transitional status. This zone district is characterized by growing crops and raising livestock. It is intended to maintain the rural character of areas at the periphery of the town, while allowing some appropriate residential development. Lot area is a minimum of five acres and only two dwelling units are allowed on each lot. 
18.04.140 - Developing resource district (DR). 
    The developing resource district is intended to provide for the annexation of those properties that are currently used for agriculture or other nonurban uses and for which there are no specific and immediate plans for development. These areas are designated on the master plan as potentially suitable for urban development, but not in the immediate future because of lack of utilities, other services, or other uses. The only permitted use in the developing resource district is the one that existed on the date the property was placed in this district. 
Chapter 18.05 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

18.05.010 - Nonresidential development standards. 
    The following standards shall regulate the size, bulk, height, building setbacks, density, and open space within the designated zone districts. 
Zones Standard CH IC CP LI HI ID Minimum Lot Area (sf) 2500 2500 2500 None None None Maximum Lot Coverage 100% 50% 50% None None None Maximum Building Height (ft) 35 45 45 45 45 45 Minimum Landscaped Area 0% 20% 20% 20% 10% 20% Maximum Building Height (ft) for Accessory Building or Use 25 25 25 25 25 45 Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft) 0 10 10 10 10 10 Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft) 0 0 0 10 10 10 Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft) 0 0 0 10 10 10 Maximum Fence Height, Front (ft) 3.5 3.5 3.5 8 8 8 Maximum Fence Height Rear and Side (ft) 8 8 8 8 8 8  
    Gate structures over the eight-foot fence height limit requires approval of a special use permit. 
    Public structures, including but not limited to athletic field backstops, are not considered fencing structures and may be constructed to the required height necessary for safety purposes without a special use permit. 
(Ord. 2012-13(1)) 
18.05.020 - Residential development standards. 
    The following standards shall regulate the size, bulk, height, building setbacks, density, and open space within the designated zone districts. 
Zones Standard MHP MF SF/HD SF/MD SF/LD RR AG Minimum Lot Area/Dwelling (sf), Dwelling more than 1,000 sf 3,500 4,000 6,500 10,001 20,001 2 acres 5 acres Dwelling 1,000 sf or less 3,500 3,000 6,500 10,001 20,001 2 acres 5 acres Restricted Workforce Housing ("RWH") (18.05.050) N/A 2,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Maximum Lot Coverage (buildings, structures and accessory buildings) 50% 50% 50% 50% 331/3% 33% 33% Minimum Lot Width (ft) 25 25 25 25 60 60 60 Minimum Lot Frontage (ft) 25 25 25 25 35 35 35 Minimum Lot Depth (ft) 50 50 50 50 60 60 60 Maximum Building Height (ft), Principal Building 20 45 35 35 35 35 35 Accessory Building 20 20 20 20 20 25 None Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft) 25 25 25 25 25 25 50 Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft) 10 10 10 10* 10* 25 50 Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft) 10 10 10 10* 10* 25 50 Maximum Square Footage, Noncommercial Greenhouse, one per lot 120 120 120 300 500 500 500  
* See 18.05.030(d). 
    Multifamily minimum lot area shall be increased for each additional dwelling unit. Examples: 
MF Type RWH MF in which all Dwelling Units are 1,000 sf or less MF in which any Dwelling Unit is more than 1,000 sf Increased density projects in which all Dwelling Units are 1,000 sf or less (see 18.05.025) Duplex 4,000 sf 6,000 sf 8,000 sf 4,000 sf Triplex 6,000 sf 9,000 sf 12,000 sf 6,000 sf Fourplex 8,000 sf 12,000 sf 16,000 sf 8,000 sf  
    Lot coverage includes all buildings, structures, and accessory buildings. Lot coverage does not include driveways, roof overhangs, open decks, porches and/or walkways unless covered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, 7-26-16) 
18.05.025 - Restricted workforce housing projects or multi-family projects seeking approvals for an increased number of dwelling units. 
    Restricted workforce housing projects or multi-family projects seeking approvals for an increased number of dwelling units at 2,000 square feet of land per unit must receive additional approval as outlined below. 
(1)  Owner shall be required to present the proposed project before the Council for review during a public hearing. 
(2)  Owner shall present a site plan of the project including access, landscaping, parking, amenities, etc. 
(3)  Owner shall present architectural drawings including elevations, floor plans, exterior materials, colors, etc. 
(4)  Consideration factors shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The project being located within the core area of town in order to concentrate density close to core services instead of increasing density in outlying areas; 
b.  The project promotes compatibility with existing neighborhood uses and goals; 
c.  Compatibility with the town's master plan; 
d.  Adequate recreation, utilities, access, and traffic flow is provided; 
e.  Project may be required to provide additional on-site amenities in order serve the increased number of residents and/or surrounding neighborhood. 
f.  Project may be subject to site changes or architectural improvements in order to ensure a quality project will be constructed. 
(5)  After considering testimony and commentary from any and all interested persons, the town council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, 7-26-16) 
18.05.030 - Setback requirements. 
(a)  Setbacks are measured from the property line on all sides of a lot, including the street side. 
(b)  On corner lots, all sides of the lot with street frontage shall meet the applicable front yard setback. 
(c)  Permanent features allowed within setbacks shall include: 
(1)  Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features if they extend no more than two feet into a required setback and if they do not encroach into or overhang an easement; 
(2)  Steps or ramps to the principal entrance and necessary landings, provided they do not extend more than six feet into the required setback; 
(3)  Landscaping; 
(4)  Fences and walls, subject to height and other restrictions; 
(5)  Utility service lines to a structure and utility lines, wires and associated structures within a utility easement. 
(d)  Rear and side setbacks, SF/MD or SF/LD, shall be one-half the height of the principal building if that is greater than ten feet. 
(e)  Side and rear setbacks for storage sheds less than 120 square feet in floor area shall be three feet, if the storage shed is not placed upon a permanent foundation and is easily moved as determined by the town manager or the town manager's designee. 
(f)  For the purpose of minimizing traffic hazards at street intersections, improving visibility for converging vehicles and maintaining a site triangle at such locations, no fence, structure or landscaping over 36 inches above the adjacent street elevation shall be permitted to be placed, planted, or erected on any corner lot within the triangular portion of such lot measured from the point of intersection of the lot lines abutting the streets a distance of thirty feet along each such lot line. 
18.05.040 - Development standards for mobile home parks. 
(a)  The minimum lot area for a mobile home park shall be two acres. 
(b)  Minimum width for roadways and driveways within a mobile home park shall be 25 feet. An additional eight feet shall be required for each parallel parking space adjacent thereto. 
(c)  At least two off-street parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit within a mobile home park. 
(d)  Streets, driveways and parking spaces within the mobile home park shall be paved, sufficiently illuminated to insure the safety of park residents, and shall include sidewalks for pedestrians not less than three feet wide. Each space within a mobile home park shall have unobstructed vehicular access to a public street or highway. 
(e)  Open space, including playgrounds, shall be provided within the mobile home park, the size of which shall be determined by the total number of spaces within the park, the density of the development and the availability of existing park or playground areas in the immediate vicinity of the mobile home park. 
(f)  A landscaping plan for the mobile home park shall be presented to and approved by the town providing for the landscaping and maintenance of the perimeter of the park, all common areas and open space within the park and the individual spaces for mobile homes within the park. 
18.05.045 - Development standards for recreational vehicle parks. 
(a)  The minimum lot area for a recreational vehicle park shall be two acres. 
(b)  Minimum width for roadways and driveways within a recreational vehicle park shall be 25 feet. An additional eight feet shall be required for each parallel parking space adjacent thereto. 
(c)  At least one off-street parking space shall be required for each recreational vehicle space within a mobile home park. 
(d)  Streets, driveways and parking spaces within the recreational vehicle park shall be sufficiently illuminated to insure the safety of park residents and visitors, and shall include pedestrian paths not less than three feet wide. 
(e)  Open space shall be provided within the recreational vehicle park, the size of which shall be determined by the total number of spaces within the park, the density of the development and the availability of existing park or open space areas in the immediate vicinity of the recreational vehicle park. 
(f)  A landscaping plan for the recreational vehicle park shall be presented to and approved by the town providing for the landscaping and maintenance of the perimeter of the park, all common areas and open space within the park and the individual spaces for recreational vehicles within the park. 
(g)  Electrical, water and sewer service shall be provided to each space within the recreational vehicle park designed to accommodate recreational vehicles, travel trailers, mounted camper units, motor homes, or camping trailers. Spaces designed to accommodate tents shall not require such utility service, but occupants of such tent spaces shall have access within the recreational vehicle park to an adequate water supply and to adequate restroom facilities. 
(h)  No tent shall remain in place in a recreational vehicle park for more than 30 days in any one-year period. Any action toward removal of wheels of a recreational vehicle, or placement of the unit on a foundation, except for temporary purposes of repair, is prohibited. No external appurtenances, such as carports, cabanas, patios or storage facilities may be attached to any recreational vehicle, travel trailer, mounted camper unit, motor home, camping trailer or tent while it is in the park. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13,  3, 10-10-17) 
18.05.050 - Restricted workforce housing. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  General purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide an opportunity for the development of a reasonable amount of restricted workforce housing in the Town of Gypsum that meets the needs of those economic groups being priced out of the residential housing market due to rapid increases in property values in Eagle County. This will be accomplished through a program and regulations that permit the set-aside of a portion of new residential development for restricted workforce housing purposes, and also by permitting an increase in residential density when the increased density is enrolled in the general restricted workforce housing program and meets additional requirements related to residential unit size. This section provides incentives and concessions to encourage the development of restricted workforce housing. It is the town's intent that restricted workforce housing is dispersed throughout the town in reasonable proximity to major services, such as commercial and retail centers, the post office, town hall, recreation center and the downtown area and not concentrated in just one area of the town. 
(2)  Starter housing. To better serve the employees and employers of the town and Eagle County, the town has developed the free market plan set forth in this section to provide entry level housing for qualified first time home buyers or those persons moving from basic minimal housing to the next level of housing. The purpose is to provide starter housing for the workforce and to provide the means to take the first or second step on the road to home ownership, while at the same time recognizing that ultimately, it is the responsibility of the workforce to reach beyond the restricted workforce housing program and find a means to move into the unrestricted housing market. 
(3)  Initial thresholds. These regulations are intended to establish the thresholds for restricted workforce housing, the expectations for homes sold as restricted workforce housing, the qualifications of those purchasing restricted workforce housing, the manner in which others, including employers, may assist the first time home buyer, and the requirement that homes in the restricted workforce housing program remain in the program through future sales and conveyances. The limit on the initial sales price for restricted workforce housing shall be subject to future adjustment by the town council, as new family income data becomes available. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Area median income or AMI means the most current local estimates of median family income compiled and released annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for Eagle County, Colorado. 
    Developer means the person or entity that applies to the town for approval of the development. 
    Development means the subdivision, PUD, or phase or portion thereof, or other specified properties to which an application for building permit applies. 
    Equity partner means a family member, employer of the qualified employee or other person or entity, including governmental entities and nonprofit organizations, who may partner with the qualified employee to facilitate the purchase of an RWH unit. A bank or other financial institution that has a deed of trust or mortgage interest in a RWH unit is not deemed an equity partner. 
    Gross income shall have such meaning as applied to the term "gross income" or the equivalent terms as used by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development relative to estimating or for applying the concept of median family income, or if no such meaning is provided, means total income of an individual occupying a RWH unit derived from all sources, including but not limited to business, trust, employment, and from income-producing property, before deduction for expenses, depreciation, taxes and similar allowances. 
    Household income, shall have such meaning as applied to the term "household income" or the equivalent term as used by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development relative to estimating or applying the concept of median family income, or if no such meaning is provided means combined gross income of all individuals who will occupy the RWH unit regardless of legal status. Adjustments to gross income for business expenses can be made for persons who are self-employed. 
    PUD means a planned unit development. 
    Primary residence means sole and exclusive place of residence. 
    Qualified employee means a person meeting the eligibility requirements of the RWH program to purchase an RWH unit. 
    Qualified employer or nonprofit organization means a governmental or nongovernmental employers with operations and employees in Eagle County, and nonprofit organizations organized for the primary purpose of providing housing for employees within Eagle County. 
    Qualified lessee means a person meeting the eligibility requirements of the RWH program to lease an RWH unit that is owned by a qualified employer or nonprofit organization. 
    RWH means restricted workforce housing. 
    RWH agreement means a written agreement between the town and a developer, setting forth the terms and conditions of enrollment of certain residential dwelling units located within the applicable development into the RWH program. 
    RWH application means an application to enroll residential units in the RWH program. 
    RWH development assistance means residential density increases, waivers of fees, charges and other development requirements, or other financial incentives, concessions or assistance provided by the town to a developer in return for enrolling RWH units in the RWH program. 
    RWH program means the program established by this section for increasing workforce housing, primarily for sale, and in limited instances for lease, to qualified employees. 
    RWH program administrator means the person or entity designated to administer the RWH program. 
    RWH regulations means regulations for implementing the RWH program. 
    RWH units means residential dwelling units enrolled by approval of the town in the RWH program and designated primarily for sale, and in limited instances for lease, to qualified employees. 
(c)  RWH program enrollment and removal. 
(1)  RWH application. Application for enrollment of residential dwelling units in the RWH program shall be made by the developer, by filling out an RWH application with the RWH program administrator. RWH applications shall include such information necessary to ensure compliance with the intent and requirements of the RWH program and RWH regulations, and administration of the RWH agreement. An RWH application shall be filed in conjunction with, or prior to, application for approval of the final subdivision or PUD plat, or issuance of a building permit for the development, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  RWH application determination. Enrollment of residential dwelling units in the RWH program shall be accomplished only by town council approval. RWH applications may be approved, denied or approved with conditions, in the sole discretion of the town council after review and recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, taking into consideration the housing needs within the town and Eagle County, and the RWH development assistance requested to be provided by the town. The town council approval shall include terms and conditions designed to ensure compliance with the intent and requirements of the RWH program and RWH regulations. 
(3)  RWH agreement. As a condition of town council approval of any RWH application, the enrollment of any residential units in the RWH program, and the provision of any RWH development assistance by the town, the applicant and the town shall enter into the RWH agreement. The RWH agreement shall, whether or not expressly referenced in writing, incorporate the provisions of the RWH program and the RWH regulations. The RWH agreement shall set forth all terms and conditions of approval for enrollment of units in the RWH program, including the initial purchase price for RWH units, and the terms of any RWH development assistance provided by the town. The RWH agreement shall be fully executed prior to approval of the final subdivision or PUD plat, or issuance of a building permit for the development, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  Removal of RWH units from RWH program. RWH units may not be sold, leased, used or owned except in compliance with the RWH program, RWH regulations and RWH agreement. Developers shall make all diligent efforts to sell units enrolled in the RWH program in a timely manner before withdrawal, including, but not limited to, adequate advertising and promotion of the units. Residential units may be removed from the RWH program only upon prior written application to and approval by the town council. Applications may be approved, denied or approved with conditions, in the sole discretion of the town council, taking into consideration the intent of the RWH program, the housing needs within the town and Eagle County, the needs of the owner at the time of the removal application, the availability of purchasers if the units stayed in the RWH program, the length of time the units were enrolled in the RWH program, the diligent efforts of the developer to sell the units, and the RWH development assistance provided by the town. The town council approval shall include terms and conditions designed to ensure adequate amortization or repayment of the RWH development assistance. For all units approved by the town council for removal from the RWH program, a rebate shall be calculated and due at the time of the closing of the first sale of the unit following its withdrawal from the RWH program, and collected in the same manner as, and in addition to, the town real estate transfer tax. Rebates shall be used to offset, in such manner as may be approved by the town council, the cost and expense of the RWH program, including past or future RWH development assistance. The RWH development assistance shall be repaid as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in paragraph b. and c. of this subsection (4), a rebate of not less than 20 percent of the sale price of the withdrawn unit for the first sale following the removal of the unit from the program shall be paid to the Town of Gypsum to compensate the town for RWH development assistance. 
b.  If the initial sale of an RWH unit does not occur within 12 months of completing construction and receiving a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy (as defined in title 15 of the Municipal Code), and the town council approves removal of the unit from the RWH program, the rebate shall be sufficient to repay the town's administrative costs for enrolling and withdrawing the unit from the RWH program, as well as any fees waived in accordance with section 18.05.050 of the Municipal Code, as determined by the town. 
c.  If the initial sale of an RWH unit associated with an increase in residential density does not occur within 12 months of completing construction and receiving a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy (as defined in title 15 of the Municipal Code), and the town council approves removal from the RWH program, the developer shall pay a rebate of 20 percent of the sales price of the initial sale after withdrawal. 
(d)  Development eligibility. To enroll in the RWH program, residential units and their associated developments must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Unit type. RWH units shall be limited to owner occupied studio units which have a single room for living and sleeping, but which may have separate kitchen and bathroom; one-bedroom units; two-bedroom units; and three-bedroom units. Additional limitations on unit size apply to RWH units approved as a density increase, as specified in subsection (e)(1). 
(2)  Initial unit price. RWH units shall be initially sold at no more than $350,000.00 per unit. In addition to the foregoing sentence, RWH units shall initially be sold at a purchase price less than the purchase price of units, if any, in the same development that are not enrolled in the RWH program. Initial purchase prices for RWH units shall be specified in the RWH agreement, subject to final approval by the town council, and established taking into consideration RWH development assistance provided by the town, and any other efficiencies, incentives or concessions. 
(3)  Quality of construction. RWH units shall be of the same quality of construction and finish, unless otherwise approved by the town council, as units, if any, in the same development that are not enrolled in the RWH program. 
(4)  Income-restricted RWH units. One-half of the RWH units within the development shall be sold to qualified employees having household incomes not greater than 140 percent of the AMI, and the initial sale to a qualified employee shall be at a purchase price that provides for monthly mortgage payments and homeowner, property or condominium association dues in a combined amount that does not exceed 30 percent of household income at 140 percent of the AMI. For purposes of this paragraph, monthly mortgage payments shall be not more than the payments based on a 30-year fixed rate, a five-percent down payment, and an interest rate based on a first time buyer with good credit. 
(5)  RWH units not income-restricted. One-half of the RWH units within the development shall be designated for sale to qualified employees without limitations on household income or the combination of monthly mortgage payments and homeowner, property or condominium association dues. 
(6)  Initial offer of non-RWH units. The remaining residential dwelling units in the development which are not enrolled in the RWH program shall not have income restrictions or other limitations on buyers at the time of sale or resale, except that such units shall at the time of their initial sale, be offered for a period of 30 calendar days exclusively to persons who are qualified employees. Additional offering restrictions may be agreed to between the developer and the town, and contained in the RWH agreement. 
(7)  Deed restrictions. All RWH units shall be subject to a deed restriction prohibiting the sale of the RWH unit to anyone other than a qualified employee or, as further conditioned and allowed by the RWH program and RWH regulations, a qualified employer or nonprofit organization. Such deed restrictions shall also require all sales, ownership, leases and use of RWH units to be subject to the RWH program, RWH regulations, and RWH agreement. 
(e)  RWH development assistance. 
(1)  Residential density increase. 
a.  Unless otherwise approved by the town council pursuant to the RWH program, residential density for multifamily development shall not exceed: 
1.  Ten multifamily residential dwelling units per acre, where any residential unit is more than 1,000 square feet; or 
2.  Fourteen multifamily residential dwelling units, per acre, where all residential units are 1,000 square feet or less. 
b.  Unless otherwise approved by the town council pursuant to the RWH program, residential density for PUD development shall not exceed 15 residential dwelling units per acre. 
c.  Additional residential unit density may be approved in multifamily and PUD developments above that specified in subsection (e)(1), if: 
1.  All additional residential units are RWH units; and 
2.  At least 80 percent of the additional residential units are 1,000 square feet or less. 
3.  Studio, one-bedroom and two-bedroom units do not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
4.  Three-bedroom units do not exceed 1,150 square feet. 
d.  Residential density shall in no event exceed 21 residential dwelling units per acre for any combination of unrestricted and RWH units. 
e.  The limitations specified in subsection (e)(1), that apply to RWH units approved as a density increase are in addition to the unit size limitations applicable for general enrollment of any residential dwelling unit in the RWH program. 
(2)  Fee waivers. In exchange for designation of RWH units and their enrollment in the RWH program, the town council may, in its sole discretion, waive fees or other charges generally applicable to other developments. 
(3)  Other assistance. In exchange for designation of RWH units and their enrollment in the RWH program, the town council may, in its sole discretion, waive other requirements generally applicable to similar developments, or provide other financial incentives, concessions and assistance. 
(4)  Determination of assistance. In approving RWH development assistance as provided in this subsection, the town council shall take into consideration the housing needs within the town and Eagle County, the general benefits of the RWH units to the public in general and the residents and taxpayer of Gypsum specifically, and the totality of the RWH development assistance provided by the town. 
(5)  Specified in RWH agreement. All RWH development assistance shall be specified in the RWH agreement. 
(f)  RWH unit ownership. 
(1)  Ownership of RWH units. Except as provided in this subsection for ownership and rental by governmental and nongovernmental employers and nonprofit organizations, and for equity partners, upon the initial sale and at all times thereafter as long as an RWH unit remains enrolled in the RWH program, the RWH unit may only be owned by a qualified employee. 
(2)  Purchase applications. Any person or entity wishing to purchase an RWH unit shall apply to the RWH program administrator. The application shall include proof of residency, employment, income, and any other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the RWH program administrator to determination qualifications and eligibility. A person who applies to purchase an RWH unit, must also submit proof of prequalification for financing and purchase of the RWH unit by a bank or other mortgage lender. 
(3)  Priority purchasers. Qualified employees who are also residents of the Town of Gypsum shall have the highest priority to purchase RWH units. 
(4)  Qualified employees. To be and remain a qualified employee, applicants to purchase and owners of an RWH unit must: 
a.  Prior residency. Or a member of the applicant's household must, have been a full-time resident of Eagle County for at least the preceding 12 months; and 
b.  Employment. Or his or her spouse must, be employed by a business located within the Town of Gypsum or the Town of Eagle, or by the United States Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, Colorado Department of Wildlife, Eagle County School District, Eagle County Government, Colorado Department of Transportation, Colorado State Patrol, Town of Eagle, Town of Gypsum, any fire, police or ambulance district in Eagle County, any hospital located in Eagle County, or any water and/or sanitation district in Eagle County; and 
c.  Primary residence. Occupy the RWH unit as his or her primary residence. Residency shall be deemed to have been terminated by accepting employment outside of Eagle County for an undefined period of time or for a defined period of time of more than three months, or residing in the RWH unit fewer than nine months out of any 12-month period; and 
d.  Citizenship. Be a United States citizen; and 
e.  Sole residential property ownership. Own no other interest in any residential real property other than the RWH unit; and 
f.  Household income. Earn at least 75 percent of the applicant's or owner's household income from employment within Eagle County; and 
g.  Sole RWH unit. Not participate, or have a household income that includes any person who participates, in any manner as the purchaser, lessee, owner and occupant of more than one RWH unit. 
h.  Waiver of employment restrictions. If a newly constructed RWH unit is offered for sale and is not sold or under contract 60 days after a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy (as defined in title 15 at the Gypsum Municipal Code) has been issued, without application from a qualified employee as restricted by section 18.05.050(f)(4)b. hereof, the RWH unit may be offered for sale and sold to any person meeting the requirements of subparagraphs a., c., d., e., f. and g. hereof. 
(5)  Qualified employers and nonprofit organizations. Qualified employers and nonprofit organizations, may also purchase RWH units, as limited by this paragraph. Prior to purchasing the RWH unit, the purchaser shall enter into a written agreement with the RWH program administrator and, if deemed appropriate by the RWH program administrator, a deed restriction, regarding conditions of leasing the RWH unit as further provided in the RWH program, and restricting any subsequent sale of the RWH unit to only a qualified employee, or a qualified employer or nonprofit organization as allowed by this paragraph. 
(6)  Equity partner. Not more than one equity partner, whose interest may not exceed 30 percent of the purchase price of the RWH unit, may participate in the purchase or ownership of an RWH unit. An equity partner may share in the net sale proceeds from the subsequent sale of an RWH unit in the same proportion as their equity interest in the RWH unit, but in no event greater than 30 percent of the sale proceeds. An equity partner shall have no authority to determine whether or when to sell the RWH unit in which its interest is owned. An equity partner shall not appear as an owner on the deed for the RWH unit, but may record a lien or similar document evidencing its interest in the unit. Equity partners may be required to sign a verification of their interests and agreement to abide by all provisions of the RWH program and RWH regulations. 
(7)  Qualified employer, nonprofit organization and equity partner ownership limitations. No equity partner or qualified employer or nonprofit organization shall own and have an equity partner interest in more than three RWH units in any single project at any one time. Solely for the purpose of this limitation, the Eagle County Regional Transportation Authority and the Eagle County Sheriff's Office shall be considered separate entities from Eagle County and its other offices or agencies. 
(8)  Agreement and deed restrictions. Any purchaser or owner of an RWH unit may be required to execute and deliver a written agreement and, if deemed appropriate by the RWH program administrator, a deed restriction, to only sell, use, lease, or allow occupancy of the RWH unit in compliance with the RWH program and the RWH regulations, including future sales or transfers only to a qualified employee, equity partner, or qualified employer or nonprofit organization as allowed by the RWH program. 
(g)  Leasing and occupancy of RWH units. 
(1)  Ownership by a qualified employee. No RWH unit that is owned by a qualified employee may be leased. 
(2)  Ownership by qualified employers and nonprofit entities. No RWH unit that is owned by a qualified employer or nonprofit organization may be leased except to a qualified lessee upon the following conditions: 
a.  Periodic reports. The owner of the RWH unit shall provide copies of all leases and periodic reports to the RWH program administrator verifying the qualifications and eligibility of the lessee. 
b.  Lease term. The term of any lease shall not exceed three years. 
c.  Rental rate. The amount of rent payable shall be restricted as provided in the written agreement entered into between the owner and RWH program administrator prior to purchase of the RWH unit. 
d.  Other terms. The owner of the RWH unit shall include in such leases provisions required in the written agreement entered into between the owner and RWH program administrator prior to purchase of the RWH unit, or otherwise reasonably required by the RWH program administrator to ensure qualification of the lessee and compliance with the RWH program and RWH regulations. 
(3)  Qualified lessee. To be and remain a qualified lessee, a lessee must: 
a.  General qualifications. But for the fact that the lessee is a lessee and not the owner of the RWH unit, meet all requirements to be a qualified employee, except that the prior residency requirement shall not apply. 
b.  Lessee income. Have household income not in excess of 140 percent of AMI. 
c.  Lessees of employer owners. In the case of an RWH unit owned by a qualified employer, be an employee of the owner. 
(4)  Occupancy. No RWH unit may be occupied by someone other than an owner that is a qualified employee, a qualified lessee of a qualified employer or nonprofit organization, or members of the qualified employee's or qualified lessee's household. All occupants of an RWH unit must provide proof of United States citizenship. No RWH unit shall be leased, used or occupied so as to evade the intent of the RWH program to make RWH units available to qualified employees, qualified lessees, and their associated households upon which compliance with household income limitations is determined. 
(5)  Waiver. Restrictions on leasing and occupancy of RWH units may be waived by the RWH program administrator to allow a temporary lease for good cause shown, such as a short-term vacation of less than two months, medical emergency, an extended period of unsuccessful sales efforts, or during the administration of an estate. 
(h)  Administration. 
(1)  RWH regulations. The town council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution RWH regulations for administration of the RWH program, consistent with this section. 
(2)  RWH program administrator. The town council may, from time to time, designate by resolution the RWH program administrator to administer the RWH program in accordance with the terms of this section and the RWH regulations. The RWH program administrator may be an employee, agent or contractor to the town. The initial RWH program administrator shall be The Economic Council of Eagle County. Prior to appointing an agent or contractor as the RWH program administrator, the town council shall review and approve the organizational structure, funding and regulations of such entity. Notwithstanding delegation by this section of any authority to the RWH program administrator, the town council, upon notice to the program administrator, may reserve such authority solely to the town council. 
(3)  Financing. The RWH program shall be funded through a real estate transfer fee imposed upon the initial sale and all resales of every RWH unit in an amount equal to two percent of the purchase price of the RWH unit. The RWH real estate transfer fee shall be in lieu of any brokerage fee paid to any realtor and shall be utilized by the town to pay the expenses of administering the RWH program. The town may provide in the RWH agreement for an exemption from all or a part of the RWH real estate transfer fee for initial sales by the developer, where such sales are not administered or brokered by the RWH program administrator. The town may delegate to the RWH program administrator the management of the RWH real estate transfer fee. Unless specifically waived by the town, the RWH real estate transfer fee shall be in addition to any other real estate transfer tax or fee imposed by the town. 
(i)  Sunset provision. Unless otherwise extended by ordinance, no additional developments and no additional residential units shall be enrolled in the RWH program after December 31, 2010. All developments and RWH units enrolled in the RWH program as of that date shall continue to be administered in compliance with this section, as amended from time to time. 
(j)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an opportunity for the development of a reasonable amount of restricted workforce housing ("RWH") in the Town of Gypsum that meets the needs of all economic groups. This will be accomplished through regulations that permit the set-aside of a portion of new residential development for RWH purposes and by permitting an increase in density to more than ten residential units per acre in multifamily or PUD developments which choose to include RWH. This section provides incentives and concessions to encourage the development of restricted workforce housing. It is the town's intent that RWH is dispersed throughout the town and not concentrated in one area. 
18.05.060 - Development standards for keeping animals in residential zone districts. 
(a)  Care requirements for large animals. 
(1)  Large animals shall include, but are not limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, cows, pigs, sheep, goats, llamas, and alpacas. 
(2)  The minimum lot size for a large animal shall be one acre. Each large animal kept on the lot or parcel of land shall require one full acre of land. 
(3)  Any structure housing any large animals shall be no closer than 20 feet from any property line and no closer than 40 feet from any dwelling unit on any adjoining property. 
(4)  Water troughs for large animals shall not be permitted to run continually causing overflows or flooding of the property. 
(5)  All facilities on the property for large animals, including, but not limited to structures, confinements, fences, pastures, and feed storage shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; animal waste shall not be permitted to accumulate on the property and shall be properly disposed of by the property owner; no nuisances, including, but not limited to odors, dust, vermin, noise and vectors shall be permitted; damages done to any neighbor's fence shall be repaired by the large animal owner. 
(6)  Off-spring from a large animal kept on the property are permitted on the property up to one year of age before such off-spring are considered in the allowable large animal count. Large animals under one year of age that are not off-spring from a large animal kept on the property must be counted toward the total allowable large animal limit. 
(7)  No large animal shall be allowed to run at large off the property. 
(b)  Care requirements for small animals and fowl (excluding chickens which is addressed in 18.05.060(c)). 
(1)  Small animals and fowl include, but are not limited to, ducks, geese, and rabbits. 
(2)  The minimum lot size for small animals or fowl shall be 10,001 square feet. No more than five small animals or fowl shall be permitted if the lot or parcel is less than one acre in size. Ten additional small animals or fowl are permitted for each one acre of lot size. 
(3)  Any structure housing any small animals or fowl shall be no closer than 20 feet from any property line and no closer than 40 feet from any dwelling unit on any adjoining property. 
(4)  All facilities on the property for small animals and fowl, including structures, confinements, fences, pastures and feed-storage shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; animal waste shall not be permitted to accumulate on the property and shall be properly disposed of by the property owner; and no nuisances, including, but not limited to odors, dust, vermin, noise and vectors shall be permitted. 
(5)  Off-spring from a small animal or fowl kept on the property are permitted on the property up to six months of age before such off-spring are considered in the total allowable small animal or fowl count. Small animals or fowl under six months of age that are not off-spring from a small animal or fowl kept on the property must be counted toward the total allowable small animal or fowl limit. 
(6)  No small animals or fowl shall be allowed to run at large off the property. 
(7)  Peacocks may not be permitted on any property in town. 
(c)  Care requirements for chickens. 
(1)  There shall be a maximum of six hens allowed and the property must be 5,0001 square feet or larger. 
(2)  Rooster chickens shall only be permitted on properties of two acres or larger within the town. 
(3)  A chicken coop shall only be located in the rear or side yard and must be at least 15 feet from a neighboring structure meant to be occupied. 
(4)  Chickens shall not be permitted to range outside of the rear or side yards of the property and they shall be further protected by being enclosed in a chicken coop from dusk until dawn. 
(5)  Chicken feed shall be kept within the residence or garage so that it can be secured from rodents or other wildlife. 
(6)  No processing of chickens may occur outside of the residence or garage. 
(7)  Minimum coop design and maintenance standards: 
i.  Chicken coops and runs shall be maintained in a clean fashion to prevent odors and chicken manure shall be removed and stored in a sealed container or removed from the property immediately. 
ii.  The footprint of a chicken coop and enclosed run shall not exceed 120 square feet. The maximum height of the chicken coop shall be eight feet. A chicken coop shall either have a raised floor a minimum of two feet, or must incorporate hardware cloth that has openings one-half inch or less throughout the mesh which is buried to a minimum of one foot around the perimeter of the coop. 
iii.  Chicken coops and runs shall be completely enclosed with wire or other material to contain the chickens and prevent wildlife intrusion. 
iv.  Coops must be predator proof, with adequate ventilation and adequate sun and shade. 
(d)  Enforcement. Enforcement of the foregoing provisions shall be in accordance with section 18.16.040 of this zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, 10-25-16) 
Chapter 18.06 - TABLE OF USES-NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS 

18.06.010 - Table of nonresidential uses. 
Table of Uses Permission Codes by Zone 
Districts Table of Nonresidential Uses P = Permitted Use 
S = Special Use 
C = Conditional Use 
* = Not Allowed Uses CH IC CP LI HI ID Adult Entertainment Establishment (18.02.070) * * * S * * Ambulance Services * P P P * P Amphitheater (18.02.100) * * P P * P Automotive Sales and Repair, Major (18.02.110) * S S P P P Automotive Sales and Repair, Minor (18.02.120) * P P P * P Bar or Tavern (18.02.130) P P P P * * Bed and Breakfast (18.02.140) P P P * * * Bulk Storage of Dangerous Materials (18.02.160) * * * P P P Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) (18.02.165) * * S P P P Child Care Center (18.02.170) P P P C * C Church C C C P * * Commercial Parking Lots * * * P * P Family Child Care Home (18.02.290) * * * * * * Fire Station * P P P * P Funeral Home (18.02.330) * * P P * * Gas Station (18.02.340) * P P P * * Gravel and Mineral Extraction or Processing * * * * S * Heavy Industrial (18.02.370) * * * S P S Home Occupation (18.02.390) * * * * * * Hospital (18.02.400) * P P P * P Hostel (18.02.410) S S * * * * Hotel/Motel/Lodging Establishment (18.02.420) P P P S * * Intermediate Health Care Facility (18.02.430) * * P P * P Medical and Dental Offices and Clinics (18.02.480) P P P P * * Medical Marijuana Caregiver Operations * * * * S * Nightclub (18.02.510) S S S S * * Nursing Care Facility (18.02.530) * * P P * P Office (18.02.550) P P P P * P Outside Storage * * * C C C Park (18.02.600) S S S S * S Pet Animal Facility (18.02.620) * * S P * P Playground (18.02.660) S S S * * S Recreation Center (18.02.670) S P P P * P Recreation Facility, Indoor (18.02.680) S P P P * P Recreation Facility, Outdoor (18.02.690) * P P P * P Recreational Vehicle Park (18.02.700) * * * * * * Recycling Facility (18.02.710) * * * S P S Residential Dwelling Unit S S S S * S Restaurant (18.02.720) P P P S * S Retail Establishment (18.02.730) P P P P * P Salvage or Wrecking Yard (18.02.740) * * * S P * Self-Service Storage Facilities (18.02.750) * * * P * * Truck Stop (18.02.810) * S * S * * Veterinary Facilities, Small Animal Clinic (18.02.830) * S S P * * Veterinary Clinic (18.02.840) * S S P * * Warehouse and Distribution (18.02.850) * * P P * * Wireless Telecommunications Equipment (18.02.860) * C C C C C Wireless Telecommunications Facility (18.02.870) * * S S S S  
(Amend. Ord. 2010-21) 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 4-25-11; Ord. No. 2013-13, 9-24-13) 
Chapter 18.07 - TABLE OF USES-RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS 

18.07.010 - Table of residential uses. 
Table of Uses Permitted Codes byZone District Table of Residential Uses P = Permitted Use 
S = Special Use 
C = Conditional Use 
* = Not Allowed Uses MHP MF SF/ RR AG HD MD LD Single-Family Dwelling Unit P * P P P P P Accessory Dwelling Unit (18.02.040) (18.10.040) * * L L L L L Duplex (18.02.240) * P * * * S P Multifamily, excluding Duplex (18.02.500) * P * * * * * Group Home, Aged (18.02.350) * P P S * S * Group Home, Developmentally Disabled/Mentally III (18.02.360) * P P P P P P Intermediate Health Care Facility (18.02.430) * S * * * * * Nursing Care Facility (18.02.530) * S * * * * * Accessory Building (18.02.030) C * P P P P P Alcoholic Beverage and Medical Marijuana Operations * * * * * * * Ambulance Services * * * * * S S Bed and Breakfast (18.02.140) * * * * S S S Bus Stop P P P P P P P Child Care Center (18.02.170) S S S S S P P Church, with or w/o Dwelling Unit * P P P P P P Commercial Farming/Commercial Greenhouse * * * * * S P Country Club * * * P P P P Family Child Care Home (18.02.290) S S S P P P P Fire Station S S * * S S P Home Occupation (18.02.390) C * C C C C C Hostel (18.02.410) * S S S * * * Keeping Large Animals (18.05.060(a); see 18.05.060(a)(2) for minimum lot size) * * * * P P P Keeping Small Animals or Fowl (18.05.060(b); * Excluding chickens; see 18.05.060(b)(3) for minimum lot size) * * * S P P P Keeping Chickens (18.05.060(c); see 18.05.060(c)(1) for minimum lot size) * * P P P P P Laundromat P P * * * * * Manufactured Home (18.02.470) P P P P P P P Mobile Home (18.02.490) P * * * * * * Noncommercial Greenhouse P P P P P P P Park (18.02.600) P P P P P P P Pet Animal Facility (18.02.620) * * * * * S S Playground (18.02.660) P P P P P P P Riding Academy/Dude Ranch * * * * * S S Sale of Produce/Plants raised on the premises * * * C C P P Sawmill, not more than 2 acres * * * * * * S School, Public or Private * P P P P P P Satellite Dish, Residential P P P P P P P Solar Energy Devices, Residential P P P P P P P Wind Energy Devices, Residential C C C C C C P Water Reservoir * C C C C C P Wireless Telecommunication Equipment (18.02.860) * * * * * S S Wireless Telecommunication Facility (18.02.870) * * * * * * S Recreational Vehicle Park (18.02.700) S * * * * * *  
    To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of those persons occupying dwelling units in the Town of Gypsum, it is necessary to establish maximum standards for the number of persons that may occupy a dwelling unit. The following standards shall apply to each dwelling unit in every residential zone district. 
(a)  Within every dwelling unit in the Town of Gypsum adequate habitable space shall be provided for each of the occupants of the dwelling unit. A "family" (section 18.02.280(2)) that is a domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption or guardianship shall be limited to the owner(s) or tenant(s) occupying the dwelling unit who are parents or guardians; their children by blood or marriage or adoption; any person for whom an owner(s) or tenant(s) acts as legal guardian; and any person who is a parent of either the father or mother of such children or legal guardian (hereinafter collectively referred to as "immediate family"). There shall be one bedroom in the dwelling unit for the occupancy of every two members of the immediate family. A "bedroom" for purposes of this provision and section 18.02.280 shall require a door, a closet, an egress window and a smoke alarm. Other persons who may be related by blood or by marriage to the owner(s) or tenant(s) of the dwelling unit shall not be considered members of the immediate family for purposes of this provision. 
(b)  Except when authorized as a group home under title 18 or otherwise allowed by state or federal law, the occupancy of any dwelling unit within any residential zone district by any number of persons in excess of the limitations set forth in section 18.02.280 is also prohibited. 
    Commercial farming/commercial greenhouse and sawmill uses shall not be allowed for property zoned AG in the following subdivisions: Eagle River Preserve, Hatzenbeller, High Chaparral Ranch or for any property zoned AG in the future unless such uses are specifically granted by the town council at the time of annexation or in the subdivision process. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, 10-25-16; Ord. No. 2017-04,  4, 5-9-17; Ord. No. 2017-13,  4, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-10, adopted Oct. 25, 2016, repealed the former  18.07.010 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  18.07.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2010-21; and Ord. 2011-3. 
Chapter 18.08 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

18.08.010 - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to permit the application of new technology, combinations of uses and greater freedom of design in land development than may be possible under strict interpretation of the other provisions of this title. The intent and purpose of this chapter is to permit and encourage innovative design and high quality master-planned developments through greater flexibility in the application of zoning and development standards. The density of uses and magnitude of development, however, must be of such design and scale to be appropriate and consistent with the character of the town and in harmony with the environment and surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Any application for a planned unit development (PUD) shall be submitted and processed simultaneously with the processing of the subdivision application for the same property. 
(c)  Because a PUD is intended to be a combination of different uses (residential and commercial or residential/commercial/industrial), before requesting approval of a PUD zone district limited solely to residential uses, the applicant is encouraged to consider the utilization of existing residential zone districts as established by this zoning code in preference to a PUD in order to achieve this Code's stated purpose of a "coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the town consistent with its established character," section 18.01.010. If a PUD zone district limited solely to residential uses is proposed, applicant shall state why existing zone districts could not be utilized for this development. 
(d)  A PUD is expected to preserve critical environmental resources, provide above-average open space and recreational amenities, include exceptional design, and provide greater efficiency in the layout and provision of roads, utilities and other infrastructure. 
(e)  The scope of review for a PUD by the town shall include architectural approval or control, limited to review consistency and compatibility with the environment, surrounding neighborhood and the town. 
(f)  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972 as amended,  24-67-101, et seq., C.R.S., and the provisions of said Act as now enacted and as hereafter amended are hereby declared to be superseded by the provisions of this chapter,  24-67-107(1), C.R.S. 
18.08.020 - Standards and requirements. 
    The following standards and requirements shall govern and shall be applied in the review and consideration of the application for a planned unit development (PUD): 
(1)  The PUD shall be consistent with the intent of the master plan and the policies therein, including the commercial and residential land use designations, and shall include references to specific provisions of the master plan when appropriate. 
(2)  Every PUD shall include adequate, safe and convenient arrangements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation, off-street parking, loading space and sidewalks. 
(3)  The town council may require such setbacks, lot widths, street widths and space between buildings as necessary to provide adequate access, fire protection and snow removal, to insure proper ventilation, light, air, snow storage and snow melt between buildings, and to insure that the PUD is compatible with other development in the area. As a general guide, 20 feet between buildings is considered minimum. 
(4)  Open space for the PUD shall be planned to produce maximum usefulness to the residents of the development and the general public for purposes of recreation, scenery, and to produce a feeling of openness. All areas designated as common or public open space pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be accessible by proper physical and legal access ways. 
(5)  Water and sewer service shall be provided by connection to central facilities, unless otherwise approved by the town council, the Colorado Department of Public Health, and the local health authorities. 
(6)  The PUD shall be designed to provide for necessary commercial, recreational and educational facilities conveniently located to residential housing. 
(7)  Clustered housing and other buildings shall be encouraged to promote maximum open space and economy of development and variety in type, design and layout of buildings. 
(8)  The permitted uses in the PUD zone district shall be proposed by the applicant for inclusion in the final PUD development plan. Only those uses designated P, C or S in the tables of uses in this zoning code may be proposed or considered for inclusion as permitted uses in a PUD zone district. Accessory uses in a PUD zone district, including home occupations, shall be subject to chapter 18.10. 
(9)  Applicant shall propose specific development standards for the permitted and accessory uses in the PUD zone district for approval and inclusion in the final PUD development plan addressing the same requirements set forth in chapter 18.05, development standards, for nonresidential, residential and setbacks and encroachments. 
18.08.030 - Criteria for evaluation. 
    The following criteria shall be utilized by the planning and zoning commission and the town council in evaluating any application for approval of a PUD zone district: 
(1)  PUD development plan. The application must include a PUD development plan which may include, but need not be limited to, permitted uses; development standards; easements, covenants, and restrictions relating to use, location, and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development; utilities, private and public streets, ways, roads, pedestrian areas, parking facilities, common open space and other public facilities; and provisions for maintenance of common property. Provisions of the PUD development plan means the written and graphic materials (which shall include architectural renderings) presented in support of the plan presented. 
(2)  Open space. A minimum of 25 percent of the total PUD area shall be devoted to open air recreation or other usable open space, public or quasi-public. Unusable open space, such as unusable drainage detention and conveyance areas, shall not be included in the required 25 percent. Usable open space (see section 18.02.580) shall be designed and intended primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents, occupants and owners of property within the PUD, but at least one-half of the usable open space within the PUD shall also be open to and accessible by the general public. 
(3)  Residential density. Density shall be limited as required by the town council upon consideration of the master plan adopted in accordance with  31-23-206(1), C.R.S., and individual characteristics of the subject land, but shall not exceed 15 residential dwelling units per acre of net developable land area. 
(4)  Density of other uses. The density of nonresidential uses shall be limited as permitted by the town council upon consideration of the master plan and individual characteristics of the subject land. 
(5)  Architecture. Each structure in the PUD shall be designed in such manner as to be consistent and compatible with other structures in the area, yet to avoid uniformity and lack of variety in structural designs within the PUD. 
(6)  Uses. 
a.  Mixed uses. The PUD shall be designed, insofar as practicable when considering the overall size of the PUD, to provide commercial, recreational, educational and transit amenities to its residents to lessen increased traffic and traffic congestion, and to increase walkability and sustainability of the PUD. 
b.  Types of uses. A PUD may include any uses approved by the town council as consistent with the master plan, this zoning code and the characteristics of the subject land, and as deemed compatible with other development in the area of the PUD. Only those uses designated P, C or S in the tables of uses in this zoning code may be proposed or considered for inclusion as permitted uses in a PUD zone district. 
(7)  Minimum area. A PUD shall not be approved on a parcel of land less than five acres in area. 
(8)  Maintenance of common property. No PUD shall be approved unless the applicant confirms that the landowner has provided for or established an adequate organization for the ownership and maintenance of common open space, private streets, roads, ways, drives, pedestrian areas and parking facilities within the PUD (hereinafter collectively referred to as "common property"). In the event that the organization established to own and maintain such common property, or any successor organization, shall at any time after approval of the PUD fail to maintain the common property in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the PUD development plan, the following procedures may be initiated by the town council. 
a.  The town council may serve written notice upon the maintenance organization or upon the residents of the PUD setting forth the maintenance deficiencies. The notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof, and shall state the time, date and place of a hearing thereon before the town council which shall be held within 15 days of the date of notice. 
b.  At such hearing, the town council may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies, including granting an extension of time within which they shall be cured. 
c.  If the maintenance deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof are not cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the town, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, ensure the benefits or services intended, preserve the taxable values of the properties within the PUD and to prevent the common property from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common property and maintain the same for a period of one year. Such entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common property except when it is dedicated to the public by the owners. 
d.  Prior to the expiration of the year of town maintenance, the town council shall call a public hearing upon notice to the organization responsible for the maintenance of the common property, and to the residents and property owners of the PUD, at which hearing such organization and the property owners shall show cause why such maintenance by the town shall not, at the election of the town council, continue for a succeeding year. If the town council shall determine that a responsible organization is ready and able to maintain the common property in reasonable condition, the town shall cease to maintain the common property at the end of said year. If the town council shall determine that a responsible organization is not ready and able to maintain the common property in a reasonable condition, the town, in its discretion, may continue to maintain the common property during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. 
e.  The cost of maintenance of such common property by the town, plus a surcharge determined by the town council in its sole discretion, but not to exceed five percent of the cost of maintenance, shall be assessed to and paid by the owners of properties within the PUD that have a right of enjoyment of the common property. Any unpaid assessments shall become a tax lien on said properties. The town shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the county clerk and recorder upon the properties affected by such lien within the PUD and shall certify such unpaid assessments to the board of county commissioners and the county treasurer for collection, enforcement, and remittance in the manner provided by law for the collection, enforcement, and remittance of general property taxes. 
f.  The requirements for maintenance of common property shall be deemed conditions of approval of every PUD, even though the PUD plan may fail to incorporate or recite them. The authority of the town to maintain such common property in a PUD shall be in addition to any other right or remedy, including but not limited to actions for breach of contract, violations of the Gypsum Municipal Code and the PUD development plan, or nuisance. 
(9)  Consent of landowners. No PUD may be approved by the town council without the written consent of the landowner or landowners whose properties are included within the PUD. All owners of land within the proposed PUD shall sign each application form requesting consideration or approval of any PUD. Subsequent amendment or modification of a PUD zone district shall not require the consent of all landowners within the PUD, but shall require notice and hearing as provided in section 18.08.180 before such amendment or modification is enacted. 
18.08.040 - Procedure generally. 
    The provisions set forth in sections 18.08.050 through 18.08.190 shall be observed when an application for PUD approval is submitted for consideration. The PUD application shall be considered concurrently as a preliminary subdivision plan application, in accordance with the town subdivision regulations. 
18.08.050 - Preapplication conference. 
    A preapplication conference shall be held with the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of establishing general considerations and comments, guidelines and eliciting direction regarding a proposed PUD. The preapplication conference is a vehicle intended to provide the applicant with general guidance and knowledge of the acceptability of any proposed PUD prior to the expenditures of large amounts of time and money in the planning effort. 
18.08.060 - PUD sketch plan-Requirements. 
    Sixty days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which it is to be considered, an applicant shall submit to the planning department in an electronic format acceptable to the planning department the completed PUD sketch plan application form, the overall PUD development sketch plan, supplemental PUD application information and the proposed PUD development plan (all of these submissions shall be collectively referred to herein as the "PUD sketch plan"). One paper copy of the PUD sketch plan shall also be submitted for the file. The PUD sketch plan shall include all materials and information required by the subdivision regulations for a subdivision sketch plan application, and the following information in conceptual or schematic design or report form: 
(1)  Reasons PUD procedure is more desirable than conventional zoning; 
(2)  Proposed land uses, building locations and housing unit densities; 
(3)  Proposed development standards for the PUD; 
(4)  Proposed circulation pattern indicating the status of street ownership; 
(5)  Proposed open space and common property uses, including verification by a professional land surveyor that the 25 percent open space requirement is met; 
(6)  Proposed grading and drainage pattern; 
(7)  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal; Note: Booster stations and lift stations are discouraged; 
(8)  Economic and supporting data to justify any proposed commercial and industrial elements in an area not so zoned; 
(9)  Relation of the proposed PUD to the surrounding area and master plan; 
(10)  Proposed schedule of PUD phasing; 
(11)  Proposed easements, covenants, conditions and restrictions; 
(12)  Copies of owners' association ("organization") documents that provide an acceptable program for the continuing maintenance of common property within the PUD and that detail the type of organizational structure responsible for such ongoing maintenance; 
(13)  Draft environmental impact report, unless applicant has requested and has been granted a waiver by the planning and zoning commission at the preapplication conference; 
(14)  Statement by a qualified professional as to the impact of the proposed PUD upon the public school system; 
(15)  Statement by a qualified professional of the estimated demands for town services, including but not limited to water, sewer, transportation, park and recreation, and law enforcement; 
(16)  Statement by a qualified professional of the projected town sales, use and property tax revenue based upon the previous year's tax levy, and a schedule of projected receipts of that revenue; 
(17)  Conceptual plans of all architectural forms anticipated for development within the PUD; 
(18)  Preliminary site plans and preliminary architectural plans proposed for the first phase of proposed development; 
(19)  Statement by a qualified professional of the estimated demands for fire protection and ambulance service; 
(20)  "Will serve" letters from utility service providers. 
(21)  Statement by a qualified professional as to the impact of the proposed PUD upon wildlife. 
(22)  Any other documents or materials deemed necessary by the planning department for review of this application. 
18.08.070 - PUD Sketch plan-Referral. 
    Prior to consideration of the PUD sketch plan by the planning and zoning commission, the planning department shall distribute for comment, copies of the PUD sketch plan to the town manager, town attorney, town engineer, public works director and other referral agencies as required by the subdivision regulations or as otherwise deemed appropriate. 
18.08.080 - PUD sketch plan-Criteria for review by commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall review and consider the PUD sketch plan and comments from referral agencies at a public meeting (PUD sketch plan review meeting), or in its discretion, at a public hearing. To recommend to the town council approval of the PUD sketch plan, the planning and zoning commission must determine that: 
(1)  There are special physical conditions or objectives that the PUD will satisfy to warrant a departure from standard zoning code and the PUD is being requested to encourage innovative and creative design and to promote a mix of land uses; 
(2)  The PUD will not be inconsistent with the master plan objectives, unless the commission determines that the character of the neighborhood has changed since the master plan was adopted or that the master plan was based on erroneous assumptions; 
(3)  The areas adjacent to the proposed PUD can be planned to be in substantial harmony with the proposed PUD; 
(4)  The adjacent and nearby areas will not be detrimentally affected by the proposed PUD; 
(5)  The proposed PUD can be completed within a reasonable period of time; 
(6)  Any proposed commercial or industrial development can be justified economically; 
(7)  The streets are adequate to support the anticipated traffic and the development will not overload the streets outside the PUD; 
(8)  Proposed public improvements, including utilities and drainage facilities are adequate to serve the PUD; 
(9)  The PUD development plan, including permitted uses and development standards for the PUD, is acceptable. 
18.08.090 - PUD sketch plan-Action by commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall, either at the PUD sketch plan review meeting, or at the public hearing, or within 45 days thereafter: 
(1)  Table the PUD sketch plan for a period not to exceed 95 days for additional study, to obtain additional necessary information, or to have the applicant revise the application or PUD development plan; 
(2)  Recommend the town council approve the PUD sketch plan as submitted, with certain conditions as specified by the commission, if any; or 
(3)  Recommend the town council deny the PUD sketch plan, or certain portions thereof, with all reasons for such recommendation clearly stated. 
18.08.100 - PUD sketch plan-Action by council. 
    At a public meeting within 45 days after receiving the planning and zoning commission's recommendations, the town council shall consider the PUD sketch plan and the commission's recommendations. Based on the same criteria set forth for PUD sketch plan review by the planning and zoning commission in section 18.08.080, the town council shall: 
(1)  Approve the PUD sketch plan as submitted, with certain conditions as specified by the town council, if any; 
(2)  Deny the PUD sketch plan as submitted, or certain portions thereof, with all reasons for denial clearly stated. An application for a PUD preliminary plan shall not be accepted following denial of a PUD sketch plan; 
(3)  Table the PUD sketch plan for a period of not more than 60 days for additional study, to obtain additional necessary information, or to have the applicant revise the application or PUD development plan; or, 
(4)  Refer the PUD sketch plan back to the planning and zoning commission with specific instructions for additional study and recommendations, for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
18.08.110 - PUD preliminary plan-Requirements. 
    Sixty days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which it is to be considered, an applicant shall submit to the planning department in an electronic format acceptable to the planning department the completed PUD preliminary plan application form, the overall PUD development preliminary plan, the supplemental PUD application information and the proposed PUD development plan (all of these submissions shall be collectively referred to herein as the "PUD preliminary plan"). One paper copy of the PUD preliminary plan shall also be submitted for the file. The PUD preliminary plan shall include all materials and information required by the subdivision regulations for a subdivision preliminary plan application, all of the information for the PUD sketch plan set forth in section 18.08.060, plus the following information: 
(1)  A complete environmental impact study; 
(2)  Any information requested or required by the town council as part of its approval of the PUD sketch plan. 
18.08.120 - PUD preliminary plan-Referral. 
    Prior to consideration of the PUD preliminary plan by the planning and zoning commission, the planning department shall distribute for comment, copies of the PUD preliminary plan to the town manager, town clerk and town treasurer, town attorney, town engineer, public works director, and other referral agencies as required by the subdivision regulations or as otherwise deemed appropriate. 
18.08.130 - PUD preliminary plan-Review by commission. 
    At a public meeting (PUD preliminary plan review meeting) or, in its discretion, at a public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall review the PUD preliminary plan based on the same criteria for review of the PUD sketch plan as set forth in section 18.08.080, and the conditions of approval set forth in the town council's approval of the PUD sketch plan. 
18.08.140 - PUD preliminary plan-Action by commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall, either at the PUD preliminary plan review meeting, public hearing or within 45 days thereafter: 
(1)  Table the PUD preliminary plan for a period not to exceed 95 days for additional study, to obtain additional necessary information, or to have the applicant revise the application; 
(2)  Recommend the town council approve the PUD preliminary plan as submitted, with certain conditions as specified by the commission, if any; or 
(3)  Recommend the town council deny the PUD preliminary plan, or certain portions thereof, with all reasons for such recommendation clearly stated. 
18.08.150 - PUD preliminary plan-Action by council. 
    At a public hearing within 45 days after receiving the recommendations from the planning and zoning commission on the PUD preliminary plan, the town council shall consider the PUD preliminary plan and the commission's recommendations. The public hearing on the PUD preliminary plan before the town council shall afford procedural due process to all interested parties. Public notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 18.15.040 for amendment of the zoning code, including the additional requirement that written notice of the public hearing be delivered or mailed, first class postage prepaid, to adjacent property owners not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Based on the same criteria for review of the PUD preliminary plan as incorporated in or as fully set forth in section 18.08.130 by the planning and zoning commission, the town council shall: 
(1)  Approve the PUD preliminary plan as submitted, with certain conditions as specified by the town council, if any; 
(2)  Deny the PUD preliminary plan as submitted, or certain portions thereof, with all reasons for denial clearly stated; 
(3)  Table the PUD preliminary plan for a period of not more than 60 days for additional study, to obtain additional information, or to have the applicant revise the application or PUD development plan; or 
(4)  Refer the PUD preliminary plan back to the planning and zoning commission with specific instructions for additional study and recommendations, for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
18.08.160 - Additional conditions. 
    In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the town council may attach conditions it finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this title. These may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  A requirement that, prior to approval of the final plat by the town council as required by section 17.20.050 of the subdivision regulations, the applicant shall provide construction security to secure the construction of the required improvements as identified in the subdivision improvement agreement in the form of a letter of credit, bond, cash or other financial security that is easily convertible into cash in a form acceptable to the town to assure that the PUD is completed according to the PUD preliminary plan approved by the town council; 
(2)  Approval of development of the PUD in phases, if requested by the applicant. 
18.08.170 - Final plat-Requirements. 
    For purposes of chapter 18.08 of title 18, approval of the PUD preliminary plan shall be considered the final step for approval of the PUD zone district. However, completion of the PUD process shall also require passage of an ordinance by the town council identifying and designating the PUD zone district upon completion of the submission requirements for the final plat, including approval thereof by the planning commission and approval by the town council of the final plat, both as required by section 17.20.050. The final plat shall include and be consistent with the PUD preliminary plan as finally approved and shall include all of the terms and conditions of the PUD development plan, including all permitted uses and development standards for the PUD, and any other requirements established by the planning director. No final plat shall be approved without submission of proof by the applicant that the organization for maintenance of common property, section 18.08.030(8), has been established as proposed by the applicant. 
    Upon final passage and publication of the ordinance establishing the PUD zone district, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be recorded in the real estate records of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder and the property shall be identified on the official zoning district map with the symbol "PUD" and the name of the planned unit development. 
18.08.175 - Vested property rights. 
    An applicant who wishes a PUD final plat, preliminary plan, or sketch plan approval to have the effect of creating vested property rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended, shall follow the procedures for the creation of vested property rights set forth in chapter 17.36 of the Code. Failure to follow those procedures shall result in no vested property rights having been created by the approval. 
(Ord 2014-04) 
18.08.180 - Amendments to PUD. 
    The PUD zone district as finally approved by the town council shall be binding and shall not be changed during the construction of the PUD or thereafter, except upon application under the following procedures: 
(1)  Conditions for amendment. A PUD zone district or an approved PUD development plan may be amended or modified, if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed amendment or modification: 
a.  Is consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the entire PUD, both as proposed and as completed to the date of the application; 
b.  Does not affect in a substantially adverse manner either the enjoyment of land adjacent to the PUD or the public interest; 
c.  Is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any person; 
d.  Does not include any new proposed uses that detract from other uses previously approved for this PUD; 
e.  Contains street and utility plans that are coordinated with planned and existing streets and utilities for the remainder of the PUD. 
f.  Does not increase water and sewer demands or create adverse traffic impacts. 
(2)  Application. When proposing any amendment or modification to a PUD zone district or PUD development plan, the applicant shall first request a preapplication meeting with the town manager or the town manager's designee to discuss procedures, requirements (including the required notice and public hearing), and the town's goals and policies. The applicant shall provide for the conference: 
a.  An application for amendment of a PUD zone district or PUD development plan, plus the appropriate application fee; 
b.  A sketch of the proposed amendments or modifications depicting: topography of the land and the allowed and proposed changes to the existing street system and approximate right-of-way widths, uses including common areas and open space or parks, and densities, and their locations. 
c.  A written summary of the amendments or modifications being requested and a statement setting forth the reasons the proposed amendments or modifications meet the conditions for amendment set forth in subsection (1) of this section 18.08.180; and 
d.  Proof of ownership and consent to the amendment or modifications from the owners of all lots directly affected by the proposed amendments or modifications. Application by or written consent from all of the owners of land in the PUD zone district is not required, if their property is not directly affected by the proposed amendments or modification and whose use or the configuration of their property is not being changed. 
At the preapplication conference, the town manager or the town manager's designee shall classify the proposed amendment or modification as a minor or major amendment, based on the classification criteria set forth below in subsection (3). If the town manager or the town manager's designee cannot determine on the basis of the criteria specified whether the proposed amendments or modifications should be classified as a minor or major amendment, the planning and zoning commission shall make a determination at its next regular meeting. 
(3)  Classification of amendments. 
a.  Minor amendment would include locations, sittings, bulk of structures, height or character of building, each of which may be authorized by the town manager or the town manager's designee if required by circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plat for the PUD was approved, without a public hearing. 
b.  Major amendment would include all other changes in use, any rearrangement of lots or access, all changes in the provisions of open space or density, all of which may only be approved by the town council, by following the same procedures for approval of the PUD preliminary plan as set forth in sections 18.08.110, 18.08.120, 18.08.130, 18.08.140 and 18.08.150, including review and recommendations by the planning and zoning commission and notice and a public hearing before the town council. In addition to any other notice of public hearing required by the provisions of this chapter, any persons owning property in or residing within the PUD zone district, whether such person has signed the application or provided written consent to the amendments or modification or not, and adjacent property owners, shall be given written notice of the public hearing, delivered or mailed, first class postage prepaid, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(4)  Review of PUD amendments. At the public hearing, the town council shall review and consider the major amendment to the PUD zone district or PUD development plan and the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. Based on the same criteria for review of the PUD preliminary plan as incorporated in or as fully set forth in section 18.08.130 by the planning and zoning commission, the town council shall: 
a.  Approve the major amendment as submitted, with certain conditions as specified by the town council, if any; 
b.  Deny the major amendment as submitted, or certain portions thereof, with all reasons for denial clearly stated; 
c.  Table the major amendment for a period of not more than 60 days for additional study, to obtain additional information, or to have the applicant revise the application for major amendment; or 
d.  Refer the major amendment back to the planning and zoning commission with specific instructions for additional study and recommendations, for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(5)  Major amendment to a PUD zone district. Approval of a major amendment to a PUD zone district shall be complete upon passage of an ordinance by the town council amending the ordinance which originally identified and designated the PUD zone district. An amended final plat shall also be prepared and submitted by the applicant for the major amendment incorporating the provisions of the major amendment for recording in the records of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder, together with a certified copy of the ordinance approving the major amendment. 
18.08.190 - Building permits-Issuance or termination. 
(a)  Development within a PUD zone district cannot occur unless and until a final plat for the portion of the property to be developed has been approved and recorded as provided in the subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Building permits for construction within a PUD zone district shall be issued only on the basis of the final plat and PUD development plan. No building permit shall be issued for construction within a PUD zone district until all public improvements have been completed, accepted and dedicated to the town. 
(c)  If no building permit for construction within the PUD zone district has been issued within two years of the date of approval of the final plat, the approval of the final plat may be rescinded by the town council and the town council may initiate the process to repeal the ordinance establishing the PUD zone district. 
Chapter 18.09 - BUILDING PERMITS 

18.09.010 - Required. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit issued by the building official. Building permits shall be issued in conformity and compliance with the provisions of the latest adopted version of the building code, the Gypsum Municipal Code, including but not limited to the land use code, and the applicable zoning, PUD and subdivision plat for the affected lot. 
18.09.020 - Expiration and cancellation. 
(a)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall automatically expire without any further action by the town or notice to the permittee, except the building official may extend the expiration date upon good cause being shown in writing for failure to begin construction as required. Any such extension so granted shall be in writing. Any fees paid to the town, other than the application fee and any review fees for the building permit, in conjunction with the issuance of the building permit which has expired may be returned or refunded as determined by the town manager. 
(b)  If the work described in any building permit has begun, but has not been substantially completed within 18 months of the date of issuance thereof, the building permit shall automatically expire without any further action by the town or notice to the permittee. 
(c)  Any fees paid to the town, other than the application fee and any review fees for the building permit, in conjunction with the issuance of the building permit, for a project that never started may be refunded as determined by the town manager. 
(d)  Upon the expiration of any building permit, the building official shall make a reasonable effort to provide the permittee with written notice of the expiration and that further work as described in the expired building permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit is obtained. Failure of the building official to provide this notice shall not invalidate the expiration of a building permit for failure to begin or substantially complete the work. 
Chapter 18.10 - ACCESSORY USES 

18.10.010 - Location. 
    All accessory uses and structures except fences, landscaping, retaining walls and unenclosed parking shall be located inside the minimum setback line. 
18.10.020 - Home occupations. 
    In any zone district in which a home occupation is a permitted use or has been authorized by a conditional use permit, the establishment and continuance of a home occupation shall be an accessory use subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
(1)  Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on principally by the residents thereof. No dwelling may be used for a home occupation unless it is used also and principally as a residence. 
(2)  Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and shall not change the residential character thereof. 
(3)  The total area used for a home occupation shall not exceed the equivalent of one-half the floor area of the first floor of the dwelling unit. 
(4)  There shall be no advertising, display, or other indications of home occupation on the premises, except one sign without neon or flashing lights, no bigger than six square feet. 
(5)  A home occupation may not primarily involve onsite retail sales. A home occupation primarily involves on-site retail sales if one-half or more of all customer trips to the dwelling unit consist of the customer coming to the dwelling to complete a sale or pick up purchased goods. Retail sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations. 
(6)  There shall not be exterior storage on the premises of material used in the home occupation. 
(7)  There shall not be excessive traffic, significant and frequent truck deliveries, or excessive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, mud, dirt, odors, or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line, as a result of the home occupation. Such conditions shall be considered excessive if they exceed the typical ambient range of variability present in the neighborhood. 
(8)  The owner of the property in which a home occupation is being conducted shall comply with all applicable on-street parking restrictions and shall provide additional off-street parking spaces reasonably adequate to accommodate the needs created by the home occupation of not less than one off-street parking space for any home occupation and one additional off-street parking space for each additional 300 square feet of floor area devoted to the home occupation or for each employee, whichever is greater. 
(9)  Only one operational vehicle that exceeds 22,000 pounds is allowed upon the property and such vehicle cannot be allowed to idle before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(10)  Maximum of three employees working for the owner of the property in which the home occupation is being conducted. 
(11)  Washing of vehicles or heavy machinery is not permitted. 
18.10.030 - Fences. 
    No barbed wire and no electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained in any residential district, except rural residential (RR), agricultural (AG), nor shall such a fence be erected or maintained in a commercial historical district (CH), an interstate commercial district (IC), or a commercial professional district (CP). Erection of such a fence in a developing resource district (DR), an institutional district (ID), a light industrial district (LI), or a heavy industrial district (HI) shall require a conditional use permit. 
18.10.040 - Accessory dwelling units. 
(a)  Limited use. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are a limited used subject to the requirements of this section 18.10.040, receipt of an ADU permit from the town, and allowed only on lots with a single-family home either within certain residential zone districts as outlined in 18.07.010 table of residential uses or within a planned unit development unless prohibited by the PUD Guide. 
(b)  ADU permits. 
(1)  Permits for new ADUs. 
a.  An owner of a single-family home in an approved residential zone district may apply for a permit to construct and operate an ADU on the property. Applications must be made in writing on forms provided by the town, submitted to the town planner or his or her duly authorized representative, showing how and in what manner the criteria of this section 18.10.040 are met, and must include a statement of current ownership, a legal description of the property, an executed deed restriction as required by subsection 18.10.040(c)(14) in the form provided by the town, and a $250.00 application fee. If the property is not served by the town for water, the applicant must also provide evidence of sufficient water rights to accommodate the additional use created by the ADU. If the property is not served by the town for sewer, the applicant must also provide approval from the Eagle County Health Department that the property has an adequate septic system to serve the additional use created by the ADU. 
b.  Applications must be submitted concurrently with either the application for a building permit for construction of a detached ADU, or, if the ADU is to be integrated into a new single-family dwelling, with the building permit application for the single-family dwelling unit. A certificate of occupancy will only be granted to an ADU after it has been granted to the primary dwelling unit. 
c.  ADU permits will be issued administratively by the town planner or his or her designee and may contain conditions designed to minimize the adverse impacts of the proposed use on neighboring properties as determined by the town planner or designee. No notice or public hearing is required prior to issuance of an ADU permit. In determining whether to grant an ADU permit, the town planner or his or her duly authorized representative shall review the completeness of the application, payment of all required fees, and whether the application meets all requirements of this section 18.10.040, and if so, the town planner or his or her duly authorized representative will issue an ADU permit. 
d.  The town may provide copies of approved ADU permits to emergency service providers, including but not limited to the Eagle County Sheriff, Gypsum Fire Protection District, Eagle County, Eagle County Health Service District, and Greater Eagle Fire Protection District. 
e.  ADU permits for new ADUs automatically expire one year after issuance if the property owner has not received a certificate of occupancy for the ADU. 
f.  ADU permits are only valid for the individual or entity who is the property owner at the time of approval. ADU permits may be transferred to a new property owner, provided the property passes a re-inspection by the town and upon payment to the town of a $50.00 permit transfer fee. The inspection and transfer fee may be waived if, prior to closing, the town performed a pre-sale inspection and were paid a reinspection fee pursuant to section 18.10.040(d). If the ADU permit is not transferred for any reason within 120 days of closing, the permit shall expire. 
g.  Approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an ADU permit are actions that may be appealed by the property owner to the planning and zoning commission, and which shall follow the process set forth in 18.10.040(e)(2). 
(2)  Permits for ADUs existing prior to May 1, 2017. 
a.  Property owners of ADUs that were in use prior to adoption of this section 18.10.040 ("Existing ADUs"), must submit an application for an ADU permit pursuant to the following schedule: 
(1)  All properties north of Eagle Street and north of Highway 6 must submit a completed ADU permit between July 1, 2017 and August 31, 2017. 
(2)  All properties south of Eagle Street and west of Valley Road/Gypsum Creek Road must submit a completed ADU permit between September 1, 2017 and October 31,2017. 
(3)  All properties east of Valley Road/Gypsum Creek Road and south of Highway 6 must submit a completed ADU permit between November 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017. 
b.  Health and safety. Each Existing ADU must meet health and safety requirements. The building official shall inspect the property and ADU to determine compliance with the following: 
(1)  Smoke detectors are required at each level of the ADU, within each bedroom, and at each adjoining hallway leading to a bedroom. 
(2)  Carbon monoxide detectors are required within 15 feet of each bedroom entrance. 
(3)  Emergency escape openings are required for each bedroom, per the International Residential Code Section R310. 
(4)  Stairs for egress are required to be in good working order with guardrails and handrails. 
(5)  One full working kitchen to include a sink, refrigerator, stove and/or other cooking appliances, and one full working bathroom, to include a sink, toilet, and shower and/or bathtub are required with an ADU. 
c.  Except as otherwise set forth in this section 18.10.040, applications for an existing ADU shall follow the same ADU permit application process and must meet the same requirements as applications for new ADUs. 
d.  Any property with an existing ADU that fails to submit a completed ADU permit application within the required timeframe, fails to obtain an approved ADU permit, or fails to comply with any conditions of the ADU permit, will be in violation of this section 18.10.040 for construction and operation of an illegal ADU and shall remove the ADU in accordance with section 18.10.040(e). Any property owner who continues to operate an illegal ADU and any tenants of the ADU shall be subject to fines and enforcement actions. 
(c)  ADU requirements. 
(1)  In addition to the off-street parking provided for the primary residence each property with an ADU shall have a minimum of one dedicated off-street parking space per ADU bedroom, but no more than two total parking spaces dedicated to the ADU. Parking is prohibited on landscaping and yard areas, must be contained within a garage or on a driveway, and must comply with all requirements of the Town Code. If the ADU is in an area where on-street parking is permitted and the property cannot legally accommodate additional off-street parking for the ADU, in lieu of off-street parking the town will issue up to two on-street parking passes for use by residents of the ADU. 
(2)  No ADU shall be used as a short-term vacation rental of fewer than 30 days. 
(3)  Only one ADU is allowed on each lot. The ADU may be integrated within the basement or other floor of the single-family home, as a detached structure in the rear or side of the property, or as a unit above an attached or detached garage. 
(4)  An ADU shall not exceed 800 square feet of gross floor area, or 50 percent of the gross floor area of the primary single-family dwelling unit, whichever is less. For the purposes of this subsection, square footage calculations shall exclude any garage, porch or similar area. This requirement shall not apply to existing ADUs. 
(5)  An ADU shall not be subdivided or sold separately from the primary dwelling unit. 
(6)  ADUs are not permitted on lots smaller than 6,500 square feet, regardless of the zone district. This requirement shall not apply to existing ADUs. 
(7)  The exterior of an ADU shall be similar in appearance to that of the primary dwelling unit, including but not limited to, materials, color, roof pitch and detailing. 
(8)  Utility service requirements. ADUs may be served through the utility services of the primary dwelling unit or may have separate services. Additional water and sewer usage fees will be charged for each ADU pursuant to section 13.04.070 of the Town Code. To comply with chapter 8.04 of the Town Code, each ADU must have its own container and pay separate fees for the container and collection and disposal of refuse. 
(9)  Prohibited accessory dwelling units. Mobile homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall be prohibited for use as an ADU. 
(10)  Building code compliance and declaration of use. 
a.  ADUs shall meet all requirements of title 15. This requirement shall not apply to existing ADUs that receive an ADU permit pursuant to subsection 18.10.040(b)(2). 
b.  If a new construction or remodel appears to create a new dwelling unit which includes a stovetop, the property owner will be required to obtain an ADU permit even if the owner has no intention of renting the ADU. However, if the area that meets the requirements of an accessory dwelling unit does not include a stovetop, the property owner must sign a declaration of use in a form acceptable to the town which will be recorded with the county clerk and recorder stating that the property may not be used as a separate dwelling unit at any time, and that the unit currently is and will continue to be used only by the occupant of the primary dwelling, or the occupant's immediate family, and not rented separately 
(11)  No home occupations shall be permitted in either the primary residence or the ADU. 
(12)  Owner occupancy. The property owner, as reflected in title records and evidenced by voter registration, vehicle registration or other similar means, must occupy either the primary residence or the ADU. This requirement shall not apply to existing ADUs, unless the property is sold. 
(13)  Occupancy. No more than two persons per bedroom shall occupy an accessory dwelling unit. 
(14)  Deed restriction. Upon issuing an ADU permit the town may file with the county clerk and recorder, the signed declaration of restrictions in reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the present owner stating that: 
a.  The ADU shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit, nor shall the lot on which it is situated be subdivided unless such subdivision is permissible in accordance with all provisions of titles 15, 17 and 18 of the Code; 
b.  The ADU shall be restricted to the approved size; 
c.  The ADU is the only ADU on the property; 
d.  Home occupations are prohibited in the ADU and in the primary residence; 
e.  The above restrictions run with the land and are binding upon any successor in ownership of the property; 
f.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant not to comply with the deed restrictions; 
g.  The deed restrictions shall lapse upon removal of the ADU. To affect this intent and upon verification of such removal, the town shall record appropriate documentation releasing such encumbrance. The property owner shall pay all required recording fees, and it shall be the property owner's responsibility to ensure that such recording is successfully completed. 
(d)  Pre-sale inspection. Prior to the sale of any property with an ADU, the owner shall schedule a re-inspection by the town to determine continued compliance with the Code and the ADU and pay a $50.00 re-inspection fee. An approved inspection shall be valid for a period of 120 days. If no sale has taken place within that time an additional re-inspection shall be required, and the town may charge an additional re-inspection fee. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Violations. The town may investigate violations of this section 18.10.040 and violations of conditions of an ADU permit, issue notices, and abate violations in the same manner as provided in section 8.05.050 of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
(2)  Revocation of permit. The town planner or his or her designee is hereby granted concurrent power and authority to revoke any ADU permit for violation of any regulations of the Town of Gypsum, including violations of this section 18.10.040, or for violations of any of the conditions imposed upon the ADU permit. Written notice will be served on the property owner at the address contained in the permit, setting forth a clear and concise allegation of the violation. If such person does not reside within the Town, service may be made by U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, to the mailing address on file with the county assessor's office. A property owner may appeal to the planning commission any decision to revoke or deny an ADU permit. Such appeal must be in writing, submitted to the town clerk within seven days of the decision, and must state the reasons why such permit should not be suspended, revoked, or the application denied. Within 45 days of the submittal of the appeal, the planning commission will hold an administrative hearing to determine whether to uphold or overturn the decision. The town clerk will provide the applicant or permit holder with seven days' notice of the time and place of such hearing. After hearing evidence from the property owner and the town planner or designee, the planning commission may issue a verbal decision and may thereafter issue written findings which shall be final and conclusive. The planning commission may promulgate additional rules and regulations or procedures to govern any such hearing and/or review. The decision of the planning commission shall be subject to review by the municipal court by filing a complaint that includes the specific allegations of error no more than 14 days after the final decision by the planning commission. The municipal court's review shall be limited to a determination of whether the planning commission exceeded his or her jurisdiction or abused his or her discretion, based on the evidence in the record before the planning commission. Any appeal of the decision of the municipal court shall be brought in district court as a civil matter pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(3)  Removal required. Within 60 days of the expiration or revocation of an ADU permit, no person shall continue to occupy an ADU as a separate dwelling unit and the property owner shall remove the ADU and return the property to its single-family use status as a single dwelling unit by either: 
a.  Removing the kitchen within the ADU and any physical separation between the ADU and the balance of the unit, and obtaining inspection by the town verifying completion of the removal; or 
b.  Leaving the kitchen within the ADU and removing any physical separation between the ADU and the balance of the unit and obtaining inspection by the town verifying completion. Owner and/or the town shall also sign a declaration of use in a form acceptable to the town planner, which will be recorded with the county clerk and recorder stating that the property may not be used as a separate dwelling unit at any time, and that the unit currently is and will continue to be used only by the occupant of the primary dwelling, or the occupant's immediately family, and not rented separately. 
(4)  Limitations on re-application. Upon revocation of an ADU permit or the failure of the owner of an existing ADU to apply for a permit within the period required by section 18.10.040(b)(2)(a), or to remove an ADU as required by this section 18.10.040(e), the property owner shall be prohibited from reapplying for an ADU permit for any location within the town for a period of three years following the date of revocation or conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04,  5(Exh. A), 5-9-17) 
Chapter 18.11 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 

18.11.010 - Existing uses and structures. 
    The lawful use of any building or of any lot existing at the time of the enactment of an ordinance codified in the land use code, which use is not in compliance with the land use code, may be continued as a nonconforming use except as set forth in this chapter. 
18.11.020 - Expansion and enlargement. 
    A nonconforming use in existence as of the date of the enactment of an ordinance prohibiting, conditioning, restricting or limiting such use shall not thereafter be expanded or enlarged. A nonconforming structure may be altered, enlarged or expanded; provided such alteration, enlargement or expansion is in conformity with the provisions of the land use code; and such alteration, enlargement or expansion does not increase, expand, enlarge, or result in the aggravation of its nonconforming feature or features. 
18.11.030 - Repairs. 
    Any nonconforming structure may be repaired whenever such repairs are necessary to the convenient use and efficient operation of such structure. 
18.11.040 - Discontinuance. 
    When any nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of 12 months, regardless of any intent to resume operations or if the use is discontinued as a result of a change in ownership of the property, such use shall not thereafter be resumed and any future use of the premises shall be in conformance with the provisions of the land use code. 
Chapter 18.12 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS; SPECIAL USE PERMITS 

18.12.010 - Intent. 
    In the tables of uses for zone districts, uses designated "C" are permitted in the zone district indicated, subject to any conditions contained in a conditional use permit to be issued administratively by the town manager or the town manager's designee, section 18.03.070(b). Uses designated "S" may be allowed in the zone district indicated, only upon issuance of a special use permit by the planning and zoning commission following notice and hearing, section 18.03.070(3). The issuance of a conditional use permit or a special use permit may, in some manner, contradict the purpose and intent of this zoning code as set forth in section 18.01.010. The following criteria shall be used to guide the town manager or the town manager's designee or the planning and zoning commission in determining that the proposed use is appropriate: 
(1)  Relation to and effect upon the master plan generally; 
(2)  Effect upon light and air, distribution of population, transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public improvements and requirements; 
(3)  Effect upon traffic in the streets, with particular reference to congestion, automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, including control and flow of traffic entering public streets from private property, access and maneuverability and removal of snow from the streets under circumstances of heavy accumulation; 
(4)  Effect upon the character of a particular zoning district, including the effect upon characteristic use within such district, and the characteristic physical attractiveness of such district, its architecture and landscaping; 
(5)  Effect upon the value of existing buildings and improvements; 
(6)  The appropriateness of the proposed use in relation to the land uses generally throughout the town; 
(7)  Complete list of the names and mailing addresses of adjacent property owners within 300 feet of subject property required to be notified of the hearing on the application for special use permit; 
(8)  Whether the granting of the application would amount to granting to the applicant a special favor not available to other persons; 
(9)  The possible adverse affect of approval or denial as a precedent in future cases. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  4, 1-12-16) 
18.12.020 - Process, submittal requirements and procedures. 
    The form of application, submittal requirements and procedures for application for a conditional use permit or an application for a special use permit are available from the planning department for the Town of Gypsum. 
    A person proposing a use which requires either a conditional use permit or a special use permit shall submit a written application to the planning department specifying or including: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The legal description and street address of the subject property. 
(3)  That the applicant is the owner of the subject property or has the written permission of the owner (copy to be enclosed), to make the application. 
(4)  The nature of the proposed use for which a conditional use permit or special use permit is required by this zoning code, fully describing the intended use of the property; 
(5)  An appropriate number of 11-inch by 17-inch reductions of the site plan as determined by the planning department; 
(6)  Unless services are already being provided to the property, letter(s) from the appropriate utility service providers and fire district stating the availability to serve the proposed use; 
(7)  Complete list of the names and mailing addresses of adjacent property owners within 300 feet of subject property required to be notified of the hearing on the application for special use permit; 
(8)  A fee of $150.00 for a conditional use permit or $250.00 for a special use permit shall be tendered by check with the application submitted to the planning department (check made payable to the Town of Gypsum); 
(9)  Additional information may be requested by the planning department as appropriate to the particular application, or portions of the information required above may be waived by the planning director if it is deemed to be inappropriate to the particular application. 
18.12.030 - Action by town manager or designee, conditional use permit. 
    A conditional use permit must be obtained prior to initiating certain uses as noted in the table of uses for various zone districts contained herein, or before initiating a use which imposes no greater impacts on the need for services and adjacent properties and is consistent with a permitted use, but which is not listed as a permitted use in the tables of uses. Conditional use permits shall be issued administratively by the town manager or the town manager's designee and may contain conditions designed to minimize the adverse impacts of the proposed use on neighboring properties as determined by the town manager or the town manager's designee. No notice or public hearing is required prior to issuance of a conditional use permit. 
    The town manager or the town manager's designee shall act to grant or deny an application for a conditional use permit within 30 days of the receipt of the application by the planning department. The applicant shall be notified in writing of approval or denial of the application. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set forth in the notice. Upon approval, a conditional use permit will be issued with any conditions as determined by the town manager or the town manager's designee and will become effective upon the signature of the permittee and the town manager or the town manager's designee. 
    Conditional use permits shall be permanent upon completion of the proposed use. However, if the proposed use is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the conditional use permit, the conditional use permit shall become null and void and of no effect, except the town manager or the town manager's designee may extend the expiration date for a period of no more than one year upon good cause being shown in writing for failure to complete the use as proposed. Any such extension so granted shall be in writing. Any fees paid to the town, other than the application fee, in conjunction with the issuance of the conditional use permit which is null and void may be returned or refunded as determined by the town manager. Any conditional use permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall become null and void at the expiration of one year after the use for which it is issued shall have been discontinued. 
    Approval, approval with conditions or denial of a conditional use permit are actions that may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission which shall follow the same process set forth in section 18.16.060 for an appeal. 
18.12.040 - Action by planning and zoning commission, special use permit. 
    A special use permit must be obtained from the planning and zoning commission, following notice and a public hearing, to undertake a use so enumerated in the zone district table of uses. A special use permit may only be granted upon a showing that the proposed use will not adversely affect neighboring parcels in a manner the commission finds to be unreasonable. Special use permits may be issued by the planning and zoning commission, following notice and a public hearing, recommendations, if any, of the planning department to grant or deny the application, and may contain conditions necessary or appropriate to prevent adverse effects on neighboring properties. 
    At the staff's discretion, a special use permit may also be required prior to initiating a use which is not listed as a permitted use in the table of uses. When a special use permit is so required, final approval and the grant of such special use permit shall require approval of the town council upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, or the town council may deny the special use permit or approve it with conditions, all after consideration of the criteria set forth in section 18.12.010. 
    The public hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be scheduled not less than 30 and not more than 60 days after receipt of the application for special use permit by the planning department. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The parcel for which such special use permit is sought shall be posted by sign at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing and continuously through the date of the public hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid to the applicant and to adjacent property owners as such owners' names and addresses may appear in the tax records of the town or Eagle County at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be given by inclusion in the agenda of the planning and zoning commission at which the application shall be heard. The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners required to be notified shall be determined by the applicant and such information shall be submitted to the planning department with the application. 
    The planning and zoning commission may table an application for 30 days after the hearing for further information or consideration or the commission may continue the hearing to a specific date and time for receipt of additional information and for consideration of that information by the commission. The planning and zoning commission shall grant or deny the application for special use permit by resolution after consideration of the criteria set forth in section 18.12.010 and only after finding that granting the application will not cause a material adverse effect on the neighborhood involved or on the town; does not frustrate the general goals of the master plan and the zoning code; and does not give the applicant a special favor not available to others in the community. In granting any special use permit, the commission may impose conditions necessary or appropriate to prevent or mitigate adverse effects on neighboring properties. The determination of the planning and zoning commission to grant or deny the application for special use permit shall be final, and any appeal of the decision shall be to the town council; see section 18.16.050(f). 
    Special use permits may be temporary or permanent. The applicant shall be notified in writing of approval or denial of the application. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set forth in the resolution. Upon approval, a special use permit will be issued with any conditions as determined by the commission and will become effective upon the signature of the permittee and the chair of the planning and zoning commission. 
    Special use permits shall be permanent upon completion of the proposed use. However, if the proposed use is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the special use permit, the special use permit shall become null and void and of no effect, except the planning and zoning commission may extend the expiration date of the permit upon good cause being shown for failure to complete the use as proposed. Any fees paid to the town, other than the application fee, in conjunction with the issuance of the special use permit which is null and void may be retained or refunded as determined by the planning and zoning commission. Any special use permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall become null and void at the expiration of one year after the use for which it is issued shall have been discontinued. 
    Temporary special use permits shall not be granted for a term of more than one year and an expiration date shall be specified when the permit is issued. A temporary special use permit shall not be renewed or extended beyond its expiration date. A new temporary use permit may be issued upon a new application after notice and a public hearing as provided herein. 
18.12.050 - Enforcement. 
    The planning and zoning commission is hereby granted concurrent (see section 18.16.040(c)(3)c.) power and authority to suspend or revoke any conditional use permit or special use permit for violation of any regulations of the Town of Gypsum or for violation of any of the conditions imposed upon the conditional use permit or the special use permit. Upon receipt of notice of a violation, the planning and zoning commission shall cause written notice to be served on the permittee, or that person's successors or assigns, at the address contained in the permit, setting forth a clear and concise allegation of the violation and directing the permittee, or that person's successors or assigns, to appear at a date and time certain before the commission not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date of service of the notice of violation. If such person does not reside within the town, service may be made by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall hold a hearing to determine the nature and extent of the alleged violation and shall have the power, on good cause being shown to cancel, suspend or revoke the conditional use permit or special use permit theretofore issued to the permittee, or to require corrective measures to be taken, or to direct the town or its agents to enter onto the premises and to take the corrective measures required by the commission, the costs of such corrective measures completed by the town to be assessed against the permittee, or that person's successors or assigns, and the property for which the permit was issued. 
18.12.060 - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any land, building or structure for any purpose for which a conditional use permit or special use permit is required by any of the provisions of this zoning code, without first obtaining such permit. If found in violation, in addition to any fine that may be imposed in the municipal court, violators shall also be responsible for court fees and attorney fees incurred by the town in bringing any enforcement action. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while any conditional use permit or special use permit is null and void for failure to complete the proposed use, canceled, suspended or revoked, to use any land, building or structure for any purpose for which such a permit is required by the provisions of this zoning code. If found in violation, in addition to any fine that may be imposed in the municipal court, violators shall also be responsible for court fees and attorney fees incurred by the town in bringing any enforcement action. 
Chapter 18.13 - VARIANCES 

18.13.010 - Authority. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to grant variances from the requirements of the zoning code in respect to any use, building, or structure classified under sections 18.04. 18.05. 18.10 and 18.17. No variance may be granted to permit a use not otherwise permitted in the applicable zone district; except that a variance may be granted to permit a use that is limited by a PUD Guide and which would otherwise be permitted by this title 18 in the corresponding zone district. Variances shall be granted only in cases of unusual hardship which are not self-imposed, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05,  1, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-05,  1, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former  18.13.010 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  18.13.010 pertained to similar subject matter. 
18.13.020 - Application-Required. 
    A person desiring a variance shall submit a written application to the planning department for determination by the planning and zoning commission, specifying: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The legal description and street address of the subject property; 
(3)  That the applicant is the owner of the subject property or has the written permission of the owner (copy to be enclosed), to make the application; 
(4)  The nature of the proposed use, or other item proposed, which is not permitted by this title; 
(5)  The nature of the hardship which would be created by a strict interpretation of this title; 
(6)  The justification for the applicant being granted a variance; 
(7)  An appropriate number of 11-inch by 17-inch reductions of the site plan as determined by the planning department shall be submitted in an electronic format acceptable to the department, together with one (1) paper copy of the site plan for the file; 
(8)  Letter from the appropriate utility providers and fire district stating the availability to serve the proposed use; 
(9)  Complete list of the name and mailing addresses of adjacent property owners within 300 feet of subject property required to be notified of the hearing on the application for variance; 
(10)  A fee in the amount of $250.00 shall be tendered by check with the application submitted to the planning department (check made payable to the Town of Gypsum); 
(11)  Additional information may be requested by the planning department as appropriate to the particular application, or portions of the information required above may be waived by the town manager or the town manager's designee if it is deemed to be inappropriate to the particular application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  5, 1-12-16) 
18.13.030 - Application-Hearing and review. 
    The public hearing on the application for variance before the planning and zoning commission shall be scheduled not less than 30 and not more than 60 days after receipt of the application for variance by the planning department. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The parcel for which such variance is sought shall be posted by sign at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing and continuously through the date of the public hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid to the applicant and to adjacent property owners as such owners' names and addresses may appear in the tax records of the town or Eagle County at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be given by inclusion in the agenda of the planning and zoning commission at which the application shall be heard. The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners required to be notified shall be determined by the applicant and such information shall be submitted to the planning department with the application. 
    In reviewing and considering an application for variance, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Relation to and effect upon the master plan generally; 
(2)  Effect upon light and air, distribution of population, transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public improvements and requirements; 
(3)  Effect upon traffic in the streets, with particular reference to congestion, automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, including control and flow of traffic entering public streets from private property, access and maneuverability and removal of snow from the streets under circumstances of heavy accumulation; 
(4)  Effect upon the character of a particular zoning district, including the effect upon characteristic use of such district, and the characteristic physical attractiveness of such district, its architecture and landscaping; 
(5)  Effect upon the value of existing buildings and improvements; 
(6)  The appropriateness of the proposed use in relation to the land uses generally throughout the town; 
(7)  The advisability of any imposition of conditions it finds necessary for the protection of the community or the immediate neighborhood from adverse effects of the use or building involved; 
(8)  The cause, uniqueness and severity of the hardship claimed by the applicant; 
(9)  Whether the granting of the application would amount to granting the applicant a special favor not available to other persons; 
(10)  The possible adverse affect of approval or denial as a precedent in future cases; 
(11)  Alternative variances which deviate less from the strict requirements of this title. 
18.13.040 - Action by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may table an application for variance for 30 days after the public hearing for further information or consideration or the commission may continue the hearing to a specific date and time for receipt of additional information and for consideration of that information by the commission. Except in unusual circumstances, or during the time an applicant is obtaining additional information requested by the commission, an application for variance shall not be tabled longer than 30 days after its first hearing. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall grant or deny an application for variance by resolution. The planning and zoning commission may grant a variance only after consideration of the factors listed in section 18.13.030, and only after finding that the granting of the variance: 
(1)  Will not cause a material adverse affect on the neighborhood involved or on the town; 
(2)  Does not frustrate the general goals of the master plan and the zoning code; 
(3)  Is justified because of any unusual hardship imposed on the subject property by a strict interpretation of this zoning code, which hardship is not the fault of the applicant or his predecessors in interest in the subject property; 
(4)  Does not give the applicant a special favor not available to others in the community. 
(c)  In granting any variance, the planning and zoning commission may impose conditions for the reasonable protection of the immediate neighborhood from adverse effects of the building or use involved. 
(d)  The applicant shall be notified in writing of approval or denial of the application. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set forth in the resolution. Upon approval, a variance in written form shall be issued with any conditions as determined by the planning and zoning commission and shall become effective upon the signature of the permittee and the chair of the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Any variance granted by the planning and zoning commission shall be permanent upon completion of the proposed use or other action proposed by the applicant. However, if the proposed use or action is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the variance, the variance shall become null and void and of no effect, except the planning and zoning commission may extend the expiration date of the variance in writing upon good cause being shown in writing by the applicant for failure to complete the use or take the action as proposed. Any variance issued under the terms of this chapter shall become null and void at the expiration of one year after the use for which it is issued shall have been discontinued. 
(f)  Any decision to grant or deny an application for variance may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided in section 18.16.050. 
Chapter 18.14 - LOCATION AND EXTENT REVIEW FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC FACILITIES 

18.14.010 - Intent. 
    The location and extent of public uses and facilities as provided by Section 31-23-209, C.R.S., which are not permitted within the applicable zone district pursuant to the tables of uses herein contained, shall be subject to review pursuant to this chapter 18.14. The intent of this chapter is to define the factors to be considered in the "location and extent" process, and to prescribe procedures for the orderly consideration of a location and extent application in order to effect the purposes of the state statute. Any public use or facility commenced within the town prior to the adoption of this chapter that was not approved pursuant to a location and extent process may, but is not required to, subsequently seek approval pursuant to this chapter. 
18.14.020 - General requirements and procedure. 
(a)  No street, road, square, park, public way, ground, or open space, no public building or structure, or publicly or privately owned public utility shall be constructed or authorized in the Town of Gypsum unless and until the proposed location, character and extent thereof has been submitted to and approved by the Gypsum Planning and Zoning Commission at a public meeting. Routine extensions of public utility lines and minor modifications to existing facilities shall not be subject to this procedure. 
(b)  If the planning and zoning commission disapproves of the proposed public facility, the commission shall communicate the reasons for such disapproval to the town council, which has the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(c)  If the public way, ground space, building, structure or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not, under the law or charter provisions governing the same, fall within the province of the town council, the submission to the planning and zoning commission shall be by the governmental body having jurisdiction and the commission's disapproval of such application may be overruled by said governmental body having jurisdiction by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership, Section 31-23-209, C.R.S.. 
(d)  The failure of the planning and zoning commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission of the location and extent application to the commission shall be deemed approval, Section 31-23-209, C.R.S. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission, and the town council when applicable, may approve the proposed public facility as submitted, approve it with conditions, or deny the facility. The conditions to be imposed are those necessary, at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission or town council, to mitigate or eliminate any adverse impacts of the proposed facility on the surrounding area. 
(f)  Upon approval of the location and extent application, the applicant shall submit a location and extent plat consisting of an original drawing in black ink on 24-inch by 36-inch single/double matte mylar to the planning department for the signature of the chair of the planning and zoning commission. The mylar will be kept on file at the planning department. 
(g)  Approval of a location and extent application shall be subject to stipulations and/or conditions precedent which the applicant is deemed to accept by preparing a reproducible mylar for signature by the chair of the planning and zoning commission within 60 days from approval date. If no mylar is submitted, the planning director shall recommend the planning and zoning commission rescind approval of the application. 
(h)  After the commission chair signs the mylar, a building permit may be issued upon a proper application and the location and extent application shall be considered to be approved. 
18.14.030 - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  The location and extent application shall be submitted in an electronic format acceptable to the planning department and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of proposed facility. 
(2)  Land area and legal description. 
(3)  Vicinity map (one mile radius with emphasis on major roadways). 
(4)  Proposed land use for each area and its area in square feet. 
(5)  Existing and proposed public and private rights of way serving the site, types of surfacing and width of paving. 
(6)  The existing zoning of the property to be used, as well as the zoning and residential density of all adjacent properties. 
(7)  All easements and drainageways should be identified. 
(8)  Existing and proposed finished grade topography shown at two-foot contours, corresponding with datum acceptable to the town. 
(9)  The location(s) and dimension(s) of all existing and proposed structures, the use(s) to be located therein, the building elevations, gross floor area and locations of entrances and loading points. 
(10)  Location of outdoor waste disposal systems. 
(11)  All existing and proposed curb cuts, driveways, parking (including number of spaces) and storage areas. 
(12)  The location(s) and dimension(s) of existing curb cuts and driveways on adjacent properties and across right-of-way. 
(13)  All walks, open space and recreation areas with a description of these improvements. 
(14)  An illustrative landscape plan showing locations, general types and sizes of all proposed landscaping materials, fences, walls, planters and any other landscaping features. 
(15)  Provisions for access by emergency vehicles. 
(16)  Signage and lighting devices fully detailed. 
(17)  Utility lines and appurtenances. 
(b)  Applicant shall provide a public improvement guarantee, in the form of a dedication of rights-of-way, sidewalk construction, etc., if required by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Additional information may be requested for inclusion by the town manager or the town manager's designee if appropriate to the application, and information required above may be waived by the town manager or the town manager's designee if it is deemed to be inappropriate to the application. 
18.14.040 - Amendments. 
(a)  Minor changes. The town manager or the town manager's designee will make the determination of whether the proposed amendment to the location and extent application is minor. Appeals of that determination may be made to the planning and zoning commission. If the changes are deemed minor, the minimum requirements are: one completed application form, one letter of intent, and one revised reproducible mylar of the amended location and extent plat for signature of the chair of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Significant changes. If the town manager or the town manager's designee determines that the changes are significant, the proposed amendment to the location and extent application shall require a resubmittal of documents and a meeting of the planning and zoning commission for approval of the changes. 
(c)  Location and extent amendment documentation. An amended location and extent application shall contain all the original information, plus the items that are being changed. When possible, the development standards should appear in a chart format comparing the approved and proposed standards. Also, an amendment history must be added to the document. If the amendment is required to be approved by the planning and zoning commission, the submittal requirements for the location and extent application described in section 18.14.030 shall be required for the amendment. 
Chapter 18.15 - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE AND OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP 

18.15.010 - Authority. 
    The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the town council, as provided by law and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
18.15.020 - Initiation of amendments to text of the zoning code. 
    Amendments to the text of this zoning code may be made by legislative determination of the town council, in the manner required for adopting ordinances, with the exception of an added review and recommendation to the town council by the planning and zoning commission. 
18.15.030 - Comprehensive zoning map revisions. 
    Comprehensive revisions of all or a large part of the zone district designations and boundaries shown on the official zoning district map shall be accomplished by legislative determination of the town council in the manner required for adopting ordinances, following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. In addition, the proposed official zoning map shall be made available for public inspection in the town hall during regular business hours for 15 days prior to the public hearing on such revisions. 
18.15.040 - Zoning amendment process. 
    Amendments to the official zoning district map affecting individual or small groups of properties may be initiated by the town council, town staff, the planning and zoning commission, or by a real property owner in the area to be included in the proposed zoning amendment. Revisions of zone district designations and boundaries shown on the official zoning district map affecting individual or small groups of properties shall be accomplished through the following notice and hearing process, and by ordinance adopted by the town council. 
(1)  Preapplication conference. The applicant shall attend a preapplication conference with a representative of the town. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the proposed zoning amendment, submittal requirements and review process. 
(2)  Zoning amendment application submittal. The applicant shall submit to the planning department the complete zoning amendment application package, including a check made payable to the Town of Gypsum in the amount of $250.00 for the fee, containing the following enumerated items in an electronic format acceptable to the department, together with one paper copy of the application package for the file, and shall request that the application be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and town council. 
a.  A completed land use application. 
b.  A legal description for all property to be considered for rezoning. 
c.  Current proof of ownership of property likely to be affected by the zoning change in the form of title insurance issued within 30 days of submission of the application, an ownership and encumbrance report, chain of title guarantee, or other similarly reliable evidence of ownership. 
d.  A zoning amendment map of the area included in the proposed change, 24 inches high by 36 inches wide, with the following information: 
1.  North arrow, scale (1 inch = 100 feet or 1 inch = 200 feet), and date of preparation; 
2.  The subdivision name or block and lot number of the area to be zoned (if applicable) at the top of each sheet; 
3.  Legal description of area to be zoned (entire area and individual zone districts). For unsubdivided property, district boundaries shall be determined by a metes and bounds description; 
4.  Location and boundaries, including dimensions, of the property(s) proposed for rezoning. Note: Generally, district boundaries are to be boundary lines of subdivided parcels or the center lines of physical streets, roads, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, and channelized waterways, or such lines extended along an imaginary line; 
5.  The acreage or square footage of the property(s) proposed for rezoning; 
6.  All existing land uses in the area proposed for rezoning; 
7.  Zoning and existing land uses on all lands adjacent to the area proposed for rezoning; 
8.  The location and dimensions for all existing public rights-of-way including streets, and centerlines of water-courses within and adjacent to the area proposed for rezoning; 
9.  The names of all adjoining subdivisions with lines of abutting lots, and departing property lines of adjoining properties not subdivided; and 
10.  Certificate and signature blocks for the surveyor, planning and zoning commission, town council, and Eagle County Clerk and Recorder as required for plat endorsements. 
e.  A written statement describing the proposal and addressing the following points: 
1.  Need for the proposed rezoning; 
2.  Present and future impacts on the existing adjacent zone districts, uses, and physical character of the surrounding area; 
3.  Impact of the proposed change on area accesses and traffic patterns; 
4.  Availability of utilities for any potential development; 
5.  Present and future impacts on public facilities and services, including, but not limited to, fire, police, water, sanitation, roadways, parks, schools, and transit; 
6.  The relationship between the proposal and the town land use code or master plan, whichever was last updated; and 
7.  Public benefits arising from the proposal which addresses the benefit to the general public, rather than the benefit to a single landowner which could be considered to be spot zoning which is prohibited in Colorado. 
f.  Adjacent property ownership report. Applicant shall provide the planning director with a current list (not more than 30 days old) of the names and addresses of adjacent property owners, within 300 feet of subject property, mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies and owners. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate. 
g.  Public hearing notification envelopes. Applicant shall provide two sets of stamped, addressed, certified (return receipt requested) envelopes. The envelopes shall have the town's address as the return address and the envelopes shall be addressed to adjacent property owners, mineral interest owners of record, oil and gas lessees for the property, and the appropriate referral agencies as designated by planning director. It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that accurate and complete information is provided. 
(3)  Zoning amendment application certification of completion. Within a reasonable period of time, the town manager or the town manager's designee shall either certify that the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. Applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application to the planning department. The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in ink. 
(4)  Final staff review and report to planning and zoning commission. The staff shall complete a final review of the completed application and prepare a report to the planning and zoning commission explaining how the application is or is not consistent with the criteria for amendments to the official zoning district map set forth below. 
(5)  Set zoning amendment public hearing and complete public notification process. The town manager or the town manager's designee shall send notice of the hearing to the applicant, adjacent property owners, all mineral interest owners of record, oil and gas lessees of the property, and to the appropriate referral agencies, not less than 15 days before the initial Planning and zoning commission hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, published and posted on the subject property pursuant to the notice requirements set forth in this zoning code not less than 15 days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall not be required for text amendments. If the zoning amendment request accompanies another application that is scheduled for a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and/or town council, a joint public hearing may be held for both applications before each body. 
(6)  Planning and zoning commission public hearing and action on the zoning amendment. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing to review the zoning amendment based on the criteria for amendments to the official zoning district map hereinafter set forth. The commission shall then make a recommendation to the town council to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the zoning amendment application. 
(7)  Revised application based on planning commission comments. If the planning and zoning commission recommends that the applicant amend the application, the applicant shall have the opportunity to make the suggested revisions based on the commission's comments and resubmit the application. 
(8)  Notify adjacent property owners. The planning department shall provide notice of the town council public hearing to adjacent property owners within 300 feet of subject property as identified by the applicant not less than ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. Such notice shall not be required for text amendments. 
(9)  Town council hearing and action on the zoning amendment. The town council shall, after receiving the report and recommendations from the planning and zoning commission and staff, hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The parcel for which such zoning amendment is sought shall be posted by sign at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing and continuously through the date of the public hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid to the applicant and to adjacent property owners as such owners' names and addresses may appear in the tax records of the town or Eagle County at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be given by inclusion in the agenda of the town council at which the application shall be heard. The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners required to be notified shall be determined by the applicant and such information shall be submitted to the planning department with the application. 
Following the public hearing, the town council shall consider the comments and evidence presented at the hearing, evaluate the application in accordance with the criteria set forth in section 18.15.050 hereof and deny the application in whole or part, or by ordinance approve the application or approve it with conditions. 
(10)  Post approval actions. Upon approval by the town council of an amendment to the official zoning district map, the town clerk or planning department shall cause an appropriate revision of the official zoning district map to be prepared for recording with the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16,  6, 1-12-16) 
18.15.050 - Criteria for amendments to the official zoning district map. 
    For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the town, the official zoning district map shall not be amended except: 
(1)  To correct a manifest error in an ordinance establishing the zoning for a specific property; or 
(2)  To rezone an area or extend the boundary of an existing district because of changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the town generally; or 
(3)  When the land to be rezoned was zoned in error and as presently zoned is inconsistent with the policies and goals of the town's land use code or the master plan, whichever was last updated; or 
(4)  When the proposed rezoning is necessary to provide land for a community-related use that was not anticipated at the time of the adoption of the land use code or master plan, whichever was last updated, and the rezoning will be consistent with the policies and goals of the master plan; or 
(5)  When the area requested for rezoning has changed or is changing to such a degree that it is in the public interest to encourage development or redevelopment of the area. 
This declaration of criteria for zoning map amendments shall not apply to amendments that occur as part of a comprehensive revision to the text of the zoning code or official zoning district map accomplished by legislative action of the town council. 
18.15.060 - Map amendment upon zoning establishment or modification. 
    Upon adoption of any ordinance annexing and establishing zoning or modifying existing zoning for any property, the town shall amend the official zoning district map to include the annexed area with the proper zoning classification or to show the amended classification, as the case may be. The official zoning district map shall contain, in tabular form, the date and number of the ordinance amending it, the date the map was amended to reflect each amendment and the initials of the person who checked and approved the change to the map. 
Chapter 18.16 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

18.16.005 - Planning and zoning commission. 
    The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the town council for a term of four years ending in May or until the member's successor takes office. Appointments to the planning commission shall be made in May following any general municipal election in April and the members so appointed shall take office at the first meeting in June following their appointment. Terms shall be staggered so that four members are appointed in one cycle and three members in the next cycle of appointments. One member of the planning and zoning commission shall be an elected member of the town council. When a town council member of the planning commission leaves office of the town council, he or she shall no longer serve as a member of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 6 series 1995 S1) 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members. In addition, the commission may have an advisory committee. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the council shall cause public notice of such vacancy to be made and encourage qualified volunteers to seek appointment. (Ord. 28, Series 1999) 
(2)  Annually, at the first regular meeting in June, the planning and zoning commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and vice-chairperson, with each being eligible for reelection. At the same meeting, the planning and zoning commission shall appoint a secretary for the purpose of keeping minutes of all meetings, for notifying all members of times and dates of meetings, and for keeping files and records. 
(3)  The chairperson shall preside at all meetings and public hearings of the planning and zoning commission and shall decide all points of order and procedure. The chairperson shall also certify plans and plats and shall transmit reports and recommendations of the planning and zoning commission to the town council. 
(4)  The vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson in the absence of the chairperson and shall act in the capacity of chairperson of all special committees created by the planning and zoning commission. Should the vice-chairperson and the chairperson be absent from a meeting or public hearing, a majority of the members of the planning and zoning commission in attendance shall appoint a member to serve as the presiding officer for that meeting or public hearing. 
(5)  The town clerk shall transmit to the chairperson all official correspondence received by the town which may require consideration or action by the planning and zoning commission. 
(6)  The town council may replace any member of the planning and zoning commission if that member misses more than three consecutive meetings or 40 percent of the meetings in a six-month period, unless the absences were due to reasons determined to be valid by the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 9 series 1993 S2) 
(7)  Regular meetings shall be held upon notice as required by Colorado Law, on such days and at such times as set from time to time by resolution of the town council. Special meetings may be called as necessary by the chairperson or a majority of the members of the planning and zoning commission at any regular meeting or upon 24 hours actual notice to all members, and such other notice as required by Colorado law. Attendance by a member at any meeting shall constitute conclusive evidence of adequate notice. Any member may waive the actual notice requirement for special meetings at any time. If is becomes necessary to change the day or time of the regular meetings, the town council may by resolution authorize such changes providing notice is published at least one time in a paper of general circulation. (Ord. 4 series 1994 S1) 
(8)  Any meeting at which a quorum of the planning and zoning commission is expected to be in attendance shall be held only after posting at the Gypsum Town Hall no less than 24 hours in advance of the meeting, an agenda of the meeting. The planning and zoning commission shall by resolution at the first meeting of each calendar year designate the Gypsum Town Hall as its designated public place for posting meeting notices. Failure to adopt such resolution shall not invalidate any notice otherwise validly posted. A posted meeting agenda may be amended by a majority vote of the members in attendance. Notice of meetings may also be provided by any other additional means deemed appropriate. 
(9)  Notice of any public hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be published, mailed or posted as provided in section 18.16.060 or such other provision of the Gypsum Municipal Code requiring such notice. 
(10)  No official action may be taken at a meeting unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of four members. (Ord. 28 series 1999). A majority of the members present must vote in the affirmative on a motion for the motion to pass. (Ord. 9 series 1993 S2) If a member recuses himself or herself and there is then no quorum, no vote shall then be taken. 
(11)  Each member of the planning and zoning commission shall receive compensation in an amount of $50.00 per meeting attended, paid monthly. 
18.16.010 - Authority to grant variances. 
    The planning and zoning commission may grant variances in respect to any use, building, or structure classified under these regulations, and may issue a variance for such use, building or structure in accordance with the procedures set forth in this title; see chapter 18.13. 
18.16.020 - Imposition of fees. 
    The town council may by resolution establish the fees to be imposed for applications for any permit, variance, rezoning, or other action under this title. The town council may also delegate to the town manager or the town manager's designee, the authority to set fees for such applications and to recover for the town the expenses incurred in processing such applications or any action required under this title. Any fee collected with the application shall be for the town's administrative expenses in processing the application, whether the application is granted or denied. Any costs and expenses the town may incur for professional services, engineering services, publication costs, recording fees or similar expenses for such application shall be paid by the applicant in addition to the fee collected with the application. 
18.16.030 - Payment of expenses for professional services. 
    When the town council, town manager or the town manager's designee determines that proper evaluation of an issue arising under this title requires advice or other service to the town by professional parties, the town may require the applicant or party requesting such action to pay the reasonable expenses of such professional services. If requested to do so by the applicant, the town shall procure an estimate of the cost of such information to the applicant. Unless the application or request for services is withdrawn, the applicant shall be required to pay the cost of such professional services as a condition of approval, and shall pay the costs incurred for such professional services up to the time that the application is withdrawn. 
18.16.035 - Impact fees. 
    Any person who seeks approval of a land development activity resulting from annexation, subdivision, zoning, approval of a planned unit development, or issuance of a conditional use permit, special use permit or variance, any of which require additional fire protection services or additional emergency medical services, shall pay a fire protection or emergency medical service impact fee as provided in chapter 17.50 of the Gypsum Municipal Code, together with any other impact fee or fees approved and authorized by the town council. 
18.16.040 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement powers. The town manager, the town planner, the code enforcement officer and their designees, shall have the duty to enforce this zoning code and the powers necessary for such enforcement, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Conduct investigations and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this zoning code, including reinvestigations of any land or structure to investigate alleged violations of the zoning code and to determine if a violation under an earlier notice or order has been corrected. 
(2)  Enter into agreements with violators for the abatement of zoning violations. 
(3)  Issue written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this zoning code. 
(4)  Issue notices of violations for noncompliance with the provisions of this zoning code and take action to abate violations of this zoning code in the same manner as provided in section 8.05.050 of the Code. 
(5)  Institute, in courts of proper jurisdiction, proceedings to enforce the provisions of this zoning code, administrative orders and determinations made hereunder, and settlement agreements made hereunder. 
(b)  Noncompliance prohibited. It shall be deemed a strict liability offense for any owner, lessee, occupant or agent of such person to allow or permit to exist, or to otherwise let happen, any condition or to take any action not permitted by the zoning code on the land or in the structure to which the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent has legal or equitable title or right of possession. 
(c)  Enforcement and abatement. The town manager, the town planner, the code enforcement officer and their designees may enforce violations of this zoning code pursuant to the investigation, notice, abatement, and enforcement procedures outlined in section 8.05.050 of the Code. 
(d)  Additional remedies. In addition to all other remedies available, the town may take any of the following remedial actions to enforce this zoning code: 
(1)  Deny/withhold permits. 
a.  The town may deny and withhold any permit, license, business license, certificate, variance, or other form of authorization to use or develop any land, structure or improvement thereon for any property which is subject to, or any property owner, agent or other person who has any outstanding violation of titles 15, 17 or 18 of the Gypsum Municipal Code until the violation related to such property, use, or development is corrected. This provision shall apply whether or not the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation. 
b.  The denial or withholding of a permit may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided in section 18.16.050 of the zoning code. 
(2)  Revocation of permits. The town council, after notice and a public hearing, may revoke any permit, license, business license, certificate, variance, building permit or other authorization to use or develop any land, structure or improvement. 
a.  Notice of public hearing. The public hearing on the revocation of a permit, variance, building permit or other authorization shall be conducted during a regular or special meeting of the town council not less than ten days from the date the notice is given. Notice of the hearing shall be deemed given to the owner, the owner's agent, or other person to whom the development permit, variance, building permit or other authorization was issued, upon deposit of said notice in the U.S. mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of said person. Additional methods of notice may be utilized to give notice of the public hearing at the discretion of the town attorney. 
b.  Findings. Following the public hearing, the town council, upon a finding of any of the following, may revoke any permit, license, business license, certificate, variance, building permit, or other authorization to use or develop any land, structure or improvement: 
1.  There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications, or conditions of approval; 
2.  There is a violation of any provision of title 15, 17 or 18 of the Code; 
3.  The permit, variance, building permit or other authorization was obtained by false representation; or 
4.  The permit, license, business license, certificate, variance building permit or other authorization to use or develop was issued in error. 
c.  Notice of revocation. Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the owner, owner's agent, applicant or other person to whom the permit, license, business license, certificate, variance building permit or other authorization to use or develop was issued in error, by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice may also be posted in a prominent location at the place of the violation. No work or construction at or use of the property shall proceed after service of the notice of revocation. 
(3)  Stop work order. The town may issue a written order to stop work on any property where the building official finds any work regulated by the Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this Code or dangerous or unsafe, or when there is a violation of a provision of this zoning code, any provision of the Code, or a provision of the permit, license, business license, certificate, variance, building permit, or when an authorization to use or develop was issued in error. The stop work order shall specify the specific violation alleged and any appeal and/or variance procedures available and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, either in person or by posting notice on the premises. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served a stop work order shall be subject to fines as set forth in section 2.01.090(5) of the Town Code for each day work continues after issuance of the stop work order. 
(e)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided for violations of this zoning code shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law and may be exercised in any order. 
(f)  Liability of town. The zoning code shall not be construed to hold the town responsible for any damages to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection, by reason of the failure to inspect or reinspect, by reason of issuing any permit, or by reason of pursuing or failing to pursue any action to enforce any provision of the Code or obtain injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 2011-16) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01,  1-3, 1-27-15) 
18.16.050 - Appeals to the board of adjustment. 
(a)  Appointment of board of adjustment. Upon receipt of an appeal pursuant to this section 18.16.050, the town council shall, by resolution, appoint a five-member board of adjustment. The town council may alternatively appoint the board of appeals established pursuant to section 15.04.022 of the town code to sit as the board of adjustment, or, if the appeal is from a decision made by an administrative official, the town council may appoint the planning and zoning commission to serve as the board of adjustment. (Ord. 2014-10) 
(b)  Notice of appeal. Any aggrieved person of interest may appeal a denial of any permit or variance, the conditions imposed upon any permit or variance granted, or any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by an administrative official or the planning and zoning commission charged with the enforcement of this zoning code by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk and paying the fee set by the current fee schedule. 
(c)  Time for appeal. Any appeal to the board of adjustment shall be made within 30 days after denial of any permit, or receipt of written notice of any determination made pursuant to the zoning code. Failure to make timely appeal shall be considered a waiver of the appellant's right to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(d)  Record. The town clerk shall forward a copy of the notice of appeal to the town manager or other appropriate administrative officer, who shall have prepared a record of the town action that is being appealed for consideration by the board of adjustment. 
(e)  Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer or commission from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his, her or the commission's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by the municipal court on application, on notice to the officer or commission from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(f)  Public hearing and action on appeal. The board of adjustment shall hear the appeal and make a decision on the appeal at a public hearing, notice of which shall be provided as set forth in sections 18.16.060, and 18.16.070. The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners required to be notified shall be determined by the appellant as such owner's names and addresses may appear in the tax records of the town or Eagle County, and such information shall be submitted to the town clerk with the notice of appeal. At the public hearing, appellant shall have the burden of proof to establish facts to warrant favorable action by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall have all the powers of the applicable town administrative official or the planning and zoning commission on the action appealed. The board of adjustment may in whole or in part affirm, reverse, or amend the decisions of the applicable town administrative official or the planning and zoning commission. The board of adjustment may impose reasonable conditions in its order to be complied with by the appellant in order to further the purposes and intent of the Zoning Code. The concurring vote of a majority of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, interpretation, or determination of any administrative official or the planning and zoning commission. No single decision of the board of adjustment shall set a precedent for future appeals. Any decision of the board of adjustment shall be made on the particular facts of each case. 
(g)  Appeal criteria. The board of adjustment in hearing an appeal shall consider only the criteria required to be considered by the original decision-maker by any applicable provisions of the zoning code. 
(h)  Appeals to municipal court. Decisions of the board of adjustment shall be subject to review by the municipal court by filing a complaint that includes the specific allegations of error no more than 14 days after the final decision by the board of adjustment. The municipal court's review shall be limited to a determination of whether the board exceeded its jurisdiction or abused its discretion, based on the evidence in the record before the board. Any appeal of the decision of the municipal court shall be brought in district court as a civil matter pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
18.16.060 - Notice requirements. 
    Certain zoning actions require a public hearing, notice of which shall be given in the manner and within the times set forth in the following notice requirements: 
Type of Action Hearing 
Requirement Notice in 
Newspaper Service or 
Mailing Posting Planned Unit Development (PUD)  PUD Preliminary Plan (18.08.150) Town Council 15 days 15 days 15 days  Amendments to PUD (18.08.180) Town Council 15 days 15 days 15 days  Maintenance of Common Property (18.08.030) Town Council N/A 15 days N/A Conditional Use Permit None N/A N/A N/A  Suspension/Revocation (18.12.050) Planning and Zoning Commission No 10 days No  Revocation (18.16.040(c)) Town Council Optional 7 days Optional Special Use Permit (18.12.040) Planning and Zoning Commission 10 days 10 days 10 days  Suspension/Revocation (18.12.050) Planning and Zoning Commission No 10 days No  Revocation (18.16.040(c)) Town Council Optional 7 days Optional Variance (18.13.030) Planning and Zoning Commission 10 days 10 days 10 days  Appeal Board of Adjustment 10 days 10 days 10 days  Revocation (18.16.040(c)) Town Council Optional 7 days Optional Location and Extent (18.14) None N/A N/A N/A Zoning Code and Map Amendments (18.15.040)  Text, Not Site Specific Planning and Zoning Commission 15 days None None  Site Specific Amendment Planning and Zoning Commission 15 days 15 days 15 days  Text, Not Site Specific Town Council 15 days None None  Site Specific Amendment Town Council 10 days 10 days 10 days Notice of Violation/Corrective Action Order, Nonemergency (18.16.040(c)) None None 30 days 30 days (alternative) Revocation of Building Permit (18.16.040(c)) Town Council Optional 10 days Optional Stop Work Order (18.16.040(c)) None None Immediate Immediate Appeals (18.16.050) Board of Adjustment 10 days 10 days 10 days  
18.16.070 - Posting. 
(a)  Responsibility. Posting of a sign on the property giving notice of any public hearing shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Staff shall advise the applicant in writing within five business days of receipt of the application of this posting requirement and the location and number of signs required for the application. All signs must be prepared by or for the applicant at the applicant's expense. All signs must be posted on the property not less than 15 or not less than ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing as set forth in section 18.16.060. The applicant must take a clear and distinct photograph of the sign(s) and submit the photograph(s) to the planning department immediately upon posting the property. No later than noon on Friday prior to the scheduled public hearing, the applicant shall present a certificate of posting in the following form to the planning department. 
(b)  Certificate of posting. 
Certificate of Posting 
    I hereby certify under oath that a sign (or signs (___)) was posted on the property known by street and number as _______ on _______, 20___, at least ten days prior to the public hearing on the Application for _______ for this property as shown in the photograph(s) submitted in support of this Certificate as notice of this public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission/Board of Adjustment/Town Council on _______, 20___ at ___ ___.m. 
Dated this ___ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Applicant 
State of Colorado   ) 
)   ss. 
County of Eagle    ) 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this ___ day of _______, 20___ by ___________ as Applicant. 
    My commission expires _______. 
___________ 
Notary Public 
Failure to present the certificate of posting and submit the photograph(s) will result in a rescheduling of the public hearing and require a new posting of the property. 
(c)  Sign specifications. A sign not less than three feet by four feet in size erected on posts no lower than four feet above natural grade and legible from the nearest dedicated public right-of-way. Title of sign shall be in letters not less than five inches high. Said sign shall be removed by the applicant within two weeks of the conclusion of the public hearing. A sample format for the sign is as follows: 

Chapter 18.17 - SIGN CODE 

18.17.010 - Purpose and intent; application. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign requirements and standards. This chapter is intended to encourage signage that is informative, creative, and aesthetically acceptable, and which contributes to the common welfare and needs of local residents, businesses and visitors alike in a concise and fair manner and which encourages compliance. 
    The town council recognizes that signs are necessary means of visual communication for the public convenience and that businesses, services, and other activities have an interest in identifying themselves by using signs that are accessory and incidental to the use on the premises where the signs are located. 
    The provisions of the sign code are intended to: 
(1)  Preserve the unique character of the Town of Gypsum; 
(2)  Provide for business signs within reasonable limitations, consistent with the goals and objectives of the community, to retain the special character and economic advantages that rest largely on the quality of the town's appearance; 
(3)  Protect the public from hazardous conditions by prohibiting signs that are structurally unsafe, obscure or distract the vision of motorists, or compete or conflict with necessary traffic signs and warning signals; 
(4)  Eliminate hazards caused by the size and placement of signs to reduce the possibility of injuries to those coming near or under signs; 
(5)  Ensure that signs are well-designed and contribute in a positive way to the town's visual environment, express local character and help develop a distinctive image for the town. 
(6)  Ensure that signs are appropriate for the type of street on which they are located. 
(7)  Bring nonconforming signs into compliance with these regulations. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Sign Code of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado" or the "sign code". 
    This chapter shall apply to all signs of whatever nature and wherever located within the Town of Gypsum. No sign shall be allowed except as permitted by this chapter. 
    The effective date of this chapter shall be August 14, 2000. Any sign for which a sign permit is issued subsequent to the effective date shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter. 
18.17.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    External lighting means illuminated by exterior light sources, such as floodlights. 
    Flashing lights means lights, which flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent electrical pulsations. 
    Frontage means the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building that abuts a street, a parking area, a mall, or other circulation area open to the general public and that has either a main window display of the business or a public entrance to the building. 
    Ground sign means sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground. 
    Illumination, direct means lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including neon tubing, that is effectively visible as part of the sign, where light travels directly from the source to the viewer's eyes. 
    Illumination, indirect means lighting by the surface of a light source that is directed at the reflecting surface in such a way as to illuminate the sign from the front or a light source that is primarily designed to illuminate the entire building facade upon which a sign is displayed, but does not include lighting that is primarily used for purposes other that sign illumination, including without limitation, parking lot lights or lights inside a building that may silhouette a window sign that are not primarily installed to serve as inside illumination of a sign. 
    Illumination, internal means lighting by means of a light source that is within a sign having a translucent background, silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or that is within letters or designs that are themselves made of translucent material. 
    Maintenance means the replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of a sign structure, periodic changing of bulletin board panels, or renewing of copy that has been made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained, but which does not meet the provisions of this sign code. 
    Nonilluminated means not supplied or brightened with light. 
    Permanent sign means any sign, which is permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure. 
    Premises means the land, building or portion of the building occupied by the business or activity being conducted and sought to be advertised. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building, not including signs attached to vehicles. 
    Real estate sign means a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent, or lease of the specific lot, building, or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed. 
    Setback means the required minimum distance measured horizontally between a property boundary or edge of pavement/back of curb and any part of a sign or sign structure. 
    Sign means any object or device or part thereof situated outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, purpose, product, service, contract, event or location by means of words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, or colors. 
    Sign structure means any supports, uprights, braces, or framework of a sign. 
    Temporary sign means a sign, banner, or similar device or display that may be erected for a temporary period not to exceed 30 consecutive days or 60 days in any one-year period for any particular business. 
18.17.030 - Signs that do not require a sign permit. 
    The following signs, which shall be nonilluminated unless specifically stated to the contrary, are permitted in all zone districts and are exempt from the provisions of this sign code requiring a sign permit: 
(1)  Public signs. Any sign erected by any governmental agency including, but not limited to, federal, state, county and municipal governments, school and recreation districts, but not including private water and sanitary sewer companies within their own right-of-way or ownership. 
(2)  Interior or window signs. Signs within any structure or attached to the inside of any window of a structure. 
(3)  Commemorative plaques. Any memorial or commemorative plaque or tablet that contains the primary name of a building, the date of erection and use of the building when the sign is built into the building or mounted flat against the wall of the building, or is designed to designate any particular location of historical significance as determined by the town. 
(4)  Address signs. Any sign designed to identify a particular parcel of land, provided such contains only the street address and name of the owner of the property or the name of the property and does not exceed two square feet in area for residential land uses and five square feet in area for nonresidential land uses. 
(5)  Special event signs. Special events such as a philanthropic campaign, church, circus, carnival or other community celebration, provided that such signs are removed within ten days of the termination of the event. 
(6)  Real estate signs. Temporary, nonilluminated real estate signs indicating the availability for sale, rent, or lease of a specific lot, building, or portion of a building upon which this sign is erected or displayed which do not exceed six square feet in total area and four feet in height for residential properties or 20 square feet in total area and six feet in height for nonresidential properties and are located on the property advertised by the sign as being for sale or for rent, limited to one such sign per street frontage. Such signs shall not remain in place more than seven days following sale or rental of the subject property. 
(7)  Building identification signs. Signs which identify by name or number individual buildings within institutional or residential building group complexes which are limited to signs attached to the building, not more than two signs per building, and not more than four square feet each. These signs may be illuminated or nonilluminated. 
(8)  Traffic directional signs. Private traffic directional signs guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto or off of a lot or within a lot, when such sign does not exceed three square feet per sign per face in area and eight feet in height, does not contain any advertising or trade name identifications, and is either nonilluminated or is internally or indirectly illuminated. Private traffic control signals shall conform to the standards of the Colorado Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and may exceed three square feet per face in area, but shall not exceed seven square feet per face. Such signs shall not exceed four feet in height and shall be set back at least five feet from the property line. 
(9)  Information and directional signs. 
a.  Signs commonly associated with and limited to information and directions related to the permitted use on the lot on which the sign is located, provided that each such sign does not exceed two square feet in total area and is either nonilluminated or is internally illuminated or indirectly illuminated. This category shall be interpreted to include such signs as "no smoking", "restroom", "no solicitors", "self service", "vacancy", and similar informational signs located at least five feet from the property line. 
b.  Off-premises informational directional sign. A single or double-faced sign designed to give direction to a church, school, philanthropic organization, or similar use of a nonretail or nonbusiness nature. Sign may contain only the name of the organization, direction, and number of blocks. Sign shall be metal, no more than two square feet, and shall be mounted on minimum two-inch square steel pole. Bottom of sign shall be a minimum of seven feet above grade. Such signs may be located in the right-of-way with the written approval of the town or CHOT. 
(10)  Courtesy signs. Nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated signs, which identify, as a courtesy to customers, items such as credit cards accepted and redemption stamps offered, shall not exceed four square feet per face or eight square feet in total area. Such signs may be attached to the building as projecting or wall signs, suspended from a canopy or included as an integral part of a freestanding sign. 
(11)  Flags. The flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county, city or town, any religious, civic, or fraternal organization or any educational institution. 
(12)  Holiday decorations. Temporary decorations or displays when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday or celebration. 
(13)  Warning signs. Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices. 
(14)  Gasoline price signs. For gasoline or service stations, two unlighted signs or one lighted sign listing only the prices and types of gasoline available are permitted with each sign, not to exceed ten square feet in area or six feet in height. 
(15)  Construction signs. A temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet announcing subdivision, development, construction or other improvement of a property by a builder, contractor or other person furnishing services, materials or labor to said premises. For the purposes of this Code, a "construction sign" shall not be construed to be a "real estate sign" as defined herein and shall contain only project name; developer, architect, builder, and/or consultants; lending institution; and opening date. Such signs shall not remain in place more than seven days following the completion of the project. 
(16)  Canopy signs. Lettering shall not exceed two square feet. 
(17)  Garage sale sign. A sign advertising the existence of a garage sale for the sale of personal property and advertising the date, time and location of the garage sale with such signs having a maximum area of six square feet, a maximum height of three feet, and a minimum setback of ten feet, posted for the period three days prior and three days following the date of the garage sale. Such signs shall not block or interfere with traffic visibility. 
18.17.040 - Signs that require a sign permit. 
    The following signs shall be permitted with a sign permit issued pursuant to section 18.17.060 and in accordance with the conditions and prohibitions stated herein: 
(1)  Class 1. Freestanding ground signs. 
a.  Permitted in commercial, light industrial and heavy industrial zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: Intended to identify shopping or business centers, office/industrial/technical parks or centers and individual structures which are not within a shopping or business center. 
c.  Maximum area: 
1.  For developments over ten acres in size, 100 square feet. 
2.  For developments ten acres or less in size and individual structures on lots over two acres in size, 60 square feet. 
3.  For individual lots two acres in size or less, 32 square feet. 
d.  Maximum height: 
1.  For signs over 60 square feet in area, 25 feet. 
2.  For signs over 32 square feet in area, but less than 60 square feet in area, eight feet. 
3.  For signs 32 square feet in area or less, six feet. 
e.  Minimum allowable setback from property line: 
1.  For signs over eight feet in height or over 60 square feet in area, 25 feet. 
2.  For signs eight feet in height or less and under 60 square feet in area, ten feet. 
f.  Limitation and number: 
1.  For developments or individual structures over ten acres in size, one per frontage with a maximum of two, with said signs to be identical in design. 
2.  For developments or individual structures ten acres in size or less, one. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Identification signs for nonretail business centers or office/ industrial/technical parks or centers shall contain only the name, address and logo or trademark of the office park or center. Such signs may include the name of the tenants therein, with said names to be integrated into the overall design of the sign with the name of the center utilizing at least 50 percent of the sign area. 
3.  Identification signs for retail shopping centers shall contain the name of the center and may include the names of any structure or tenants therein with the overall design of said signs to be of an integrated design. 
4.  Lighted signs are permitted, but not flashing lights. 
5.  No freestanding signs over eight feet in height are permitted within 50 feet of any residential district boundary or residential development. 
6.  Supporting structure of permanent ground signs must be of solid construction at least two-thirds the dimension of the width and thickness of the sign it supports. 
7.  Where a non-retail business center or office/industrial/technical park or center is planned as a series of individual structures on individual lots with each individual lot having frontage on a public street, each individual structure may be permitted to have freestanding signs in accordance with this paragraph if said sign(s) are included and approved in a planned unit development. Where a non-retail business center of office/industrial/technical park is planned as a series of individual structures on a single lot, each individual structure is permitted to have a freestanding sign of not more than 32 square feet in area and six feet in height. Such signs shall be consistent in design and color. 
8.  Freestanding signs must be located on the premises of the use being advertised or identified. For purposes of this restriction, premises do not include easements of any kind or similar adjacent parcels of land. 
9.  Menu boards in conjunction with restaurant drive-through pick up activities and automobile service facilities including car washes, lubrication shops, detail shops and similar uses may be allowed subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  Not more than two such signs. 
ii.  Twenty-five-foot setback from property lines. 
iii.  Forty square feet maximum area. 
iv.  Six-foot maximum height. 
v.  May be freestanding or wall mounted. 
10.  When shopping centers, business centers, and office/industrial/ technical parks or centers are to be developed or redeveloped, overall sign program performance standards shall be included in the planned unit development to be submitted which address size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, and type and method of construction to insure that all signage within the center is designed in a harmonious, consistent, and compatible manner. The overall sign program shall be included in the application for approval of any planned unit development. 
11.  Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, (including gauges and dials which may be animated to the extent necessary to display correct measurement), and signs that are animated with lights or illuminations, which flash, move, rotate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation shall be carefully reviewed at the time of permit application to avoid impactful nuisances that may be created by this type of sign. Exceptions to this review are signs identifying only time/temperature/date and traditional barber poles. 
(2)  Class 2. Wall signs. 
a.  Permitted in commercial, light industrial and heavy industrial zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: Intended to identify businesses, offices, office buildings, industrial, technical and employment establishments. Signs may be either placed flat against the building or project from the building. 
c.  Maximum area: The greater of 30 square feet or one square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building or tenant frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet in area for all types of signs, except that signs composed of individual raised letters may contain two square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building or tenant frontage, not to exceed 300 square feet in area. This restriction shall not apply to signs for individual tenants in buildings that are primarily multitenant office buildings. 
d.  Maximum height: May not project above the roofline of the building to which the sign is attached. 
e.  Minimum allowable setback: Same setback as the building to which sign is attached. 
f.  Limitation in number: One sign per street frontage not to exceed two frontages, or three frontages with an area not to exceed the total sign area permitted for two frontages. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Projecting signs may not exceed 30 square feet in area. 
3.  The total length of any individual sign may not exceed 75 percent of the length of the frontage of the establishment, storefront or tenant space on which the sign is placed. 
4.  Lighted signs are permitted, not flashing lights. 
5.  Uses that have no external building frontage, such as might be located within a shopping mall, may have one external sign not to exceed 40 square feet. 
6.  Buildings that are primarily office buildings may have no tenant or user signs above the first floor with the exception that building identification signs may be located above the first floor. 
7.  Changeable copy signs are permitted for motion picture theaters or theater complexes with a total maximum area not to exceed the greater of 80 square feet or 30 square feet per individual theater. 
8.  When so approved in a planned unit development, the total allowable square footage of signage for an individual use containing over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area may be divided into a primary sign and not more than two secondary signs, with each secondary sign not to exceed 60 square feet in area. 
9.  Projecting signs may not project over any public right-of-way or more than five feet from the building wall. 
10.  For individual uses over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, signage restrictions may vary from the provisions of this section and shall be as approved for a planned unit development. 
11.  Tenant signage. For multitenant office buildings, a maximum of 40 square feet per sign, 120 square feet per frontage. The building identification sign shall be in conformance with (b) above with a maximum of 100 square feet, except signs composed of individual letters which may have a maximum of 200 square feet. 
12.  When shopping centers, business centers, and office/industrial/technical parks or centers are to be developed or redeveloped, overall sign program performance standards shall be submitted which address size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, and type and method of construction to insure that all signage within the center is designed in a harmonious, consistent, and compatible manner. 
(3)  Class 3. Information and directional signs. 
a.  Permitted in all zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: A freestanding or wall sign intended to provide information and directions related to the principal permitted use on that lot. 
c.  Maximum area: 
1.  Wall sign, 15 square feet. 
2.  Freestanding signs, five square feet. 
d.  Maximum height: 
1.  Wall sign, eight feet. 
2.  Freestanding signs, 32 inches. 
e.  Minimum allowable setback: Twenty-five feet from the property line. 
f.  Limitation in number: Two. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Lighted signs are permitted, but not flashing lights. 
(4)  Class 4. Directory signs for retail shopping centers. 
a.  Permitted in all commercial zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: A freestanding sign intended to list and locate all merchants within the center for pedestrian or internal automobile traffic. 
c.  Maximum area: 
1.  For retail center four acres or less in area, 16 square feet. 
2.  For retail center over four acres in area, 30 square feet. 
d.  Minimum allowable setback: Fifty feet from property line. 
e.  Limitation in number: 
1.  For retail center four acres or less in area, one sign. 
2.  For retail center over four acres in area, one per four acres, not to exceed four total signs. 
f.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Internally illuminated signs are permitted. 
(5)  Class 5. Permanent subdivision identification signs. 
a.  Permitted in any residential zone district. 
b.  Characteristics: A freestanding sign intended to provide identification of a residential subdivision by name only. 
c.  Maximum area: Forty square feet. 
d.  Maximum height: Seven feet. 
e.  Minimum allowable setback: Three feet from the curb. This sign may be located in the public right-of-way, but not over existing or future utilities. Location and placement shall insure traffic visibility as determined by the town. 
f.  Limitation in number: One per subdivision or one per each arterial or collector street entrance. The permitted signage may be split and two signs may be permitted for each arterial or collector street entrance; however, no more than 40 square feet of signage may be located at any such entrance. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  A right-of-way maintenance agreement must be on file with the town signed by the responsible party from the homeowners association if the sign(s) are to be located in the public right-of-way, otherwise, each sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  External lighting is permitted. 
3.  Sign material and design must be approved by the town. 
4.  Under unusual hardship circumstances, as determined appropriate by the town manager, a single offsite sign may be permitted with the permission of the property owner on whose property said sign would be located. Such a sign shall have a maximum area of 20 square feet and a maximum height of three feet. 
(6)  Class 6. Home occupation signs. 
a.  Permitted in all residential zone districts in which home occupations are permitted. 
b.  Characteristics: To identify a home occupation; wall or window signs only. 
c.  Maximum area: One square foot. 
d.  Maximum height: Below the eave of the building on which the sign is located. 
e.  Minimum setback: Must be attached to the front of the building on which the sign is located. 
f.  Limitation in number: One. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Sign may not be illuminated. 
(7)  Class 7. Election signs. 
a.  Permitted in all zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: A sign advocating or advertising the election of any candidate for public office or any question upon which a public vote is being taken. 
c.  Maximum area: Fifty square feet in any commercial zone district; eight square feet in all other zone districts. 
d.  Maximum height: Six feet. 
e.  Minimum setback: Ten feet. 
f.  Limitation in number: No limitation. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications, and exceptions: 
1.  Such signs shall not be erected more than 30 days before an election or in the case of a mail ballot election, such signs shall not be erected more than 30 days before the first day to mail ballots to all registered electors. All election signs shall be removed within ten days following the election. Exception: Successful primary candidates may leave their signs up until ten days after a general or run-off election. 
2.  An application for a sign permit for a specific election sign at multiple locations in the town must include the name, address and phone number of person responsible for maintenance and removal of signs. 
3.  Election signs may be located in the public right-of-way, provided: 
i.  The sign does not block or otherwise interfere with traffic visibility; 
ii.  The sign is not located within 50 feet of an intersection; 
iii.  The sign does not exceed three square feet in area. 
(8)  Class 8. Temporary outside signs. 
a.  Permitted in all zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: A sign, banner, or similar device, not including pennants on a string or rope, or display which is intended for a temporary period of display for the purpose of announcing a special event for a business such as a grand opening, a sale or a new service. Said sign may be constructed or cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or other light temporary material. Such a sign must be attached flat against a building. 
c.  Maximum area: Forty square feet per sign. 
d.  Maximum height: May not project above the roofline on the building to which the sign is attached. 
e.  Minimum allowable setback: Same setback as the building to which the sign is attached. 
f.  Limitation in number: One per street frontage, not to exceed two signs for each location. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications, and exceptions: 
1.  Sign must be located on the premises. 
2.  Sign may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days or 60 days in any one-year period for any particular business. 
3.  Sign must be removed at the expiration of the temporary sign permit. 
(9)  Class 9. Off-site residential development directional signs. 
a.  Permitted in undeveloped (no improvements on the lot or parcel) areas of all zone districts. 
b.  Characteristics: A ground sign intended to direct vehicular traffic to developments with residential units for sale or lease. 
c.  Maximum area: No ground sign structure shall exceed eight feet by four feet in area. Each ground sign structure shall be capable of display of three individual directional signs per face and no single individual directional sign shall exceed 24 inches in height by 42 inches in length. 
d.  Minimum allowable setback: Ground sign structures in the public right-of-way shall be located within two feet of the property line and shall be located in a manner that does not obstruct traffic visibility. A site plan shall be submitted and shall require approval of the town for all such sign placements. 
e.  Maximum height: Twelve feet. 
f.  Limitation in number: One per residential development per sign structure and a maximum of three individual directional signs per face of each ground sign structure. 
g.  Restrictions, clarifications and exceptions: 
1.  Maximum of one sign on each undeveloped corner at an intersection of two arterial streets. 
2.  No such sign shall be illuminated or have any moving, rotating, or otherwise animated parts. 
3.  Each such sign shall bear in a prominent position thereon a clearly legible identification plate stating the name of the person responsible for the construction of the sign and the date of installation. 
4.  Such signs erected shall be structurally sound and satisfactorily maintained so as not to become a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood or an eyesore to passersby. 
5.  Support posts, frame, and plywood backing shall be painted cream, tan, or beige. Sign panels may be of any color except fluorescent, dayglo, or other reflective or brilliant colors. All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with guidelines prepared by the Town of Gypsum. 
6.  No individual directional sign shall be permitted that advertises developments outside the town limits of the Town of Gypsum. 
7.  Any such sign shall be removed within 30 days of completion of the project, as determined by the building official. 
8.  Any person desiring to install such a sign within 660 feet of a state highway right-of-way shall first obtain a permit from CHOT and submit an application for a town sign permit to the code enforcement officer (building official). The application shall include a copy of the state permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 2-10-15) 
18.17.050 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited in all zone districts: 
(1)  Any sign not specifically permitted by the sign code. 
(2)  Any sign erected upon or over the public right-of-way of any street, roadway, or alley, with the exception of those signs erected by a governmental entity, permanent subdivision identification signs and those instances where existing buildings are contiguous with the right-of-way and the sign has previously been attached to said building and projects over the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations, pennants, streamers, balloons, and any other inflatable object or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze. 
(4)  Imitations of official government protective or warning signs are prohibited. Any sign using the word "stop" or "danger" or which otherwise presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping, or a caution for the existence of danger, or which is a copy of, or which for any reason is likely to be confused with any municipally approved official signs, such as those signs approved and shown in the Uniform Traffic Code, are prohibited. 
(5)  Any sign that obstructs any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or openings intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any building, as required by law. 
(6)  Any portable sign, including any sign displayed on a vehicle when said vehicle is used primarily for the purpose of displaying such sign, when used outside a building. Any advertising device used on a vehicle meeting the following criteria shall be excepted: 
a.  Such vehicle at no time remains in one visible place for more than 24 consecutive hours; and 
b.  Such vehicle is actually used by its owner or another as a means of transportation of people or goods. 
(7)  Any sign that violates any provision of any law of the State of Colorado relative to outside advertising. 
(8)  Temporary cardboard or paper signs attached to utility poles or stakes that have the intent of advertising merchandise for sale, except a sign advertising the existence of a garage sale as permitted under section 18.17.030(q). 
(9)  Changeable copy signs other than theater marquees, notice or listing of church services or gasoline price signs. 
(10)  Any sign which causes any direct glare into or upon any residential or commercial building or premises other than the building or premises to which the sign is attached. 
(11)  Any attached sign projecting above the roofline of a structure. 
(12)  Any sign advertising an activity, business, product or service which has not been produced or conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located for a period of 90 days or more. If the sign or sign structure is covered or the identifying symbols or letters removed, an extension of time may be granted by the town if good cause is shown for such extension. This provision shall not apply to permanent signs accessory to businesses, which are open only on a seasonal basis, provided there is clear intent to continue operation of the business. 
(13)  Off premise advertising or directional sign, except as authorized by section 18.17.030(i)(2). 
(14)  Billboards which advertise a business, product, service or event, lighted or unlighted, are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 2-10-15) 
18.17.060 - General sign provisions. 
(a)  Requirements for a sign permit. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, or occupant of any property located within the Town of Gypsum to erect, maintain, or permit the erection or maintenance of any sign, except as may be allowed by section 18.17.030, on such property without first obtaining a sign permit through the following procedure: 
(1)  An Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the planning director and shall contain the following information, unless specifically waived by the planning director. Exception: signage within the Airport Gateway Business Center Subdivision shall adhere to Airport Gateway Sign Guidelines that have been adopted by the Town of Gypsum and shall submit materials and pay fees according to those guidelines instead. 
a.  Elevation of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, showing the sign that is proposed to be erected and the message that it will carry; 
b.  Drawing of the plans, specifications and method of construction of the sign and its supports, showing proposed dimensions, materials, and colors, and the type, intensity and design of the sign's illumination. 
c.  A plot plan showing the location of the sign on the property. If the sign is to be attached to the face of the building, the plot plan shall also show the outline of the building and the physical address and/or legal description of property where sign will be located; 
d.  Name and address of property owner or a letter of consent from the owner of the building or property, if the applicant is not the owner. 
e.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the applicant's signature; 
f.  Type and specifications of proposed lighting; 
g.  Dates of display, if a temporary sign is being proposed; 
h.  Fee for sign permit as herein provided, section 18.17.060(b), shall be tendered with the application. 
(2)  If, after review, the code enforcement officer finds the proposed sign to be in conformity with this sign code, the other provisions of the zoning code and the building code of the Town of Gypsum and any applicable planned unit development, a sign permit may be issued. If the application is denied, the code enforcement officer shall inform the applicant of the reason(s) for denial and the process to request a sign variance or to appeal the denial to the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Fees: A fee for a sign permit shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  The fee for the following types of sign permits shall be $30.00: 
i. Class 1 Freestanding Ground Signs ii. Class 2 Wall Signs iii. Class 3 Information and Directional Signs iv. Class 4 Directory Signs for Retail Shopping Centers v. Class 5 Permanent Subdivision Identification Signs vi. Class 6 Home Occupation Signs vii. Class 9 Off Site Residential Development Directional Signs  
  
b.  The fee for the following types of sign permits shall be $10.00: 
i. Class 7 Election Signs ii. Class 8 Temporary Outside Signs  
  
c.  The fee to request a sign variance shall be $50.00. 
d.  There shall be no fee payable if the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located removes a sign or sign face from a building or a sign structure. If the town removes a sign or sign face from a building or a sign structure after the owner has been given notice to remove and has failed to do so, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located shall be charged a fee of $100.00, plus the actual cost incurred by the town for the removal of the sign. 
e.  To account for the additional costs of enforcement and administration of this sign code, the foregoing fees shall be doubled for any sign which has been erected without first obtaining the required sign permit from the town. 
(b)  Measurement. In determining the size of any sign, the following procedure shall be used: 
(1)  For signs involving individual letters which are placed flat against the faade of a building or which are to be supported on individual standards and which will be freestanding, the area of said sign shall be considered to be that of a single rectangle or square encompassing all of the letters used to convey the message of the sign, and shall include the open space between letters of words within that squared rectangle. The height of the letters shall be measured on the upper case letters. 
(2)  For signs, either freestanding or faade mounted, with background material, the area measurement shall be determined by the area of the entire sign, including the background material. 
(3)  For all two-faced freestanding or projecting signs, the area measurement shall be determined by measurement of one face of the sign only. No sign shall have more than two faces. 
(4)  The height of any sign shall be determined by the distance between the topmost portion of the sign or the structure supporting the sign and the elevation of the ground at the base of the sign. 
(c)  Illumination requirements. For the protection of the town's appearance and to minimize light pollution and traffic hazards caused by glare, illuminated signs shall be subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  Any light used for the illumination of a sign shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly onto surrounding areas. 
(2)  Neither the direct nor the reflected light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
(d)  Altering or moving existing signs. A sign permit shall be required prior to moving an existing sign from one location to another or altering a sign in any manner other than for normal maintenance. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a sign not in conformity with an approved planned unit development and a sign permit is required prior to moving or altering such a sign in order to bring it into conformity. An alteration to an existing sign or to a sign not in conformity with an approved planned unit development which requires a sign permit includes, but is not limited to, a change in text, height, size, shape, construction material, or lighting. 
(e)  Maintenance. No person shall fail to maintain a sign on such person's premises, including any sign that does not require a sign permit under section 18.17.030, in good structural condition at all times. All signs, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or constructed of rust-resistant metals, shall be kept neatly painted. The code enforcement officer (building official) shall inspect and may order the painting, repair, alteration, or removal of a sign that constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence, under the procedures prescribed in section 18.17.060(f), notice to repair or remove. 
(f)  Notice to repair or remove. If the code enforcement officer or building official finds that any sign is not being maintained in accordance with the provisions of this sign code, the following actions are authorized: 
(1)  The code enforcement officer or building official may require that the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located repair or alter the sign to bring it into conformity with the requirements of the sign code or to remove the sign. In cases of immediate danger to the public due to the defective nature of a sign, the code enforcement officer or building official may have the sign removed and assess the costs of the removal against the property without prior notice to the property owner. Such assessment shall constitute a lien on the property and upon certification to the county treasurer by the town clerk, shall be collected in the same manner as property taxes. 
(2)  In all other cases, other than the failure to obtain a sign permit, the code enforcement officer or building official shall notify the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located of the duty to repair, alter or remove the sign and that such person has 30 days from the date of the notice, or such longer period as the code enforcement officer or building official finds is reasonably necessary, to complete such repair, alteration or removal. Notice under this subsection is sufficient if it is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the application for sign permit, or, if no sign permit exists or is required, to the last known owner of the real property on which the sign is located, at the address shown by the records of the Eagle County Assessor. 
(g)  Nonconforming signs. Any nonconforming sign which existed, excepting those signs described in section 18.17.050, prohibited signs, prior to the adoption or amendment of this sign code may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such sign shall be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to increase its nonconformity; however, any sign or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  If any such sign or the nonconforming portion thereof be destroyed by any means or removed for any reason, voluntary or otherwise, to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of said removal or destruction, it shall not be reconstructed or reassembled except in conformity with this chapter. 
(3)  If any such sign should, for any reason, be removed from its present location, it shall conform to the requirements hereof for the zone district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(h)  Sign removal. 
(1)  Except for nonconforming signs, subsection 18.17.060(g), any sign that is listed in section 18.17.050 as a "prohibited sign" shall be removed within 60 days following the effective date of adoption of this chapter. Any sign listed in section 18.17.040, Signs that require a sign permit, erected after the effective date of this sign code without a sign permit may be removed in accordance with the following paragraph. 
(2)  Any sign erected without a sign permit as hereby required, any sign deemed hazardous by an authorized town official, or any temporary sign for which a sign permit has expired, may be removed and stored by the town for ten days after the owner has been ordered in writing to repair, alter or remove the sign and has failed to do so. The owner shall be notified of the removal and storage of said sign by certified mail, return receipt requested, and if the sign is not claimed within ten days after mailing of said notice, the sign may be disposed of by the town. Any sign erected without a sign permit within a public right-of-way may be removed without notice by the town. Any sign removed from the public right-of-way having a value in excess of $5.00 shall be stored by the town for three days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, with notice of such removal and storage given to the owner or responsible person by telephone or other means of communication if the owner or responsible person is identified on the sign. If the sign removed from public right-of-way is not claimed within three days, it may be disposed of by the town. Any sign removed from the public right-of-way valued at less than $5.00 may be disposed of by the town without notice. All written notices required under this section shall be mailed to the owner, or if the owner is unknown, to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, or to the responsible person identified on the sign. The town shall have the authority to levy against the owner of the sign or, if the owner is unknown, the owner of the property on which the sign is located, whatever costs are incurred by the town for the removal, storage, and/or disposition of the sign. 
(i)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals to modify the conditions of a sign permit or to challenge the denial of a sign permit may be made to the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions of section 18.16.050 of this zoning code. However, in no case shall the board of adjustment consider, authorize or approve a request for a class of sign other than that which is specifically permitted by this sign code. 
(2)  Before approving a request for a variance to the sign code, or an appeal to modify the conditions of a sign permit or to grant a sign permit previously denied, the board of adjustment shall determine that: 
a.  There are special circumstances or conditions such as the existence of buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structures, or other matters on adjacent lots or within the adjacent public right-of-way which would substantially restrict the effectiveness of the sign in question; provided, however, that such special circumstances or conditions must be peculiar to the particular business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention and which do not apply generally to all businesses or enterprises. 
b.  The variance or sign permit, if authorized, will not weaken the general purpose of the sign code, nor the regulations prescribed for the zone district in which the sign is located. 
c.  The variance or sign permit, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the zone district in which the sign is located. 
d.  The variance or sign permit, if authorized, will not cause a material adverse effect on the neighborhood involved or on the town. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 2-10-15) 
Chapter 18.18 - SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITS 

18.18.010 - Consent to use town property. 
    Consent of the town is required to use any town park, recreational property or other properties and facilities owned or operated by the town, except as otherwise permitted by the Gypsum Municipal Code and rules or regulations associated with such property. In evaluating any request to use a town property or facility, the town shall determine whether such use shall be allowed only pursuant to a special events permit. 
18.18.020 - Special events permits. 
    A special events permit granted pursuant to this chapter is required in advance for all events occurring on or after June 1, 2009, which are held on or in town parks, recreational properties or other properties and facilities owned or operated by the town where the activities or uses associated with the event: 
(1)  Are not allowed by the applicable zoning, or a special use permit, conditional use permit or zoning variance; or 
(2)  Would otherwise violate the Gypsum Municipal Code; or 
(3)  Are determined by the town when evaluating the request to use the town property or facility to require special conditions to mitigate the anticipated impacts from the special event on adjacent property, the neighborhood, and the public. 
18.18.030 - Special events permit holder rights. 
    A special events permit shall allow the permit holder to conduct the event for the time period, activities and uses specified in the permit, subject to compliance with the conditions of the permit. A special events permit shall be valid for a specific period of time, not to exceed 120 days, and shall not be transferable. 
18.18.040 - Application procedure. 
    Applications for a special events permit shall be submitted to the senior planner no later than 60 days prior to a proposed special event. No more than one special events permit application shall be required for any organized special event, such as a festival, involving more than one activity or site or held for a duration of more than one day or for a series of periodic, related events, so long as the application is otherwise complete as to each such activity, site, occurrence or time period. 
(1)  The senior planner shall refer the application for comments to other departments or agencies, as determined by the senior planner to be appropriate. 
(2)  The senior planner shall determine whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the special events permit application. 
(3)  The town shall publish notice of a decision to approve or deny a special events permit at least 30 days prior to a proposed special event. 
(4)  Any person alleged to be negatively affected by the granting or denial of a special events permit application may file with the senior planner a written appeal of the decision within seven days after notice of the decisions is published. The town council shall hold a hearing to consider the appeal upon not less than three days notice to the applicant and the person filing the appeal. An administrative appeal to the town council is a requirement of any judicial challenge or appeal to the approval or denial of a special events permit, any of the permit conditions or the holding of the event based on the terms of an approved permit. 
18.18.050 - Grounds for approval or denial. 
(a)  A special events permit application shall be approved by the senior planner if, based on conditions and requirements imposed upon the permit, it meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant has obtained permission to use all properties or facilities associated with the special event. 
(2)  The proposed special event will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(3)  The particular location requested can reasonably accommodate the special event, given the proposed nature, size, or duration of the event. 
(4)  The applicant complies with any other required approvals, conditions or permits. 
(5)  The proposed special event shall not create an unreasonable risk of: 
a.  Significant damage to public or private property; 
b.  Injury to persons; 
c.  Public or private nuisances; 
d.  Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of, vehicular or pedestrian travel; or 
e.  Unduly burdensome police, fire, trash removal, maintenance, or other public service demands. 
(6)  The time and location for the proposed special event is not already permitted or reserved for other activities. 
(7)  The applicant has provided sufficient proof of liability insurance to reasonably cover any potential claims that could arise as from the special event, the policy for which shall name the town as an additional insured. 
(8)  The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold the town harmless for any and all claims and liabilities arising from the special event. 
(b)  Prior approval of a special events permit shall not be grounds for requiring a permit to be issued for any other event requested to be held by the same applicant, or any subsequent occurrence of the same or similar event. 
(c)  Failure of an applicant to conduct a previous event in compliance with applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions shall be a basis of denial of a special events application. 
18.18.060 - Conditions and restrictions. 
(a)  The following restrictions shall apply to all special events permits: 
(1)  Permanent alterations to the site inconsistent with applicable zoning are prohibited. 
(2)  Permanent signs are prohibited. All approved temporary signs associated with the temporary use shall be removed when the activity ends. 
(3)  Except for variances or exceptions specifically allowed by the special events permit terms, which may include but not be limited to exceptions to requirements or limitations regarding zoning, noise, curfew and operation of vehicles and movement of pedestrians, the special event shall be conducted in compliance with all provisions of the Gypsum Municipal Code and applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  In approving special events permits, the senior planner may impose such conditions reasonably necessary to reduce or minimize potential unreasonable adverse impacts upon the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of the citizens of the town. The senior planner shall consider characteristics of the proposed event including but not limited to the frequency, duration, hours and days involved in the special event, the number of persons attending, and the number of properties and persons affected. Significant, frequent impacts of long duration between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that are specific to one or a small number of properties or persons, shall require greater consideration of mitigating conditions than impacts of less significance, frequency and duration occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. that are general to large neighborhoods or the town or the public as a whole. 
(c)  Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Requirements for adequate parking. 
(2)  Requirements for adequate pedestrian and vehicular access and egress. 
(3)  Requirement for adequate emergency services access. 
(4)  Requirements for adequate traffic control. 
(5)  Limits on lighting, sound volume, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases and heat. 
(6)  Regulation of temporary buildings, structures, and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas. 
(7)  Provision of sanitary facilities. 
(8)  Provision of solid waste collection and disposal. 
(9)  Requirements of trash and debris clean up at the site of the special event and any other public or private property potentially impacted by the special event. 
(10)  Provision of security and safety measures. 
(11)  Provision of emergency services, including emergency medical services. 
(12)  Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities that may have unmitigated and unreasonable adverse impacts. 
(13)  Limitations on the duration, days and hours of public or private attendance at the special event. 
(14)  Limitations on the duration, days and hours of set up, tear down and clean up for the special event. 
(d)  Submission of a performance bond or other financial guarantee to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed temporary use will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition. 
(e)  The senior planner, special events coordinator or the code enforcement officer may temporarily suspend any special events permit and order a special event to discontinue operations for violation of the terms of this chapter or the terms or conditions of the permit. The provisions of this chapter and terms and conditions of any special events permit may be enforced by an action brought in the municipal court, which shall have the power to revoke any special use permit and impose fines and penalties as provided generally for violations of the Gypsum Municipal Code. 
18.18.070 - Lundgren Theatre sound amplification events. 
    The Lundgren Theater is designated as an adequate and suitable place for holding events that require sound amplification. The town council may from time to time by resolution designate other areas within the town as appropriate for sound amplification. The senior planner may establish regulations regarding acceptable decibel levels and time periods for sound amplification at the Lundgren Theater and any other areas designated by the town council as adequate and suitable for events that require sound amplification. In no event shall permitted decibel levels for the Lundgren Theatre or other areas designated as adequate and suitable for sound amplification events exceed 120 dB at the nearest residential property line. 
Chapter 18.19 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[1] 

Footnotes: 

18.19.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in the chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Medical marijuana, medical marijuana center, medical marijuana infused product, optional premises, and optional premises cultivation operation , shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3, C.R.S., as the same may from time to time be amended. 
    Patient shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14(1) of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Primary caregiver shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article XVII, Section 14(1) of the Colorado Constitution and Section 25-1.5-106 C.R.S. 
18.19.020 - Findings. 
    The town council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. Section 12-43.3-1041, et seq., clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent Article XVII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution 
(2)  This chapter is necessary to protect and is enacted in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare of the town. 
(3)  This chapter is intended to apply and shall apply to all property, businesses and business enterprises operating within the town, whether stationary, mobile or virtual. 
18.19.030 - Uses prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit to be operated a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility in the town. 
(b)  Medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers and optional premises cultivation operations may not be operated as a primary land use, or as an incidental activity to another lawful land use, or as a home occupations. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person who is not registered as a patient or primary caregiver pursuant to 25-1.5-106 C.R.S to cultivate or sell medical marijuana within the town. Any person cultivating or selling marijuana in violation of this chapter and Section 25-1.5-106 C.R.S shall not be entitled to the affirmative defense provided in Section 14 of Article XVII of the Colorado Constitution. 
18.19.050 - Penalty; nuisance declared. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any such violation is hereby designated a criminal offense and any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of the chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both pursuant to section 18.16.040(a)(1) and 2.01.090 of this Code. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)  The conduct of any activity or business in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the provisions for the enforcement of the zoning code provided in section 18.16.040 of this Code. All violations of this chapter shall be considered an emergency violation as provided in section 18.16.040(a)(1) of this Code. 
(c)  The town is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement, restitution, or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(d)  Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity. 
(e)  There shall be no appeals to the board of adjustment as provided in section 18.16.050 of the zoning code for any violation of this chapter 18.19. 
Chapter 18.20 - MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 

18.20.010 - Authority. 
    The town council hereby finds and determines and declares that it has the power and authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; 
(2)  The authority granted to home rule municipalities by Article XX of the Colorado Constitution; 
(3)  The powers contained in the Town of Gypsum Home Rule Charter; 
(4)  The Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S.; 
(5)  Part 3 of Article 23 of Title 31, C.R.S. (concerning municipal zoning powers); 
(6)  Section 31-15-103, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police powers); 
(7)  Section 31-15-401, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police powers); and 
(8)  Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. (concerning municipal authority to regulate businesses. 
18.20.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Community grow operation is the growing of marijuana on a single piece of land by a collective group of individuals and/or entities utilizing either individual or shared plots. 
    Marijuana or marihuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or "marijhuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seed of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
    Marijuana club means an entity or place of assembly that allows members and their guests, or any other persons, to consume marijuana or marijuana products whether for-profit or not-for-profit. Marijuana clubs shall not include social gatherings within a residential zone of adults 21 years of age and older, where a fee is not charged, or goods are not sold, or no profit is made by the individual or entity hosting the gathering. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, a retail marijuana store, or a community grow operation. (Ord. 2014-03) 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, or organization, or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer, or employee thereof. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana products manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
(Ord. 2014-03) 
18.20.030 - Uses prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit to be operated, any marijuana establishment or marijuana club within the town, and all such uses are hereby prohibited in any location within the town. 
(b)  Marijuana establishments and marijuana clubs may not be operated as a primary land use, or as an incidental activity to another lawful land use, or as a home occupation. 
18.20.040 - Penalties; nuisance declared. 
    A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  By a fine or imprisonment, or both, pursuant to sections 18.16.040(a)(1) and 2.01.090 of this Code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(2)  The conduct of any activity or business in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the provisions for the enforcement of the zoning code provided in section 18.16.040 of this Code. All violations of this Chapter shall be considered an emergency violation as provided in section 18.16.040(a)(1) of this Code. 
(3)  The town is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement, restitution, or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove the violation. 
(4)  Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity. 
(5)  There shall be no appeals to the board of adjustment as provided in section 18.16.050 of the zoning code for any violations of this chapter 18.20. 
Title 19 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
  
Chapter 19.02 - OPTIONAL PREMISES LIQUOR LICENSES 

19.02.010 - Optional premises licenses-Standards adopted. 
    The following standards for the issuance of annually renewable optional premises liquor licenses, or optional premises for a hotel and restaurant licenses,(referred to throughout this chapter as "optional premises license(s)") for the sale of alcoholic beverages or for storing alcoholic beverages on or off the optional premises for future use on the optional premises, are hereby adopted pursuant to Section 12-47-135.5, C.R.S., as amended. 
19.02.020 - Standards additional to standards under the Colorado Liquor Code. 
    The standards contained in this chapter shall be considered in addition to all other standards and requirements applicable to the issuance of licenses under Section 12-47-101 et seq. C.R.S., the "Colorado Liquor Code," for Optional Premises Licenses. 
19.02.030 - Eligible facilities. 
    An optional premises license may only be approved when the optional premises applied for are: 
(1)  In the case of an application for a hotel and restaurant license, the hotel and restaurant's related outdoor sports and recreational facilities established for the convenience of its guests or the general public, located on or adjacent to the hotel or restaurant; or 
(2)  In the case of an application for an optional premises license, located on an applicant's outdoor sports and recreational facility (as defined in Section 12-47103(13.5)(b), C.R.S.). 
(3)  The types of outdoor sports and recreation facilities which may be considered for an optional premises license include, without limitation, the following: 
  Country clubs; 
  Golf courses and driving ranges; 
  Ice skating areas; 
  Ski areas; 
  Swimming pools. 
(4)  There are no restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be eligible for the approval of an optional premises license. 
However, the local licensing authority (as defined in Section 12-47-103(9), C.R.S.), of the Town of Gypsum referred to throughout this chapter as the "local authority") may consider the size of the particular outdoor sports or recreational facility in relationship to the number of optional premises requested for the facility. 
19.02.040 - Submittal requirements. 
    When submitting a request for the approval by the local authority of an optional premises license, an applicant shall submit the following information to the local authority: 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises applied for; 
(2)  A legal description of the approximate area within which the optional premises shall be located; 
(3)  A map or diagram showing seating, restrooms, and restricted access areas; 
(4)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use; 
(5)  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous, and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional premises for future use on the optional premises; 
(6)  A written statement setting forth what will be done to secure the optional premises and storage area or areas; 
(7)  A written statement indicating why the local licensing authority should grant the license; 
(8)  If the applicant does not own the proposed optional premises, a written statement by the owner of the premises, approving the application and license sought; and 
(9)  Other information deemed necessary, by the local authority, to insure the control of the optional premises, the ease of enforcement, and that the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and outdoor sports and recreational facility users will not be adversely affected should the license be issued. 
19.02.050 - Advance notification. 
    Pursuant to Section 12-47-135(6) and (7), C.R.S., as amended, no alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee provides written notice to the state and local licensing authorities 48 hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional premises. Said notice shall contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. 
19.02.060 - Ultimate authority-Illegal acts. 
(a)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude the local premises license in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. Any such conditions may be imposed when the license is initially issued or should any specific event or use of the optional premises so warrant. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or store alcoholic beverages at an outdoor sports and recreational facility: without having first obtained a valid optional premises license as provided in this chapter and the Colorado Liquor Code; or in violation of any provision, restriction or limitation of any issued optional premises license. 
(Ord. 07, series 1997) 
Chapter 19.04 - PURPOSE 

19.04.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title is to provide for the regulation of the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the town in order to ensure and provide for the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the town. 
(Ord. 1 Series 1995 SI) 
Chapter 19.08 - VIOLATIONS 

19.08.010 - Prohibited distribution. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, dispense or permit the sale, serving, giving, disposition or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, including fermented malt beverages commonly known as 3.2 beer, to any person under the age of 21 years, to a visibly intoxicated person, or to a known habitual drunkard. It is the responsibility of anyone licensed by the Town of Gypsum or licensed by the state and operating with in the town to dispense alcoholic beverages to determine if any person is under the age of 21 or visibly intoxicated before selling, serving, giving, disposing of or otherwise dispensing such beverages to such person. 
(Ord. I Series 1995 SI) 
19.08.020 - Prohibited possession. 
    It is unlawful to obtain or possess in any public place, or to attempt to obtain or possess in any public place any alcoholic beverage, including 3.2 beer, by a person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. I Series 1995 SI) 
19.08.030 - Related prohibitions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to assist any other person in the violation of section 19.08.010 and 19.08.020. It is unlawful to make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any false documentation for the purpose of violating sections 19.08.010 and 19.08.020. 
(Ord. I Series 1995 SI) 
Chapter 19.10 - TASTINGS 

19.10.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Liquor authority means the Town Council of the Town of Gypsum, sitting as the local liquor licensing authority of the town. 
    Sample means a one ounce serving of a malt or vinous liquor or a one-half ounce serving of a spirituous liquor. The term shall also include any opened bottle or container of malt or vinous liquor intended to be dispensed in one ounce servings or spirituous liquor intended to be dispensed in one-half ounce servings to patrons for the purpose of allowing them to taste its contents. 
    Tastings means the sampling of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensee or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee. 
19.10.020 - Tastings. 
(a)  The town hereby authorizes tastings to be conducted by licensed retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drugstores in accordance with this chapter and pursuant to  12-47-301, C.R.S. No tastings shall be conducted in any licensed retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore until such establishment obtains a tastings permit from the town. 
(b)  Any licensed retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore desiring to conduct tastings on its premises shall obtain a permit from the liquor authority by first completing a tastings permit application and paying a permit fee, which shall be established by and periodically amended by resolution of the town council. 
(c)  The liquor authority is hereby authorized to establish the procedures for processing a tastings permit application. The liquor authority may deny issuance of a tastings permit if it determines that the applicant has failed to establish that the licensee is able to conduct tastings without violating the provision of this chapter or that the granting of a permit would create a public safety risk to the neighborhood. Issued permits shall not be transferable to a new owner in the event of a sale of the permitted establishment. 
(d)  Tasting permits shall not be issued by the liquor authority until the applicant provides sufficient proof of liability insurance to cover any potential claims that could arise as a result of serving liquor on the premises. 
(e)  Tastings shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of a licensee, and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
(2)  The alcohol used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to  12-47-403, C.R.S., at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost of such alcohol. 
(3)  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one ounce of malt, or vinous liquor or one-half ounce of spirituous liquor. 
(4)  Tastings shall not exceed a total of three consecutive hours in duration per day. 
(5)  Tastings shall be conducted only during the licensee's normal operating hours, but in no case may the tasting be conducted before 11:00 a.m. nor after 7:00 p.m. 
(6)  Tastings may not be conducted more than four days in a six-day week, nor may they be conducted more frequently than 104 days per year. (Ord. 2007-12) 
(7)  Licensees shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
(8)  Licensees shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following completion of the tasting. 
(9)  Licensees shall not serve any person who is under the age of 21 years, as evidenced by a valid driver's license or identification issued by the State of Colorado; an operator's, chauffeur's or similar type driver's license containing a picture, and date of birth, issued by any state, Canada, Mexico or United States Territory; identification card containing a picture, issued by any state for the purpose of proof of age in accordance with C.R.S. 42-2-402.; military identification card; passport; alien registration card; a valid employment authorization card containing a picture and date of birth issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, Immigration and Naturalization service. No person who is exhibiting the common signs of being visibly intoxicated, including but not limited to slurring of words, poor coordination, and the heavy smell of alcohol on his or her breath, shall be served. No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed on the premises during a tasting unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(10)  Licensees shall not serve more than four individual samples to a single patron. 
(11)  Licensees shall not charge a fee for any samples dispensed to patrons. 
(12)  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for the tasting. 
(13)  A violation of a limitation specified herein or of  12-47-301, C.R.S., by a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, whether by his or her employees, agents or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who is conducting the tasting. 
(14)  At the discretion of the liquor authority, violations of these provisions shall be grounds for revocation of the tastings permit and may be considered as part of the annual review and renewal of the establishment's liquor license. 
(15)  Prior to any revocation, suspension or imposition of fines or penalties, the liquor authority shall conduct a public hearing, pursuant to  12-47-601, C.R.S., at which hearing the licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard to defend the revocation, suspension, or imposition of fines or penalties. 
Chapter 19.11 - SPECIAL EVENT LIQUOR PERMIT 

19.11.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Alcoholic beverage means malt, spirituous or venous liquor sold by the drink. 
    Licensee means an applicant granted a special event liquor permit. 
    Liquor authority means the Town Council of the Town of Gypsum, sitting as the local liquor licensing authority of the town, or an administrative officer of the town designated by the town council. 
    Organization means an organization incorporated under the laws of Colorado for purposes of a social, fraternal, patriotic, political or athletic nature and not for pecuniary gain, or a regularly chartered branch, lodge or chapter of a national nonprofit organization or society which is organized for social, fraternal, patriotic, political or athletic purposes, or a regularly established religious or philanthropic institution. 
    Political candidate means a political candidate who has filed the necessary reports and statements with the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 1, Article 45, C.R.S. 
(Ordinance No. 1 Series 2009) 
19.11.020 - Application. 
(a)  Pursuant to  12-48-107(5)(a), C.R.S., the town council, acting as the liquor authority, elects not to notify the state licensing authority to obtain the state licensing authority's approval or disapproval of applications for special event permits. The town hereby authorizes the issuance of special event permits for the sale, by the drink only, of malt beverages, or the sale, by the drink only, of malt, spirituous or venous liquors to the town, organizations, and political candidates in accordance with this chapter and pursuant to  12-48-101, et seq., C.R.S. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at any special event until a special event liquor permit is obtained from the town. The standards contained in this chapter shall be considered in addition to all other standards and requirements applicable to the issuance of licenses under  12-47-101, et seq., C.R.S., the "Colorado Liquor Code." 
(b)  Any organization or political candidate desiring to sell alcoholic beverages at a special event shall obtain a permit from the liquor authority by first completing a special event liquor permit application and paying a permit fee, which shall be established by and periodically amended by resolution of the town council but shall not exceed $100.00. An applicant must file the application at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the liquor authority for good cause shown. 
(c)  The liquor authority is hereby authorized to establish the procedures for processing a special event liquor permit application. The application must be verified by oath or affirmation. Public notice of the proposed permit and of the procedure for protesting issuance of the permit shall be conspicuously posted at the proposed location for at least ten days before approval of the permit by the liquor authority. The liquor authority shall promptly act upon each application for a special event liquor permit and shall either approve or disapprove such application. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the liquor authority shall, as required by  12-48-107(5)(c), C.R.S., access information made available on the state licensing authority's website to determine the statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit. Before approving an application, the liquor authority shall consider compliance with  12-48-105(3), C.R.S., which restricts the number of permits issued to an organization in a calendar year. 
(e)  The liquor authority may deny issuance of a special event liquor permit if it determines that the issuance would be injurious to the public welfare because of the nature of the special event, its location within the community, or the failure of the applicant in a past special event to conduct the event in compliance with applicable laws. Issued permits shall not be transferable. 
(f)  The liquor authority shall cause a hearing to be held if, after investigation and upon review of the contents of any protest filed by affected persons, sufficient grounds appear to exist for denial of a permit. Any protest shall be filed by affected persons within ten days after the date of notice. The hearing shall be held at least ten days after the initial posting of the notice, and notice of the hearing shall be provided the applicant and any person who has filed a protest. 
(g)  As required by  12-48-107(5)(a), C.R.S., the liquor authority shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten days after it issues a permit, the name of the organization to which a permit was issued, the address of the permitted location, and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. 
(h)  The sale, by the drink only, of malt beverages, or the sale, by the drink only, of malt, spirituous or venous liquors to the town, organizations, and political candidates in accordance with this chapter and pursuant to  12-48-101, et seq., C.R.S. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at any special event until a special event liquor permit is obtained from the town. The standards contained in this chapter shall be considered in addition to all other standards and requirements applicable to the issuance of licenses under  12-47-101, et seq., C.R.S., the "Colorado Liquor Code." 
(i)  Any organization or political candidate desiring to sell alcoholic beverages at a special event shall obtain a permit from the liquor authority by first completing a special event liquor permit application and paying a permit fee, which shall be established by and periodically amended by the resolution of the town council. An applicant must file the application at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the liquor authority for good cause shown. 
(j)  The liquor authority is hereby authorized to establish the procedures for processing a special event liquor permit application. The application must be verified by oath or affirmation. Public notice of the proposed permit and of the procedure for protesting issuance of the permit shall be conspicuously posted at the proposed location for at least ten days before approval of the permit by the liquor authority. 
(k)  The liquor authority may deny issuance of a special event liquor permit if it determines that the issuance of such a permit would be injurious to the public welfare by reason of the nature of the special event, its location within the community or the failure of the applicant in a past special event to conduct such event in compliance with applicable laws or regulations. Issued permits shall not be transferable. 
(l)  The liquor authority shall cause a hearing to be held if, after investigation and upon review of the contents of any protest filed by affected persons, sufficient grounds appear to exist for denial of a permit. Any protest shall be filed by affected persons within ten days after the date of notice. The hearing shall be held at least ten days after the initial posting of the notice, and notice of the hearing shall be provided the applicant and any person who has filed a protest. 
(Ord. 2011-17) 
19.11.030 - Limitations. 
    Special event liquor permits shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages served pursuant to a special event liquor permit shall be served only by a person who is at least 21 years of age and has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(2)  Each special event liquor permit shall be issued for a specific location and is not valid for any other location. 
(3)  Subject to the conditions imposed by a temporary use permit, a special event liquor permit authorizes the sale of alcoholic beverages only during the following hours: 
a.  Between the hours of 5:00 a.m. of the day specified in a malt beverage permit and until 12:00 midnight on the same day; 
b.  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. of the day specified in a malt, vinous and spirituous liquor permit and until 2:00 a.m. of the day immediately following. 
(4)  A special event liquor permit shall not be issued to any organization more than 15 days in any calendar year , pursuant to  12-45-105, C.R.S. (Ord. 2011-17) 
(5)  No issuance of a special event liquor permit shall have the effect of requiring the liquor authority to issue such a permit upon any subsequent application by a licensee. 
(6)  Sandwiches or other food snacks shall be available during all hours of service of alcoholic beverages either on the licensed premises or from adjacent food vendors. 
(7)  Licensees shall not serve any person who is under the age of 21 years, as evidenced by a valid driver's license or identification issued by the State of Colorado; an operator's, chauffeur's or similar type driver's license containing a picture, and date of birth, issued by any state, Canada, Mexico or United States Territory; identification card containing a picture, issued by any state for the purpose of proof of age in accordance with  42-2-402, C.R.S.; military identification card; passport; alien registration card; a valid employment authorization card containing a picture and date of birth issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, Immigration and Naturalization Service. No person who is exhibiting the common signs of being visibly intoxicated, including but not limited to, slurring of words, poor coordination, and the heavy smell of alcohol on his or her breath, shall be served. 
(8)  Special event liquor permits shall not be issued by the liquor authority until the applicant provides sufficient proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover any potential claims that could arise as a result of serving liquor at the special event. 
(9)  Special event liquor permits may only be issued upon a showing that other existing facilities are not available or are inadequate for the needs of the applicant or that during special events such as civic celebrations that members of the general public will be served. 
(10)  An application for a special event liquor permit may not be received or acted upon if the premises upon which the liquor is to be sold are located within 500 feet of any public or parochial school, or the principal campus of any college, university or seminary. This restriction shall not apply during hours in which no school classes are scheduled. 
19.11.040 - Violation. 
    At the discretion of the liquor authority, violations of these provisions shall be grounds for revocation of the special event liquor permit. Prior to any revocation, suspension or imposition of fines or penalties, the liquor authority shall conduct a public hearing, at which hearing the licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard to defend the revocation, suspension, or imposition of fines or penalties. These provisions shall also be enforced in accordance with chapter 19.12 of this Code. 
Chapter 19.12 - ENFORCEMENT 

19.12.010 - Enforcement officer. 
    The town council appoints the town manager or such other person as may be designated as the alcoholic beverage enforcement officer. If such enforcement officer shall find that any provisions of the title are being violated, he has the authority to enforce this title. Enforcement may be effected via the provision of written notice demanding immediate cessation of the violation or by initiation of any action in the municipal court. Enforcement options shall be at the sole discretion of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. I Series 1995 SI) 
19.12.020 - Municipal court. 
    Upon filing of a complaint by the alcoholic beverage enforcement officer, the municipal court shall retain full jurisdiction over the matter and shall dispose of the matter within the bounds of its authority and discretion. 
(Ord. I Series 1995 SI) 
Title 20 - REGULATIONS FOR AREAS AND ACTIVITIES OF STATE INTEREST 
  
Chapter 20.01 - INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

20.01.101 - Title and citation. 
(a)  These various chapters and sections contained within title 20 of the Gypsum Municipal Code that are organized into a comprehensive set of regulations are entitled and may be cited as the "Regulations for Areas and Activities of State Interest" of the Town of Gypsum. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Chapters 20.01 through 20.05 may be cited as the "Administrative Regulations". (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.102 - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The purpose of these administrative regulations is to facilitate identification, designation, and administration of matters of state interest consistent with the statutory requirements and criteria set forth in  24-65.1-101, et seq., C.R.S., and guidelines for identification and designation approved by the Colorado Land Use Commission, as well as to provide for certain inclusions in Gypsum's master plan pursuant to  24-32-111, C.R.S. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The Town Council of the Town of Gypsum, Colorado finds that: 
(1)  The notice and public hearing requirements of  24-65.1-404, C.R.S., have been followed; 
(2)  These administrative regulations are necessary because of the intensity of current and foreseeable development pressures on and within Gypsum; 
(c)  These administrative regulations were adopted after taking into consideration applicable guidelines adopted and issued by the Colorado Land Use Commission; 
(d)  These administrative regulations apply to the entire area within the municipal boundaries of Gypsum; 
(e)  These administrative regulations interpret and apply to any regulations adopted for specific areas of state interest and specific activities of state interest which have been or may be designated by the town council. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.103 - Authority. 
    These administrative regulations are authorized by, inter alia,  24-65.1-101, et seq., 31-23-101, et seq., 31-23-209, 29-20-101, et seq., and 24-32-111, C.R.S., and the Gypsum Home Rule Charter. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.104 - Applicability. 
    These administrative regulations shall apply to all proceedings subject to  31-23-209, C.R.S., and proceedings concerning identification and designation of and developments in any area of state interest or any activity of state interest which has been or may hereafter be designated by the town council. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.105 - Exemptions. 
    The portions of these administrative regulations authorized exclusively under 524-65.1-101, et seq., C.R.S. 1973, shall not apply to any development in an area of state interest or any activity of state interest if, on May 17, 1974: 
(1)  The specific development or activity was covered by a current building permit issue by Gypsum; 
(2)  The specific development or activity was directly approved by the electorate of the state or Gypsum; provided that, approval by the electorate of any bond issue by itself shall not be construed as approval of the specific development or activity; 
(3)  The specific development or activity is on land which had been finally approved, with or without conditions, for planned unit development or for a use other than a subdivision substantially the same as planned unit development; 
(4)  The specific development or activity is on land which was either zoned or rezoned in response to an application which specifically contemplated said specific development or activity; or 
(5)  The specific development or activity is on land with respect to which a final plat for a subdivision had been approved, with or without condition, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 2-11 of Chapter 81, Session Laws of Colorado 1972, codified at  30-28-101, 110, 133, 136, and 137, C.R.S. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.106 - Interpretation with other enactments and plans. 
(a)  Whenever the provisions of title 20, G.M.C., are found to be inconsistent with any other resolution, ordinance, code, regulation, other enactment or master plan of Gypsum, the enactment imposing the more restrictive standards or requirements shall control. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  In the event that the provisions of title 20, G.M.C., are found to be less stringent than the statutory criteria for administration of matters of state interest set forth in  24-65.1-202, 204, C.R.S., the statutory criteria shall control. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.107 - Maps. 
(a)  Each map referred to in designations and regulations for any particular matter of state interest adopted by town council is deemed adopted therein as if set out in full. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Maps referred to in any such designation and regulation shall be filed with and be available for inspection at the office of the Eagle County Clerk and Recorder and shall also be available for inspection in the office of the town clerk. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.108 - Duties of the town council. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, it shall be the duty of the town council to perform all functions set forth in all regulations for matters of state interest. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.109 - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision, or portion of these administrative regulations should be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the administrative regulations shall not be affected thereby and is hereby declared to be necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.01.110 - Definitions. 
    The words and terms used in these regulations for administration of areas and activities of state shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context requires otherwise: 
    An identification of an area of state interest is the act of viewing and preparing a description of the land within the borders of which is located that area of state interest. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Designation is only that legal procedure specified by  24-65.1-101, et seq., C.R.S. It is carried out by the town council. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Development means any construction or activity which changes the basic character or the use of the land on which the construction or activity occurs. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Layman's description means a general, non-legal description and the popular name, if any, of the tract of land upon which the activity or development is to be conducted. The term "general description" means "layman's description". (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Legal description is any description from which it is possible to locate accurately on the ground the boundaries of the land being described. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Matter of state interest means an area of state interest or an activity of state interest or both. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, company, or other public or corporate body, including the federal government, and includes any political subdivision, agency, instrumentality, or corporation of the state, any county, or any local government. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Receipt of application means the time at which the completed application is accepted by the permit authority. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Regulation means both regulation and guideline as the terms are used in  24-65.1-101, et seq., C.R.S. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    Technical step in identification of an activity of state interest is the act of formulating a plan or program for the administration of any one of the activities of state interest within Gypsum consistent with the criteria of  24-65.1-204, C.R.S. 
    Town council means the Town Council of the Town of Gypsum, which shall be responsible for the administration of designated matters of state interest within Gypsum, and shall constitute the permit authority for consideration, approval or denial of applications for permits to conduct activities of state interest or engage in development within an area of state interest within Gypsum. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.02 - IDENTIFICATION, MASTER PLAN AND PLANNING COMMISSION PROCEDURES 

20.02.101 - Identification of matters of state interest-Technical step. 
    The technical step in identification of any matter of state interest shall be made by report and must be complete for the appropriate matter of state interest before the identification is adopted. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.02.102 - Adoption of identification-Inclusion in master plan. 
    After completion of the technical step, identification by the Gypsum Planning Commission is completed when adopted as part of the Gypsum Master Plan or is completed by the town council when a designation or regulation based thereon is adopted. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.02.103 - Adoption of identification by the planning commission-Procedures to be followed. 
(a)  Adoption of identification shall be accomplished under the same procedures followed for adoption of the master plan as well as the following additional procedures: (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The "careful and comprehensive studies and surveys" upon which the Gypsum Master Plan must be based according to  31-23-107, C.R.S., shall include the technical step as described above. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  At least 30 days before adoption of official identification as part of the Gypsum Master Plan, a summary of the proposed official identification shall be submitted to the division of planning, department of local affairs, for review and advisory recommendations. If any other local governmental jurisdiction would be directly or indirectly affected, the proposed identification similarly shall be submitted to such government and to the regional planning commission and/or council of governments. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
    The planning commission's adoption of the identification as part of the Gypsum Master Plan shall be made by resolution. 
    Before adoption, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, with notice of the hearing given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within Gypsum. 
    Adoption shall refer to any maps and descriptive matter intended to be a part of the identification. 
    The action taken shall be recorded on any such map or descriptive matter by the signature of the chairman or secretary of the planning commission. 
    Once the identification is adopted, as part of the master plan, the planning commission shall certify a copy of the identification to the town council, and shall send a copy or summary of the identification to the division of planning, department of local affairs. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.03 - DESIGNATION OF MATTERS OF STATE INTEREST 

20.03.101 - Town council to make designations. 
    Designations and amendments or revocations of designations may be initiated in three ways: (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(1)  After a matter of state interest has been identified as provided in chapter 20.02 of this title, the town council may designate such matter by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this section and the Gypsum Home Rule Charter. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(2)  If the town council finds that it would be inappropriate to await identification of any matter of state interest by the planning commission, the governing body may designate such matter by ordinance prior to adoption of the identification. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(3)  If the Colorado Land Use Commission submits a formal request to the town council with regard to a specific matter which the Colorado Land Use Commission considers to be of state interest within Gypsum, the town council shall publish notice and conduct a hearing pursuant to  24-65.1-407(l)(a), C.R.S. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.102 - Moratorium. 
    After the town council has received a formal request to take action with regard to a specific matter which the Colorado Land Use Commission considers to be of state interest within gypsum's jurisdiction, no person shall engage in development in the area or conduct the activity specifically described in said request until the town council has held its hearing and issued its order relating thereto. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.103 - Public hearing required. 
(a)  The town council shall hold a public hearing before designating any matter of state interest and adopting regulations for the administration thereof. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  In the event that the Colorado Land Use Commission submits a formal request to take action, such public hearing for designation shall be held within 90 days after receipt of the formal request. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.104 - Notice of public hearing, mailing list, publication. 
(a)  The town council shall prepare a notice of the designation hearing which shall include: 
(1)  The time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  The place at which materials relating to the matter to be designated and any guidelines and regulations for the administration thereof may be examined. 
(3)  A telephone number where inquiries may be answered. 
(4)  A description of the area or activity proposed to be designated in sufficient detail to provide reasonable notice as to property which would be included. The notice should include, when practicable, both the legal description of the property as well as any general or popular names of the property. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The town clerk shall maintain a mailing list of the names of those persons requesting that their names and addresses be placed on the list and paying an annual fee, the amount of which shall be determined from time to time by the town clerk. In order to have his name and address retained on said mailing list, the person shall resubmit his name and address and pay such fee before January 31 of each year. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  At least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the public hearing, the town council shall publish the notice in a newspaper of general circulation within Gypsum, and shall mail the notice by first class mail to each of the following: 
(1)  The Colorado Land Use Commission and other state and federal agencies, as deemed appropriate in the discretion of the town council. 
(2)  Persons on the mailing list. In the discretion of the town council, members of the news media and any other person considered to be likely to be affected by the proposed designation. 
(3)  If any other local governmental jurisdiction would be directly or indirectly affected, the proposed designation similarly shall be mailed to such government and to the regional planning commission and/or council of governments. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.105 - Matters to be considered at designation hearings. 
(a)  At the public hearing regarding designation of a matter of state interest described above, the town council shall consider such evidence as may appear appropriate including, as a minimum: 
(1)  The intensity of current and foreseeable development pressures; 
(2)  The matters and considerations set forth in any applicable guidelines for identification and designation; 
(3)  Model regulations issued by the Colorado Land Use Commission and other state agencies; 
(4)  The boundaries of the proposed area; 
(5)  Reasons why the particular area or activity is of state interest, the dangers that would result from uncontrolled development of any such area or uncontrolled conduct of such activity, and the advantages of development of such area or conduct of such activity in a coordinated manner; and 
(6)  Any master or comprehensive plan pertaining to or affected by the area or activity under consideration. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The town council shall hear testimony and receive evidence, including: 
(1)  The recommendations of the planning commission, if applicable; and 
(2)  Relevant testimony and documents presented. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.106 - Record of designation proceedings. 
(a)  The town council will collect and preserve the following record of the public hearing, as a minimum: 
(1)  Notice of the hearing. 
(2)  Certificate of publication of the notice. 
(3)  Names and addresses of persons who presented written or oral statements. 
(4)  Evidence of the identification of the matter of state interest proposed to be designated. 
(5)  Written findings concerning each of the matters referred to in 20.03.105(a), above. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Any person may, at his own expense, provide for the recording of the hearing and transcription thereof, provided, however, that a copy of the recording or transcript thereof, if transcribed, shall be furnished free of charge to the town council and shall become part of the record. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.107 - Adoption of designation and regulations. 
(a)  At the conclusion of such hearing, the town council may adopt, with modification, or reject the proposed designation which was the subject of public hearing; if designation and regulation under  524-65.1-101, et seq., C.R.S., is rejected, the town council may regulate the matter under any other available land use control authority or it may reject regulation of the matter entirely. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Such action shall be taken by order. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  In the event that the town council finally determines that any matter is a matter of state interest, or if the town council is acting pursuant to court order, it shall be the town council's duty to designate such matter and adopt regulations for the administration thereof. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(d)  Each designation order adopted by the town council shall, as a minimum: 
(1)  Specify the boundaries of the designated area of state interest or the boundary of the area in which an activity of state interest has been designated. 
(2)  State reasons why the particular area or activity is of state interest, the dangers that would result from uncontrolled development of any such area or uncontrolled conduct of such activity, and the advantages of development of such area or conduct of such activity in a coordinated manner. 
(3)  Specify the regulations applicable to the designated matter of state interest. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.108 - Submission of material to land use commission. 
    Upon adoption of a designation order, all relevant materials including the record of any public hearing relating to the designation and regulations, as described in section 20.03.106, above, shall be forwarded by the town council to the Colorado Land Use Commission for review. If within 30 days after receipt of a designation order and regulation the land use commission has notified the town council that modification of the designation or regulations is required, the town council shall, within 30 days after receipt of the recommended modifications: 
(1)  Modify the original order in a manner consistent with the recommendations of the Colorado Land Use Commission and resubmit the order to the Colorado Land Use Commission, or 
(2)  Notify the Colorado Land Use Commission that the Colorado Land Use Commission's recommendations are rejected and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.109 - Recording of notice of designation. 
    A notice of the designation shall be certified by the town council to the county clerk and recorder for filing in the same manner as any document affecting real property. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.03.110 - Effect of designation-Moratorium until final determination. 
    After a matter of state interest is designated pursuant to section 20.03.107, no person shall engage in development in such area and no such activity shall be conducted until the designation and regulations for such area or activity are finally determined as required by  24-65.1-404(4), C.R.S. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.04 - PERMITS 

20.04.101 - Permits required after designation; receipt of application form. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in a development in a designated area of state interest or to conduct a designated activity of state interest must obtain a permit from the town council. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  An application shall not be accepted unless it is complete. If the application is considered incomplete by the town council, the town council shall specify what additional information is required. When a submitted application is considered to be complete by the town council, the town council shall note upon the application the date and hour of its receipt. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  When the applicant seeks a permit to engage in development in more than one area of state interest and/or to conduct more than one activity of state interest and/or to engage in development in one area of state interest and to conduct one activity of state interest, the application may be completed for all such activities or developments and may be reviewed by the town council in one consolidated hearing. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.102 - Application fee. 
    The application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $500.00, or such greater amount as may be determined by the town council as necessary to process the application. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.103 - Notice of permit hearing. 
    Not later than 30 days after receipt of a completed application for a permit, the town council shall set and publish notice of a date, time, and place for a hearing on said application. Such notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within Gypsum, not less than 30 nor more than 90 days before the date set for hearing and shall also be given to other persons and entities in the same manner as set forth above in section 20.03.104, G.M.C., for the notice of a designation hearing. 
(Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.104 - Conduct of permit hearing. 
(a)  The town council shall conduct the public hearing in such a manner to afford procedural due process to the applicant as well as to any person who opposes issuance of the permit. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The town council shall hear testimony and receive evidence, including: 
(1)  The recommendations of the town manager, and the planning commission, and 
(2)  Relevant testimony and documents presented. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  Although the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure do not govern the conduct of the hearing, all persons appearing at the hearing in person or by counsel shall be afforded the right of cross-examination as well as reasonable opportunity to offer evidence in rebuttal. Any person engaging in cross-examination or offering evidence in rebuttal shall thereby become a party. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(d)  Any person may, at his own expense, provide for the recording of the hearing and transcription thereof; provided, however, that a copy of the recording or transcript, if transcribed, shall be furnished free of charge to the town council and shall become part of the record. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(e)  The town council shall collect and preserve the following record of the public hearing: 
(1)  The permit application. 
(2)  Any written statements or documents presented in support of or in opposition to the permit application. 
(3)  The names and addresses of all persons making oral or written statements, appearing as witnesses, or offering documentary evidence. 
(4)  Any recording or transcript, if any, of the hearing as provided in subsection (d), above. 
(5)  Written minutes of the town council relating to the public hearing. 
(6)  The resolution of the town council granting or denying the permit application. 
(7)  A copy of the permit, if issued. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.105 - Approval or denial of permit application. 
(a)  If the town council finds that there is not sufficient information concerning any material feature of a proposed development or activity, the town council may deny the application or it may continue the hearing until the additional information has been received. However, no such continuance may exceed 60 days unless agreed to by the applicant. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The town council shall approve an application for a permit to engage in development in an area of state interest or for the conduct of an activity of state interest if the proposed development or activity complies with the provisions of the regulations governing such area or activity. If the proposed development does not comply with such regulations the permit shall be denied. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show compliance with the provisions of these regulations governing the area or activity of state interest involved. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(d)  The town council conducting a hearing pursuant to this section shall state, in writing, reasons for its decision, and its findings and conclusions. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(e)  The town council shall reach a decision on a permit application within 120 days after the completion of the permit hearing, or the permit shall be deemed approved. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.106 - Combined designation and permit hearing. 
    If a person proposes to engage in development in an area of state interest or to conduct an activity of state interest not previously identified, designated, or for which regulations have not been adopted, the town council alone may hold one hearing for determination of identification, designation and regulations as well as for granting or denying the permit. No permit that is granted at the conclusion of any such hearing shall be authority to engage in development or to conduct an activity until the identification, designation and regulations are finally determined. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.107 - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  The permit shall be issued on the form adopted by the town council. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The permit may be issued for an indefinite term, or for a specific period of years. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  Copies or notice of the permit shall be sent to the Colorado Land Use Commission, and to any other person requesting a copy thereof on payment of the cost of reproduction. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(d)  A copy of the permit shall be certified by the town council to the county clerk and recorder for recording in the same manner as any other document relating to real property, and the certified copy of the permit shall be presented by the town council to the clerk and recorder for recording. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.108 - Financial security. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued, the town council may, in its discretion, require the applicant to file a guarantee of financial security deemed adequate by the town council and payable to Gypsum. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  The purpose of said financial guarantee shall be to assure that the applicant or permittee shall faithfully perform all requirements of the permit or applicable regulations adopted by the town council. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(c)  The amount of said financial guarantee shall be established by the town council upon consideration of the following applicable criteria: 
(1)  The estimated cost of returning the site of the permitted development or activity to its original condition or to a condition acceptable to Gypsum in accordance with standards adopted by Gypsum for the matter of state interest for which the permit is being granted. 
(2)  The estimated cost of completing the permitted development or activity, and 
(3)  The estimated cost of complying with any conditions of the permit. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(d)  Estimated cost shall be based on the applicant' s submitted cost estimate plus the town council' s estimate of the additional cost to Gypsum of bringing in personnel and equipment to accomplish any unperformed purposes of the financial guarantee. The town council shall consider the duration of the development or activity and compute a reasonable projection of increases due to inflation. The town council may require, as a condition of the permit, that the financial security shall be adjusted upon receipt of bids. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(e)  At least ten percent of the amount of the financial guarantee shall be in cash deposited with the town clerk and shall be placed in an earmarked escrow account mutually agreeable to the town council and the applicant. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(f)  The financial guarantee may be released only when: 
(1)  The permit has been surrendered to the town council before commencement of any physical activity on the site of the permitted development or activity, 
(2)  The development or activity has been abandoned and the site thereof has been returned to its original condition or to a condition acceptable to Gypsum in accordance with standards adopted by Gypsum for the matter of state interest for which the permit is being granted, 
(3)  The project has been satisfactorily completed, or 
(4)  Applicable guaranteed conditions have been satisfied. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(g)  Any security may be canceled by a surety only upon receipt of the town council's written consent which may be granted only when such cancellation will not detract from the purposes of the security. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(h)  If the license to do business in Colorado of any surety upon a security filed pursuant to this regulation is suspended or revoked by any state authority, then the applicant or permittee, within 60 days after receiving notice thereof, shall substitute a good and sufficient surety licensed to do business in the state. Upon failure of the permittee to make substitution of surety within the time allowed, the town council shall suspend the permit until proper substitution has been made. (Ord 18 SI, 1997) 
(i)  (1)  If the town council determines that a financial guarantee should be forfeited because of any violation of the permit or any applicable regulations adopted by the town council, it shall provide written notice to the surety and to the permittee that the financial guarantee will be forfeited unless the permittee makes written demand to the town council within 30 days after permittee's receipt of notice, requesting a hearing before the town council. If no demand is made by the permittee within said period, then the town council shall order the financial guarantee forfeited. 
(2)  The town council shall hold a hearing within 30 days after the receipt of the demand by the permittee. At the hearing, the permittee may present for the consideration of the town council statements, documents, and other information with respect to the alleged violation. At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall either withdraw the notice of violation or enter an order forfeiting the financial guarantee. 
(3)  The cash deposit described in subsection (e), above, may be used by the town council in the event of the default or alleged default of the permit holder only for the purposes of recovering on the surety or fulfilling the permit obligations of the permit holder. In the event that the ultimate reviewing court determines that there has been no default by the permit holder, that portion of any moneys expended by Gypsum from the escrow funds relating to such default shall be replaced in the escrow account by the town council immediately following such determination. Gypsum may arrange with a lending institution, which provides money for the permit holder, that said institution may hold in escrow any funds required for said cash deposit. Funds shall be disbursed out of escrow by the institution to Gypsum upon Gypsum's demand for the purposes specified in this section. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(j)  If the forfeiture results in inadequate revenues to cover the costs of accomplishing the purposes of the financial guarantee, the town attorney shall take such steps as he deems proper to recover such costs where recovery is deemed possible. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.04.109 - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
(a)  When it comes to the attention of the town council that the provisions of any permit or the terms of any regulation for administration have been violated by the holder of the permit, the town council may temporarily suspend the permit for a period of 30 days. Before making such a temporary suspension, the town council shall give the permit holder written notice of the specific violation and shall allow the permit holder a period of at least 15 days to correct the violations. If the permit holder does not concur that he is in violation, he shall, within 15 days of his receipt of said notice, show cause to the town council why temporary suspension should not be ordered. A hearing shall be held within said 30-day period pursuant to subsection (b), below. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Either prior to or subsequent to a temporary suspension, the town council may permanently revoke or suspend the permit after conducting a public hearing in substantially the same manner and after substantially the same notice as for permit hearings, and if it finds: 
(1)  A violation of the provisions of the permit or any applicable regulation for administration which may have been adopted by the town council, or 
(2)  That the applicant has failed to take substantial steps to initiate the permitted development or activity within 12 months from the date of the permit or, if such steps have been taken, the applicant has failed to complete the development or activity with reasonable diligence. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.05 - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

20.05.101 - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person engaging in a development in a designated area of state interest or conducting a designated activity of state interest who does not obtain a permit pursuant to these regulations for administration, who does not comply with permit requirements, or who acts outside the authority of the permit, may be enjoined by Gypsum or the land use commission from engaging in such development or conducting such activity, and may be subject to such other criminal or civil liability as may be prescribed by law. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Any person knowingly engaging in a development in a designated area of state interest or conducting a designated activity of state interest who does not obtain a permit pursuant to these regulations for administration, who does not comply with permit requirements, or who acts outside the authority of the permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $900.00, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.05.102 - Mapping disputes. 
    Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundary of any designated area and where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the town council shall make the necessary determination of the boundary. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given an opportunity to present his case to the town council. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
20.05.103 - Inspection. 
(a)  The town council or its authorized representative is hereby empowered and directed to inspect and examine the use, occupation or development of or activity in each and every area or activity subject to these regulations for the purpose of determining from time to time whether or not any use, occupation, development or activity is in violation of any of the provisions of this regulation or of any permit issued or required pursuant to this or other applicable regulations. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
(b)  If a violation shall be found to exist, the town council or its authorized representative shall by written order direct that such remedial action be taken forthwith as will result in full compliance with the applicable regulations; provided, however, that the issuance of such order shall in no way or manner be deemed a prerequisite to the institution of such enforcement proceedings as are set forth in the regulations; and provided further, that compliance with such order shall not necessarily be deemed to be a defense to any alleged violation of this or other applicable regulations in any court action instituted seeking full compliance therewith. (Ord. 18 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.06 - AIRPORT SITE SELECTION REGULATIONS 

20.06.101 - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of these regulations contained in chapters 20.06 to 20.09 is to facilitate the administration of airport location and expansion by establishing requirements which must be met before an airport site may be selected. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Airport site selection shall be accomplished in such a manner as to minimize dangers to public health and safety or to property including dangers from aircraft crashes, aircraft noise, traffic congestion, and air pollution. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
(c)  Airports shall be located and expanded in a manner which will minimize disruption to the environment of existing communities, will minimize the impact on existing community services, and will complement the economic and transportation needs of the state, Gypsum, and the area. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
(d)  Airport location or expansion decisions shall consider the type of development which will occur within the airport area of influence and the effects of such development on existing communities, natural resources, agriculture, wildlife, historic sites, and the ability to provide services to such development. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.06.102 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means any municipal or county airport or airport under the jurisdiction of an airport authority formed under the "Public Airport Authority Act" of 1965, as amended, and shall include the Eagle County Regional Airport. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
    Airport area of influence or airport influence area means an area encompassing the flight patterns, critical zones, airport height zone, CNR noise zones, and other areas adjacent to the airport site. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
    Applicant means any person, including a local, county, metropolitan, state or federal entity, proposing to locate, expand, relocate, alter or alter the operations of an airport within Gypsum and who applies for a permit under the provisions of this regulation. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
    ICNR means the composite noise rating as computed pursuant to Federal Aviation Administration standards and procedures, or any replacement standard or rating. A CNR noise zone is an area arranged in contours on a map indicating expected noise levels from aircraft. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
    Site selection, selection of site or select a site means the process for determining the location of a new airport or the expansion or relocation of an existing airport. The occurrence or proposed occurrence of any of the activities listed in subparagraphs (1) through (4) below within Gypsum shall constitute site selection within Gypsum. Expansion of an existing airport is defined to include land acquisition, development, or construction that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Construction, installation or alteration of new, existing, expanded, or replacement facilities, improvements and buildings. Alteration shall include changes affecting the usability of the facility, improvement or building, or which changes or rearranges the structural parts or wall configurations, but does not include minor remodeling or redecorating changes, such as painting or papering walls, replacing ceiling tiles, reroofing, and normal maintenance; 
(2)  Grading, filling, leveling, or digging any area greater than 10,890 square feet of surface area, or 1,210 cubic yards of material; 
(3)  Construction of airfield, apron, or taxiway pavement, roads, aircraft or vehicle parking or storage, and runway lighting of any nature; or 
(4)  Construction, expansion, or extension of any water or sewer line or facility. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.06.103 - Authority. 
    These regulations are adopted pursuant to inter alia, 24.65.1-101, et. seq., 29-20-101, et. seq., and 31-23-209, C.R.S. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.06.104 - Applicability. 
(a)  These regulations shall apply to all site selection and sites for airport location or expansion within Gypsum, whether or not application is first made for a permit to select an airport site or to expand an existing airport pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
(b)  Any person seeking to locate or expand an airport within Gypsum shall obtain a permit pursuant to these regulations prior to, or simultaneously with seeking any other permit, rezoning, or other action by Gypsum. (Ord 19 SI, 1997) 
20.06.105 - Extentions. 
    These regulations shall not apply to any airport site selection which is exempted according to the provisions of section 20.01.105, G.M.C. 
(Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.06.106 - Relationship of regulations to other requirements. 
(a)  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as exempting an applicant for a permit from any other requirements of Gypsum or other state or federal laws and regulations. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
(b)  To the extent that the requirements of these regulations differ from any other applicable requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.07 - DESIGNATION OF AIRPORT SITE SELECTION 

20.07.101 - Designation of airport site selection. 
    The town council, having considered the intensity of current and foreseeable development pressures and applicable guidelines for identification and designation adopted and issued by the Colorado Land Use Commission, it is the order of the town council that site selection and expansion of airports be designated a matter of state interest and regulated pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.07.102 - Boundaries of area covered by designation. 
    The site selection and expansion of any airport within the boundaries of Gypsum, as they exist currently and as they may be revised from time to time, shall be subject to this designation and regulation. 
(Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.07.103 - Reasons for designation. 
    Airport site selection and expansion is hereby designated as a matter of state interest for the reasons stated in section 20.06.101, G.M.C., and the recitals contained in the ordinance adopting these provisions, which recitals are incorporated herein. 
(Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.08 - PERMIT PROGRAM FOR SITE SELECTION OF AIRPORTS 

20.08.101 - Prohibition on airport site selection without permit. 
(a)  No person may select a site, locate or expand any airport within Gypsum without first obtaining a permit pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(b)  No building permit or land use approval shall be issued for any airport purposes without the applicant having first obtained a permit pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 19 SI, 1997) 
20.08.102 - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person seeking to select a site, locate or expand an airport within Gypsum shall apply for a permit from the town council on the appropriate form prescribed by the Colorado Land Use Commission. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(b)  Any application for a permit to select a site, locate or expand an airport shall be accompanied by nonrefundable certified funds in the amount of $500.00, or such greater amount as may be determined by the town council as necessary to process the application. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(c)  An application for a permit to select a site, locate or expand an airport shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the following documents and information: 
(1)  A completed application form; 
(2)  A list of alternative locations for the airport; 
(3)  Site or expansion selected by Gypsum and/or by the applicant; 
(4)  Preliminary review or approval of recommended sites by the Federal Aviation Administration; and 
(5)  For each alternative site or expansion area being considered by the applicant, the information specified in section 20.08.102, G.M.C. 
(Ord. 19 91, 1997) 
20.08.103 - Submission requirements. 
    Applicants for permits for site selection, location or expansion of an airport shall submit with their applications, 12 copies of the following information: 
(1)  Community or area served by the airport: 
a.  Names, addresses, and business of local parties interested in proposed airport including any planning and aeronautical organizations. 
b.  Reason for site investigation: local or other requests, state plan, regional or metropolitan plan, national plan and who proposed the site. 
c.  Population and predominant types of businesses and industry in the community or area. 
d.  Railroads, highways, and airways serving the locality and distances to other cities or main trading centers. 
e.  Size and type of airport presently required; ultimate size and type required. 
f.  Relation to and status of state, metropolitan, or regional airport system plan. 
g.  Aeronautical chart, USGS quadrangle sheet and aerial photograph. 
h.  The number of people who will occupy, be employed at, or visit the site, both during development and upon completion. 
i.  A listing of any benefits and burdens which the proposed location or expansion will bring to the communities of the region. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(2)  Airport sites under consideration: 
a.  General geologic and topographic features of vicinity. 
b.  General meteorological and climatological conditions wind, snow, rain, temperature, rainfall, etc., as they relate to airport operations and maintenance. 
c.  Location and designation of each site considered. This is to be a map of the area at scale not larger than one inch equals 2,000 feet nor smaller than one inch equals 5,000 feet. 
d.  Advantages and disadvantages of each site compared one to another for economic feasibility and practicality and effect on surrounding area. This should include a statement of special factors which necessitate location of the proposed location or expansion on the site in question, and be undertaken after completing the work in subsections (3) through (7) below. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(3)  General land and aeronautical features of each site including the area around the airport location or expansion which is likely to be developed because of the airport: 
a.  Land description section, township, range. 
b.  Separation from existing, dormant, or potentially superior sites and/or other possible airport development. 
c.  Approach and clear zone plan and profiles as determined according to current Federal Aviation Administration Regulations. The purpose of this drawing is to show obstructions, including unremovable terrain. 
d.  Removable obstructions - poles, trees, stacks, towers, houses, railroads, roads, etc. 
e.  The most favorable glide angle obtainable throughout all approach zones when removable obstructions have been eliminated. 
f.  Status of zoning legislation applicable to site. 
g.  Elevation of site and length of landing facilities required for recommended initial and future airport type. Total area available for initial and future landing and building area and ground transportation access should be shown. 
h.  Present use, assessed and actual value of land and future use and value of land. 
i.  If land is irrigated, indicate water rights available, and if not, indicate possibility of water development. 
j.  Effect on upstream, downstream, or adjacent communities and other water users of any adverse effects of any development, fill, encroachment, alteration, or relocation of a watercourse. 
k.  Existing easements for power or telephone lines, canals, mineral claims, roads, etc. 
l.  Evaluation of natural resources that may be rendered unavailable or reduced as a result of the proposed airport development. 
m.  Airport access considerations, including a traffic impact survey detailing existing traffic levels generated by the existing level of development or activity, the effect of the proposed location or expansion on traffic congestion and airport access, existing access routes, expansions or enlargements of access routes, and parking needs. 
n.  Status of sanitary landfills and dumps. 
o.  Bird, deer, and elk hazards: migrating or wintering areas. 
p.  Availability of utilities, and estimates of use requirements electricity, gas, telephone, water, sewage, etc. 
q.  Detailed description of method of providing fire protection and rescue, including additional facilities, equipment and personnel which may be necessitated by the proposal. 
r.  Ability of applicant to obtain needed easements for drainage, disposal, utilities, avigation, etc. 
s.  Recreational facilities, attractions in community, and possibility of recreational development at site. 
t.  Number of families and businesses requiring relocation. 
u.  Amount of agricultural land taken out of production, including the value of crop or livestock losses. 
v.  Presence of endangered species of wildlife, other unique natural resources or historic landmarks at or near proposed site and effect of airport upon them. 
w.  Effect on air pollution. 
x.  Relationship of site to mass transit service. (Ord 19, SI, 1997) 
(4)  Airport operations for each alternative site: 
a.  Volume of aircraft traffic expected, immediate and future, and distribution of traffic between day and night, weekday and weekend, and on a seasonal basis. 
b.  Type of aircraft expected, immediate and future. 
c.  Runway alignment, immediate and future. 
d.  Expected volume and type of nonaircraft traffic related to operation of the airport, immediate and future. 
e.  The expected noise levels generated by immediate and future airport operation and aircraft traffic in existing communities near the airport and in the expected or existing airport area of influence indicated on a CNR or LDN contour map. 
f.  The exact nature of activities to be conducted upon the site after the proposed location or expansion. 
g.  An evaluation of and a plan for the elimination or neutralization of, any hazardous or toxic wastes, substances or waste disposal associated with the proposed location or expansion. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(5)  Engineering and construction factors for each alternative site: 
a.  Geological features affecting soil and foundation conditions. 
b.  Types of soil for foundations and drainability. 
c.  Capacity to support turf, stability when turfed, and favorability of soil and climate to beneficial vegetative cover. 
d.  Necessity for pavement or for mechanical or other stabilization. 
e.  Availability, types and sources of materials for pavement, stabilization, etc. 
f.  Topography of site (landforms, benchland, valley, rolling, flat, swampy, etc.). 
g.  Clearing requirements - trees, fences, etc. 
h.  General grading light or heavy rock, removal of adverse materials, specifications for filling, dredging, channel changes, grading and storage of materials. 
i.  Drainage features: natural drainage course, total tributary acreage and method of estimating runoff. 
j.  Necessary drainage installation - excessive, average, moderate. 
k.  Specifications for building, construction and materials, and special construction requirements. 
l.  Preliminary pavement design. 
m.  Airport lighting requirements. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(6)  Economic/financial feasibility of each alternative site. 
a.  Total estimated development cost. 
b.  Feasibility of development, including economic status of community (tax base, revenue bonds, etc.) (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(7)  An environmental impact assessment report, if required by federal regulations or statutes, for each alternative site and the area around the airport which is likely to be developed because of the airport location or expansion. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(8)  Copy of the filing of a notice of an airspace determination and copy of the Federal Aviation Administration flight check of the proposed sites. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(9)  Proposed airport area of influence delineated for each alternative site being considered. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(10)  The applicant shall submit such other materials and information as may be required by the town council in order to determine if appropriate design and performance standards have been met. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
20.08.104 - Waiver of submission requirements. 
(a)  The town council may waive any part but not all of the submission requirements imposed by this regulation upon petition of the applicant that full compliance with the submission requirements would be unreasonably burdensome for the applicant and that the proposed development will have an insubstantial impact on the surrounding area. Such a waiver may be granted, after due consideration by the town council, upon a written determination that the information to be submitted is sufficient for the town council to arrive at a permit decision in full compliance with the law and these regulations and that the proposed development will have an insubstantial impact on the surrounding area. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
(b)  The petition shall be considered and the decision rendered by the town council at a public hearing held in compliance with the provision of section 20.04.103, G.M.C. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
20.08.105 - Permit application hearing procedure. 
    Permit application and hearings shall be governed by the administrative regulations of title 20, G.M.C prior to granting or denying a permit to locate or expand an airport within Gypsum. (Ord. 19, Sl, 1997) 
20.08.106 - Approval of permit application. 
(a)  The town council shall approve an application for a permit to select a site, locate or expand an airport within Gypsum only if the proposed airport site or expansion complies with these regulations, other relevant guidelines and regulations, and meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The nature and location of the airport site or expansion complies with all applicable provisions of the Gypsum comprehensive, major street, zoning and master plans, the state airport system plan, and other applicable regional, metropolitan, state and national plans; 
(2)  The nature and location of the airport site or expansion will minimize disruption to the environment of existing communities, will minimize the impact on existing community services, and will complement the economic and transportation needs of the state, Gypsum, and the area; 
(3)  The nature and location of the airport site or expansion complements the existing and reasonably foreseeable economic and transportation needs of the state and of the area immediately served by the airport, particularly mass transit facilities; 
(4)  The nature and location of the airport site or expansion does not unduly or unreasonably impact existing community services; 
(5)  The nature and location of the airport site or expansion will not create an expansion of the demand for government services beyond the reasonable capacity of the community or region to provide such services, as determined by the town council; 
(6)  The airport site or expansion is not in an area with general meteorological and climatological conditions which would unreasonably interfere with or obstruct normal airport operations and maintenance; 
(7)  The airport site or expansion is not in an area with unremovable obstructions which might interfere with any airport approach or clear zone; 
(8)  Assurances have been received that all removable obstructions will be eliminated from all airport approach or clear zones; 
(9)  The airport site or expansion will not adversely affect the water rights of any upstream, downstream, or adjacent communities or other water users; 
(10)  Adequate water supplies are available for airport needs; 
(11)  The airport site or expansion will not unduly interfere with any existing easements for power or telephone lines, canals, mineral claims, or roads; 
(12)  The benefits of the airport site selection, location or expansion outweigh the loss of any natural resources or agricultural lands rendered unavailable as a result of the proposed airport location or expansion including expected development of the area around the airport; 
(13)  The applicant is able to obtain needed easements for drainage, disposal, utilities, and avigation within the airport area of influence, etc. 
(14)  Adequate electric, gas, telephone, water, sewage, and other utilities, and fire protection and rescue services exist or shall be developed to service the airport site; 
(15)  The airport location or expansion will not interfere with any significant wildlife habitat or adversely affect any endangered wildlife species, unique natural resource or historic landmark at or near the airport site; 
(16)  The airport location or expansion, including expected ground traffic related to the airport operation, will not increase air pollution levels beyond applicable federal or state ambient air standards; 
(17)  The geological and topographic feature of the airport site are adequate for all construction, clearing, grading, drainage, vegetation, and other needs of the airport; 
(18)  Immediate and future noise levels in communities within the airport area of influence to be caused by the airport location or expansion and any anticipated future expansion will not violate any applicable local, state, or federal laws or regulations, and is designed to minimize the impacts of airport noise. (Ord. 19, S1, 1997) 
(b)  The town council shall deny the permit if the airport location or expansion does not meet all of the criteria in section 20.08.106(a), G.M.C. (Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
Chapter 20.09 - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

20.09.101 - Administration, enforcement, and penalties. 
    The provisions of this article and any permits issued hereunder shall be administered and enforced according to the administrative regulations of this title 20, G.M.C. 
(Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
20.09.102 - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision, or portion of these regulations should be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this regulation shall not be affected thereby and is hereby declared to be necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. 19, SI, 1997) 
Title 21 - ANNEXATIONS 
  
Chapter 21.01 - PREPETITION PROCESS 

21.01.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the pre-petition process to assist persons interested in annexing property to the Town of Gypsum in identifying issues and impacts that the proposed annexation may create, so as to allow sufficient analysis and investigation by the land owners to insure compliance with Gypsum's annexation policies and the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, prior to submission of the petition for annexation and consideration by the town council. The town council may, in its sole discretion, refuse to consider any petition for annexation for which the petitioners did not first submit to the pre-petition process outlined in this chapter. 
21.01.020 - Prepetition submittals. 
    Any petitioner intending to submit a petition for annexation must first submit to the Gypsum Planning Department a mission statement and written outline of the proposed annexation and development of the subject property. The mission statement shall concisely define the proponents' reasons for seeking annexation and the benefit to the town of approving annexation. The outline should include a map showing the property and a general discussion of all items required of a development plan upon submission of an annexation petition. 
21.01.030 - Process. 
    Through the pre-petition process, the annexation proponents, planning commission and town council will attempt to identify terms, if any, upon which a petition for annexation may be deemed beneficial to Gypsum. Upon submission of a pre-annexation outline, the planning department shall schedule the proposal for one or more work sessions between the proponents, the town planning commission, and if desired, the town council. At such work sessions, the proposal, and the potential impacts, benefits, and detriments to the Town of Gypsum shall be discussed. 
Chapter 21.02 - PETITIONS FOR ANNEXATION 

21.02.010 - Annexation. 
    Annexation to Gypsum shall be in accordance with the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, Title 31, Article 12, C.R.S., and the terms and conditions of this title. 
21.02.020 - Petitions. 
    Petitions seeking annexation of land to Gypsum shall comply with all requirements of the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965 and the Colorado Constitution. In addition, petitions shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Fees. Each petition or series of petitions for annexation shall be accompanied by a fee and deposit as stated in title 17 chapter 17.60. If the actual out-of-pocket costs of Gypsum are greater than the amount of fees paid, the town council will condition the granting of the petition contingent upon the payment of the additional out-of-pocket cost incurred by Gypsum. The fees required are intended to reimburse Gypsum for its costs reviewing, considering, and processing the petition, and are in addition to any other fees, charges, impositions, or requirements that Gypsum may impose as a condition of granting the petition. (Ord. 2010-26) 
(2)  Development plan. Each petition for annexation shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  If the property is undeveloped or not previously subdivided, a proposed development plan which shall contain, at a minimum, a sketch plan sufficient to meet the Gypsum Municipal Code's subdivision sketch plan requirements, and a proposed zoning plan showing the existing and proposed zoning sufficient to meet the Gypsum Municipal Code requirements for a proposed zoning amendment. 
b.  Evidence that all municipal services are capable of being extended to the property, the demands for such services that will be created by annexation and/or development, the costs of the services that will be necessitated by the annexation and/or development, and a detailed plan for providing such services at no cost to Gypsum or the applicable service provider. Municipal services and facilities that must be analyzed include: law enforcement; fire protection; emergency medical; library; transportation, including roads, pedestrian and bicycle paths; solid waste collection; recreation; drainage; open space; schools; and planning and building administration. 
c.  An analysis of revenues, if any, that will be generated to Gypsum and other municipal service providers from the annexation and development. 
d.  Proof that the property is currently being provided adequate water and sewage treatment service, or a detailed plan showing how water and sewage treatment service will be provided to the property, at no cost to Gypsum. Such plans shall include: 
1.  The estimated requirements for water and sewage treatment services upon full buildout and the impact on Gypsum's water and sewage treatment plants and conveyance systems. 
2.  The existing capacity of Gypsum's water and sewage treatment plants and transmission facilities, capacity necessary to serve existing properties within Gypsum that have not yet been developed based on their current zoning and subdivision, and the remaining capacity, if any, which will be left in the treatment plants and transmission facilities if all properties within Gypsum and the property proposed for annexation are developed. 
3.  Engineering data sufficient to show the feasibility of the proposal and compliance with all federal, state, and Gypsum regulations and requirements. 
(3)  Fire protection. Each petition for annexation shall be accompanied by proof that the area to be annexed is within the boundaries of the Gypsum Fire Protection District, or proof that an application for inclusion of the property within the boundaries of the Gypsum Fire Protection District has been filed. In addition, if the property is currently within the boundaries of any other fire protection district, proof must be submitted that a petition for exclusion of the area from such other fire protection district has also been filed. 
21.02.030 - Eligibility for annexation. 
    In addition to the findings of fact required by the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, in order for property to be annexed to Gypsum, the town council must first find and determine that the petition is consistent with Gypsum policies concerning annexation, and the benefits of annexation to the citizens of Gypsum outweigh any impacts. 
21.02.040 - Subdivision and zoning. 
    The town council may require as a condition of approval of any annexation petition that the property be contemporaneously zoned and subdivided. The owner of any property annexed to Gypsum without being zoned under the Gypsum Municipal Code shall petition for zoning within 60 days, and the property shall be zoned within 90 days, of the effective date of the annexation. During such period, no building permits or other development approvals shall be granted. 
21.02.050 - Annexation agreement. 
    Unless waived by the town council, an annexation agreement, acceptable to the town council, must be presented for consideration prior to or contemporaneously with the final reading of the proposed ordinance for annexing the property. Proposed annexation agreements shall provide for compliance with all zoning, subdivision, and development standards of Gypsum, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Properly constructed and dedicated roads; 
(2)  Properly constructed and dedicated water and sewer facilities; 
(3)  Provision for adequate storm drainage; 
(4)  Dedication of useable land for public purposes or cash payment-in-lieu thereof, based on the value of the property upon subdivision approval, necessary to meet Gypsum Municipal Code requirements and offset the impacts on all municipal service providers identified in the annexation development plan; 
(5)  Compliance with Gypsum's water dedication requirements; 
(6)  Installation of all service and utility lines underground; 
(7)  The provision of necessary easements for all public purposes; and 
(8)  Compliance with all ordinances, resolutions, and policies of the Town of Gypsum, and conditions imposed by the town council to mitigate impacts of the annexation on Gypsum. 
21.02.060 - Conditions of annexation. 
    The town council may grant any annexation petition contingent on any conditions deemed necessary or appropriate, in the sole discretion of the town council. Such conditions shall be incorporated into the annexation agreement, and may include, but not limited to, additional requirements beyond any imposed by the Gypsum Municipal Code regarding subdivision and zoning, for construction of public facilities, dedications or conveyances of property, limitation or restrictions on the use of the property, the construction and timing of construction of public improvements and facilities, cash payments to Gypsum, and the conveyance of property, including water rights, to Gypsum. 
(Ord. 23, 1997, SI). 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the town used in this Code beginning with Supplement 1. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2011-07  4-25-11 18.06.010 2013-13  9-24-13 18.02.160       Added 18.02.165 18.06.010 2014-16  1-13-15 1(Exh. A)       Added 12.08.010-12.08.040 2014-17  1-13-15 1 8.04.040(a), (e) 2015-01  1-27-15 1-3 18.16.040 2015-02  1-27-15 1       Rpld 8.05.050 2(Exh. A)       Added 8.05.050 2015-03  1-27-15 1 15.04.029 2015-04  2-10-15 18.17.040(1) 18.17.050 18.17.060(a) 2015-05  4-28-15 1       Added 2.01.090(9) 2015-06  6-23-15 1       Rpld 8.04.070       Added 8.04.070 2015-14  1-12-16       Rpld 18.03.020       Added 18.03.020 2015-16  1-12-16 1 17.12.020(s) 2 17.16.020(c)(16) 3 17.20.070(a)(1)b.6. 17.20.070(a)(2)b.7. 4 18.12.020(7) 5 18.13.020(9) 6 18.15.040(2)f. 18.15.040(8) 2016-02  2- 9-16 1 13.08.040 2 13.08.060 3       Added 13.04.080(4) 4 13.08.090 5 13.08.110(3) 2016-04  2- 9-16 1 17.20.070 2016-07  5-10-16 1(Exh. A) 3.08.020 2016-09  7-26-16 18.05.020       Added 18.05.025 2016-10 10-25-16       Rpld 18.05.060       Added 18.05.060       Rpld 18.07.010       Added 18.07.010 2016-11 11- 8-16 1 17.20.070(3) 2017-03  3-14-17 9.03.010-9.03.060 2017-04  5- 9-17 1 8.04.010 2 8.04.070 3       Rpld 18.02.040       Added 18.02.040 4 18.07.010 5(Exh. A)       Added 18.10.040 2017-05  5- 9-17 1       Rpld 18.13.010       Added 18.13.010 2017-07  5-23-17 1 13.04.010 2       Rpld 13.04.080       Added 13.04.080 3       Rpld 13.08.060       Added 13.08.060 2017-08  5-23-17 1       Rpld 13.12.310       Added 13.12.310 2       Rpld 13.12.320       Added 13.12.320 2017-12  9-26-17 3 15.04.010(a) 4 15.04.012 5       Rpld 15.04.013       Added 15.04.013 6       Rpld 15.04.016       Added 15.04.016 7 15.04.018 8       Rpld 15.04.019       Added 15.04.019 9       Rpld 15.04.021       Added 15.04.021 10 Ch. 15.04, Table 10 2017-13 10-10-17 1 18.02.700 2 18.04.070 3       Added 18.05.045 4 18.07.010 2018-02  3-13-18 1 13.04.360 2 13.04.070 3 13.04.320 4 13.04.110 2018-09  9-11-18 1 15.04.013(f) 2018-14  1- 8-19 1(Exh. A) Ch. 15.04, Table 4 2(Exh. B) Ch. 15.04, Table 5 3(Exh. C) Ch. 15.04, Table 6  
