LAMAR, COLORADO MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OF LAMAR OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Roger Stagner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kirk Crespin, Mayor Pro Tem 
Beverly Haggard 
Rafael Rodriguez 
Gerry Jenkins 
Oscar Riley 
Anne-Marie Crampton 
City Council 
____________ 
John Sutherland 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Kristin McCrea 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Garth Nieschburg 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Linda Williams 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lamar, Colorado. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2000 Code, as supplemented through November, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is numbered 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross-references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Mollie Garrett, Code Attorney, and Rebecca D. Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Linda Williams for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lamar, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross-references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lamar, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lamar, Colorado. 2019. 
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF LAMAR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Spelling and punctuation errors have been corrected and omitted words supplied by the editor. 

June 26, 1962 - PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
    The Charter Convention elected on February 27, 1962, respectfully presents this Charter to the voters of the City of Lamar, Colorado, for their approval. 
    The Charter Convention has studied the Charters of several other Colorado cities, has had the advice of experts in the field of city government, and has employed competent legal counsel in evolving the final draft of the Charter here presented. 
    The Constitution of the State of Colorado authorizes a Home Rule City to have great latitude and freedom in exercising its governmental functions, implemented by the necessary grant of authority to serve its citizens. It is the intent of this Charter that the City of Lamar shall be able to exercise these Constitutional powers. 
    This Charter is itself a guide as to how these powers shall be used and a limitation on those powers, designating which may be exercised by the City Council, which are reserved to the people themselves, and what the basic organizational structure shall be to serve the citizens. 
    The Charter provides for a Mayor-Council form of city government. Seven Councilmembers will be elected, two from each of the three wards of the City, and one from the City at large. A Mayor will be elected biennially by the Council from among its members. The Charter also provides for a Utilities Board composed of five appointed members, appointed by the City Council. 
    Provisions are made in the Charter for recall of elected officers, for control of legislation by the people through initiative and referendum and for amendment of the Charter by popular vote. Provision is also made that no elected officer of the City shall hold any other elective public office. 
    The City Council will have all policy making and legislative power in the City not otherwise delegated by this Charter. It will appoint the City Treasurer, City Clerk, City Auditor, City Attorney, Municipal Judge, and members of advisory boards and commissions. 
    The Convention sincerely feels that the City of Lamar will, under this Charter, continue its sound and progressive government, and unanimously recommends the approval of this Charter by the voters at the election on June 26, 1962. 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of Lamar, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain, establish, and adopt this Charter for our municipal government. 
Article I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 1-1. - Name; boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as a city of the second class in the County of Prowers, State of Colorado, and known as the City of Lamar, shall remain and continue as a body politic and corporate under this Charter with the same name and boundaries until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
Sec. 1-2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be the Mayor-Council form of government. 
Sec. 1-3. - General powers. 
    The City shall have all powers which are necessary, requisite or proper for the government and administration of its local and municipal matters, and all powers which are granted to home rule cities by the Constitution of the State of Colorado. This Charter shall be construed as a limitation on those powers and not as a grant of power, and the enumeration herein of certain powers shall not be construed to deny to the City and the people thereof any right or power granted to them by the Constitution of the State of Colorado. 
Sec. 1-4. - Present ordinances in force. 
    All ordinances of the City of Lamar in force at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in force, except insofar as they conflict with provisions of this Charter, or until they shall be amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
Sec. 1-5. - Construction of words. 
    Words used in this Charter importing the singular or plural number shall be construed so that one number includes both; words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to apply to the feminine gender as well; and the word "person" shall be extended to include persons, firms and corporations; provided that these rules of construction shall not apply to any part of this Charter containing express provisions excluding such construction, or where subject matter or content is contrary thereto. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to the Charter shall be proposed and adopted in accordance with the Constitution of the State of Colorado. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one election. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between amendments voted upon at the same election, and more than one be adopted, then the amendment receiving the largest number of votes shall prevail. 
Sec. 1-7. - Invalidity of part. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to be invalid or unconstitutional any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this Charter, such judgment or decree shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this Charter, but the effect thereof shall be confined to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this Charter so adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 1-8. - Rights and liabilities continue. 
    No valid and legally existing right or liability, either in favor of or against the City of Lamar, and no judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, shall be affected by the change in government occasioned by the adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 1-9. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Charter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Appropriation. 
    The authorized amount of funds set aside or allocated for expenditure during a specified time and for a specified purpose. 
(b)  Member of the bar. 
    A member of the bar shall mean a person who is licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado. 
(c)  City. 
    The City of Lamar, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
(d)  Codification or code. 
    A compilation of all ordinances which are of a general and permanent nature in published form, properly indexed, and organized according to subject matter. 
(e)  Council. 
    The City Council of the City of Lamar. 
(f)  Employee. 
    Any person in municipal service who is not an officer. 
(g)  Franchise. 
    A special privilege granted by the City permitting the continuing use of public property. 
(h)  General election. 
    The municipal election held every two (2) years at which candidates for elective officers of the City are voted upon. 
(i)  Officer. 
    Any person elected or appointed to office. 
(j)  Overlapping terms. 
    Terms of office which are such that only a portion of the members will be appointed or elected at any one (1) time, sometimes referred to as staggered terms. 
(k)  Qualified elector. 
    A resident of the City who is qualified to vote under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, and who is registered to vote. 
(1)  Qualified tax-paying elector. 
    Any qualified elector who, in the calendar year last preceding the election at which the vote is offered, shall have paid a tax or become liable for the payment of a tax upon real property assessed to him and owned by him in the City. 
(m)  Statutes. 
    The applicable laws of the State of Colorado as they now exist or as they may be amended, changed, repealed or otherwise modified by legal procedure. 
(n)  Publication or legal publication. 
    Publication or legal publication, as used in this Charter, shall mean publication in a legal newspaper, as defined by the statutes of the State of Colorado in general circulation in the City of Lamar, Colorado. 
Article II. - Elections 

Sec. 2-1. - Colorado municipal election laws. 
    City elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Law, as now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-2. - Registration, judges, and clerks. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, establish the method for the registration of electors; the number, qualifications and compensation of election judges and clerks; and the boundaries of election precincts. The Council may, by ordinance, establish an election commission with such powers, duties, terms and qualifications as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-3. - Municipal elections. 
    A general municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November, 2005, and biennially thereafter. Special elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The polling places shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on election days. 
(Ord. No. 1070, passed at the November 1, 2005 election) 
Sec. 2-4. - Special elections. 
    Special elections shall be held forty-five (45) days after published notice of said special election. 
Article III. - Legislative Body 

Sec. 3-1. - City Council. 
    All powers of the City of Lamar not otherwise limited or conferred upon others by this Charter shall be vested in a Council consisting of seven (7) members, with two (2) Councilmembers to be elected from each of the three wards of the City, and the Mayor of the City to be elected from the City at large. 
(Ord. No. 880, passed at the June 5, 1990 election) 
Sec. 3-2. - Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
    The Mayor will be the presiding officer and required to vote. The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City of Lamar on an at-large basis, and shall be elected directly by the said qualified electors every two years, commencing with the general municipal election to be held in 1991. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the City government for all ceremonial and legal instruments requiring the Mayor's signature as such official. A mayor pro tem shall be elected by the remaining Councilmembers, and said mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence of the Mayor, with all powers herein granted to the Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 880, passed at the June 5, 1990 election) 
Sec. 3-3. - Qualifications of elective officers. 
    Each elective officer, when elected, shall be a qualified elector of the City, shall be a citizen of the United States of America, and shall have resided in the City of Lamar for at least the past one year. Councilmembers elected from wards shall also be residents and qualified electors of the respective wards from which they are elected. A person who has been convicted of a felony shall not become a candidate for nor hold elective office. No elected official shall hold any other elective public office or be a salaried employee of the City of Lamar. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Sec. 3-4. - Wards. 
    The City of Lamar is hereby divided into three wards whose boundaries shall be the same as presently established. Changes in the boundaries of wards may be made by ordinance adopted by the Council, at least 180 days prior to any general election. Wards shall be contiguous and compact, and shall have approximately the same number of voters. 
Sec. 3-5. - Terms of office. 
    Terms of councilmembers shall begin at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council following the regular City election. The terms of the Councilmembers shall be for four years. At the first election for Councilmembers following the adoption of this Charter, seven Councilmembers shall be elected as follows: Two Councilmembers are to be elected from each ward and one Councilmember is to be elected at large; one Councilmember from each ward will be elected to serve from the first general election in September, 1962, until the general election in November, 1965; and one Councilmember from each ward will be elected to serve from the first general election in September, 1962, until the general election in November 1963; and one Councilmember at large will be elected to serve from the first general election in September, 1962, until the general election in November, 1965. At the first election, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes in his ward and the Councilmember at large shall be elected until the general election in November, 1965. The remaining candidate from each ward shall be elected until the general election in November, 1963. At each succeeding election, the Councilmembers shall be elected for four-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 1109, passed at the November 7, 2007 election) 
Sec. 3-6. - Vacancies. 
    An elective office under this article shall become vacant whenever any officer is recalled, dies, becomes incapacitated, or moves from, resigns, or becomes a nonresident of the City or ward from which he was elected. In case of a vacancy, the remaining Councilmembers shall choose by majority vote, within thirty days after such a vacancy occurs, a duly qualified person to fill the unexpired term so vacant until the next general election, at which time the voters shall elect such officer to fill the remaining portion of the term so vacated. If more than four vacancies occur simultaneously, the remaining Councilmembers shall call for a special election to fill such vacancies, provided there will not be a general election within 90 days. 
Sec. 3-7. - Council meetings. 
    The Council shall meet regularly at least twice each month at a time and place to be fixed by the rules of procedure of each Council. The first Council and each succeeding Council elected under this Charter shall prescribe, within sixty days after its first meeting, the rules of procedure to govern meetings. All meetings for the transaction of business shall be open to the public. Special meetings of the Council may be called for such place and in the manner and at the time provided for by the rules of procedure. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. 
Sec. 3-8. - Powers of Council. 
    The Council shall have all legislative powers of the City and all other powers of a home rule city not specifically limited by the Constitution of the State of Colorado and not specifically limited or conferred upon others by this Charter. It shall have the power to enact and provide for the enforcement of all ordinances necessary to protect life, health and property; to declare, prevent and summarily abate and remove nuisances; to preserve and enforce a good government, general welfare, order and security of the City and the inhabitants thereof; to enforce ordinances and regulations by ordaining fines not exceeding three hundred dollars or imprisonment not exceeding ninety days, or both fine and imprisonment, for each and every offense; to provide for the granting of probation and the conditional suspension of sentences by the municipal court; and to delegate to boards and commissions, within limitations of the Constitution and this Charter, such functions, powers, and authority of the City as it deems proper and advisable. 
    The Council, or a committee thereof duly authorized by it, shall have the power to investigate the official acts and conduct of any officer of the City. 
    No enumeration of particular powers granted to the Council shall be construed to impair any general grant of power herein contained or granted by the State Constitution, nor to limit any such grant to powers of the same class or classes as those so enumerated. 
Sec. 3-9. - Appointments by Council. 
    The Council shall appoint or remove at its pleasure the officers and all members of the boards and commissions, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 3-10. - Recreation program. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the planning and supervision of a community recreation program and/or equipping and maintaining City-owned or controlled parks, recreational areas and facilities, both in and outside the corporate limits of the City. The City may cooperate with other public authorities, special districts, organizations or individuals in or outside the City to implement the operation of this program. 
Sec. 3-11. - Audit of accounts. 
    An independent audit shall be made annually of all funds, including utility funds, of the City. More frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by registered or certified public accountants, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
Sec. 3-12. - Council membership rules. 
    The Mayor shall be a member of the Council and shall be subject to all the rules and regulations governing Councilmembers. The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members, subject to judicial review. In the event of the arising of a conflict of interest involving any member of Council, said conflict of interest shall be governed by the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-4-404(2), as presently exists, in that any member of said City Council who has a personal or private interest in any matter proposed or pending before the City Council shall disclose such interest to the City Council and shall not vote thereon, and shall refrain from attempting to influence the decisions of the other members of the City Council in voting on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 880, passed at the June 5, 1990 election) 
Sec. 3-13. - Compensation of Councilmembers. 
    The Council may provide for the payment of salaries to its members by ordinance. 
Article IV. - Recall 

Sec. 4-l. - Recall from office. 
    Every elected officer of the City of Lamar may be recalled from office at any time, after holding office for six months, by the qualified electors of the City in the manner herein provided. 
Sec. 4-2. - Procedure. 
    The procedure hereunder to effect the recall of any elective officer shall be as follows: 
    A petition signed by qualified electors equal in number of twenty-five percent of the entire ballots cast at the last preceding election for all candidates for the office which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies, demanding a recall of the officer named in said petition, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, provided, if more than one person is required by law to be elected to fill the office of which the person sought to be recalled is an incumbent, then the said petition shall be signed by electors equal in number to twenty-five percent of the entire ballots cast at the last preceding election for all candidates for the office, said entire vote being divided by the number of all officers elected to such office; and such petition shall contain a general statement in not more than two hundred words of the ground or grounds on which such recall is sought. 
    When such a petition is filed with the City Clerk, he shall notify the Council and the Council shall set a date for a recall election to be held within ninety days after the filing of the petition. 
    The ballot upon which such proposed recall is submitted shall state the reasons set forth in the petition for demanding such recall, and there shall also be printed thereon the words: "Shall (name person against whom the recall petition is filed) be recalled from the office of (title of office)?" Following such question shall be the words "Yes" and "No" on separate lines with a blank space to the right of each in which the voter shall indicate, by marking a cross (X), his vote for or against such recall. 
    In the event that an officer is recalled by a majority vote of those voting on the question, the office or offices shall be deemed vacant, and shall be filled as provided in this Charter for the filling of vacancies. 
Sec. 4-3. - Implementation. 
    The Council shall make such additional rules and regulations as are necessary to implement the above procedure. 
Article V. - Ordinances 

Sec. 5-1. - When required. 
    All legislative enactments of the Council must be in the form of ordinances. Legislative enactments, as used herein, shall include, but not be limited to, every act making an appropriation, levying a tax, authorizing the borrowing of money, creating an indebtedness, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property. 
    Further, any act required elsewhere in this Charter to be done by ordinance shall so be done. 
Sec. 5-2. - Form. 
    All ordinances shall be introduced in written form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LAMAR, COLORADO." 
Sec. 5-3. - Effective date. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, all ordinances shall take effect thirty (30) days after publication following final passage. 
Sec. 5-4. - Procedure for passage. 
    An ordinance may be introduced at any regular or special meeting, and upon such introduction, shall be read in full, except for ordinances making a general codification of ordinances or ordinances adopting standard codes, which said ordinances need not be so read. 
    Said ordinance, before its final passage, shall be presented at one additional meeting of the Council, which meeting shall be held no earlier than five days after publication of the ordinance in its final amended form, and shall again be read in full, unless it is an ordinance of the type excepted in this section. 
    After final passage, every ordinance shall again be published by reference, or in full, as the Council may determine; provided, any publication by reference shall contain a summary of the subject matter of said ordinance and a notice that copies of the ordinance are on file at the office of the City Clerk for inspection. 
Sec. 5-5. - Voting. 
    The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and entered upon the minutes or records of the Council proceedings. Every ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council entitled to vote for final passage, and a majority vote of the Council present for passage on any reading prior to final passage. 
    Every member, when present, must vote upon ordinances, except that a member who has a personal or private interest in any ordinance proposed or pending before the Council shall disclose this fact to it and shall not be entitled to vote thereon, provided, should any member entitled to vote hereunder fail to vote, his vote shall be recorded in the affirmative. 
Sec. 5-6. - Emergency ordinances. 
    Emergency ordinances for the preservation of public property, health, peace and safety shall be approved only by a two-thirds vote of the entire Council. The fact showing such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the measure itself. No ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying taxes, incurring indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, or fixing rates charged by any City-owned utility under the administration of the City Council shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon publication following final passage. 
Sec. 5-7. - Disposition. 
    A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by the Council, shall be numbered and recorded, and adoption and publication shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and the City Clerk and by the certificate of the publisher, respectively. 
Sec. 5-8. - Codification. 
    Within three (3) years after the effective date of this Charter, the Council shall direct and complete the codification of the permanent ordinances of the City and shall cause a recodification to be made at least every ten (10) years. 
    All additions or amendments to the Code shall be adopted by ordinance, and when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Municipal Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code. 
Sec. 5-9. - Codes published by reference. 
    Standard codes, promulgated by the Federal Government, the State of Colorado, or any agency of either, or by any municipality within the State of Colorado or by recognized trade or professional organizations, or amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted by reference, providing the publication of the adopting ordinance shall advise that copies of the code to be adopted by reference are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk, and providing that any penalty clause in said codes may be adopted only if set forth in full and published in the adopting ordinance. 
Sec. 5-10. - Resolutions and motions. 
    All actions of the Council not required by this Charter to be in the form of ordinances may be in the form of resolutions and motions. Every member, when present, must vote upon resolutions and motions, except that a member who has a personal or private interest in any resolution and motion proposed or pending before the Council shall disclose this fact to it and shall not be entitled to vote thereon; provided, should any member entitled to vote hereunder fail to vote, his vote shall be recorded in the affirmative. 
Article VI. - Initiative and Referendum 

Sec. 6-1. - The initiative. 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Council by petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to the percentage hereinafter required. 
Sec. 6-2. - Submissions. 
    If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to fifteen percent of the total ballots cast in the last general election and is filed with the City Clerk at least sixty days prior to any general or special election, and contains a request that said proposed ordinances be submitted to a vote of the people if not passed by the Council, the Council shall, within thirty days after the attachment of the Clerk's certificate of sufficiency to the accompanying petition, either (a) pass said ordinance without alteration or (b) call a special election unless a general election is fixed within ninety days thereafter; and at such special or general election, said proposed ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to the vote of the qualified electors of the City but not more than one special election under this article shall be held in any twelve-month period. 
Sec. 6-3. - Publication. 
    An initiated ordinance shall be published in like manner as other proposed ordinances. The ballot upon which such proposed ordinance is submitted, shall state briefly its nature and it shall contain the words, "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." If a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon shall vote in favor thereof, the same shall thereupon without further publication become an ordinance of the City. 
Sec. 6-4. - The referendum. 
    The referendum shall apply to all ordinances passed by the Council, except ordinances fixing the rate of taxation on property each year for municipal purposes, making the annual appropriation, calling a special election or ordaining improvements initiated by petition and to be paid for by special assessments. If at any time within thirty days after the final passage of an ordinance to which the referendum is applicable, a petition signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least ten percent of the total ballots cast in the last general election be presented to the Council protesting against the going into effect of any ordinance, the same shall thereupon be suspended and the Council shall reconsider such ordinance; and if the same be not entirely repealed, shall submit the same to a vote of the qualified electors of the City in a manner as provided in respect to the initiative at the next general election, or at a special election called therefor. Such ordinance shall then go into effect if a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon vote in favor thereof, without further publication. The Council, on its own motion, shall have the power to submit at a general or special election any proposed ordinance to a vote of the people in manner as in this Charter provided. If provisions of two or more proposed ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict, the ordinance receiving the highest affirmative vote shall become effective. 
Sec. 6-5. - Procedure. 
    Within ten days from the filing of any initiative or referendum petition, the City Clerk shall ascertain whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors and if sufficient, shall attach thereto his certificate of sufficiency showing the result of such examination. If the petition is insufficient, he shall forthwith, in writing, notify one or more of the persons designated on the petition as filing the same. The petition may then be amended within ten days from the filing of the certificate. The City Clerk, within five days after such amendment, shall make like examination of the amended petition and attach thereto his certificate of the result. If still insufficient, he shall return the petition to one of the persons designated thereon as filing it without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose, but such petition shall not be refiled within one year after return by the Clerk. 
Sec. 6-6. - Amendments. 
    A proposed ordinance adopted or rejected by electoral vote under either the initiative or referendum cannot be revived, repealed, amended, or passed except by electoral vote; provided, however, that the Council shall have the power to adopt ordinances making technical amendments thereto which do not change the intent of the people's ordinance. The Council shall have power to resubmit to electoral vote any proposed ordinance reviving, repealing or amending an ordinance which has been adopted or rejected by electoral vote upon its own initiative and without any petition therefor. Any question submitted at a special election shall not again be submitted at a special election within two years thereafter. 
Sec. 6-7. - Further ordinances. 
    The City Council shall have power by ordinance to make further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article. 
Article VII. - Utilities Board 

Sec. 7-1. - Utilities Board. 
    There is hereby created the Utilities Board of the City of Lamar, which shall be responsible for the development, production, purchase, and distribution of all electricity. 
Sec. 7-2. - Board of Utilities Commissioners. 
    There is hereby created the Board of Utilities Commissioners of the City, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction, control and management of the department and all its operations and facilities. The Board shall have all the powers and duties possessed by the City to construct, acquire, expand and operate the utility system, and to do any and all acts or things that are necessary, convenient or desirable in order to operate, maintain, enlarge, extend, preserve and promote an orderly, economic and businesslike administration of the utility system. The Board shall operate as a separate unit of City government; and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, both the Board and the department shall be free from the jurisdiction, direction and control of other City officers and of the City Council. The Board may sue or be sued in its own name. All damage claims arising from the operations of the Board and the department shall be the responsibility of and be liquidated by the Board from the appropriate funds of the respective utility system of the department. 
Sec. 7-3. - Organization of Board. 
(a)  Number of Commissioners. The Board shall consist of five Commissioners and a member of the City Council selected by the Council to act as an ex officio member without a vote. 
(b)  Appointment and tenure. The Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council. The first Commissioners shall be appointed to serve terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, from the first Monday of the month following the taking effect of this Charter, the term of each to be designated by the Council. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years and until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Any Commissioner may be removed by the Council at its pleasure. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term. No vacancy in the Commission shall impair the right of the remaining Commissioners to exercise all the powers of the Commission. 
(d)  Qualifications. No person shall be a Commissioner unless he shall have been for at least one year next preceding his appointment a qualified elector of the City. No person who holds any other public office or who is an employee of the City government or who has a business relationship with the department other than as a consumer shall be a Commissioner. A Commissioner ceasing to possess any of these qualifications shall be removed from his office by the Council. 
(e)  Compensation. Each Commissioner, as full compensation for his services as a member of the Board, may be paid from the revenues of the department the sum of ten dollars for each meeting of the Board actually attended by him; but no commissioner shall receive in any one year more than two hundred and forty dollars for his attendance. Commissioners may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in carrying out their duties, other than those which may be incurred in attending meetings of the Board within the City. 
(f)  Conduct of meetings. The Board, by a majority vote, shall elect from among its members a chairman who shall preside over the meetings of the Board and a vice-chairman who shall act for the chairman during his absence. The City Clerk shall act as secretary of the Board. An election of officers of the Board shall be held at the first regular meeting at which all members are present following the appointment of a new Commissioner for a full term, but not later than the fourth meeting following the appointment. The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings, which shall be open to the public. No action shall be taken by the Board except by the affirmative vote of at least three Commissioners. Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Sec. 7-4. - Organization of department. 
(a)  Superintendent. The Board shall appoint a superintendent of the department to be responsible to the Board and to serve at its pleasure. 
(b)  Other employees. There shall be such other officers and employees of the department as may be provided by the Board. The officers and employees shall be appointed and removed by the superintendent. 
(c)  Salaries. The Board shall fix the salary of the superintendent and shall have, but may delegate to the superintendent, the power to fix the salaries of all other officers and employees of the department. 
(d)  Bonds. All officers and employees of the department shall be bonded in compliance with Section 10-7 of this Charter. 
(e)  Employee benefits. The Board may contribute to the cost of pension retirement, life and accident and health insurance programs for the officers and employees of the department. 
Sec. 7-5. - Powers and duties of the Board. 
(a)  Real estate and contracts. The Board, in the efficient and economical operation of the department, both inside and outside the City limits, may: 
(1)  Sell its products and services to public and private corporations and to other consumers; 
(2)  Construct plants, transmission lines, and other facilities; 
(3)  Purchase real estate and franchises in the name of the City with the approval of the Council; and 
(4)  Enter into all contracts, leases, and agreements in furtherance hereof. 
(b)  Extensions of services. The Board may adopt regulations governing extensions of services of the department both inside and outside the City limits. The regulations shall provide the conditions under which the extensions shall be made to render them compensatory and shall provide that each extension project shall, when completed, become the property of the City whether on public or private property. The Board may provide for the form of refunds where advances by the persons benefitted are necessary to make extensions compensatory. 
(c)  Joint operations with others. The Board may contract with any public corporation or any individual, both inside or outside the City limits: 
(1)  For the joint use of poles and other property belonging either to the department or to the other contracting party or jointly to both parties; and 
(2)  With the approval of the Council, for the joint acquisition of real property and franchises and the joint financing, construction, and operation of plants, transmission lines, and other facilities, whereby any property acquired may become the property of both the City and the other contracting party. 
(d)  Eminent domain. The Board may enter upon any land or water for the purpose of making surveys and may exercise the right of eminent domain on behalf of the City whenever public necessity or convenience requires. The Board shall have the right of eminent domain as provided by the Constitution and the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(e)  Use of thoroughfares for utility installations. The Board may use the ground over, under, or along any road, railroad, highway, street, sidewalk, thoroughfare, alley or waterway in the operations of the department, but shall in all cases, and subject to the applicable general regulations of the City, cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual condition. 
(f)  Rates. The Board shall fix rates to be charged for these utilities sold and services rendered by the department. Rates shall be fair, reasonable and compensatory and shall be uniform for all consumers within the same class, but different rate schedules may be applied to different classes of consumers as determined by the Board. Rates within the City limits may be more or less than for the same class of consumers outside the City limits. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the utility operation and, except for the first two years of operation, all bond interest and redemption costs of the utility operation. No resolution fixing rates shall be finally adopted until published in full two times, at least ten days apart. The resolution shall not become effective until the fifth day after the last publication. A public hearing shall be called prior to final passage of a rate increase by the Board. The Board may require reasonable deposits as security for the payment of charges for utility services and may provide for the return of the deposits, and interest on deposits as determined by the Board, when satisfactory consumer credit has been established. 
(g)  Authority for expenditures. No money shall be drawn from the funds of the department nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except as authorized by the Board, and not to exceed the annual budget. 
(h)  Short term loans. The Board may borrow money for periods not to exceed two years and may issue negotiable notes, payable from the revenues of the department, as evidence of the loans. The action of the Board may be by resolutions which may be adopted at the same meetings at which introduced and shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(i)  Promotion expenditures. The Board may authorize reasonable expenditures to advertise and otherwise promote the use of the services of the department and to acquaint the public with the operations, programs, and planned expansion of the department. 
(j)  Investment and utilization of reserve funds. The Board may invest reserve funds of the department only in such a manner as is allowed by the Colorado Public Deposit Protection Act, being C.R.S. § 11-10.5-101 et seq. In addition, the Board may disburse as a one-time transfer to the City a portion of reserve funds available to the Board, with such funds to be used for the City's capital improvements consisting of contributions to construct a public pool and Senior Center complex so as to improve the City infrastructure. Such transfer shall be a one-time transfer not to exceed nine hundred fifty thousand dollars to be paid only as a supplement to City and grant funds and public donations. Such Board reserve funds as may be paid over unto the City pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution and shall be in addition to the Charter appropriation established by Section 11-2 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Lamar. 
(k)  Accounting and budget reports. The Board, in addition to the reports and accounting it may otherwise be required by law to make, shall, not later than the first day of February in each year, furnish the Council its annual report, which shall include the following statements as of the end of the preceding fiscal year: 
(1)  A balance sheet and operating statement showing the financial condition of the department, prepared according to generally accepted public utility accounting principles; 
(2)  Any additional supporting statements or schedules deemed necessary and desirable by the Council to make a clear and informative presentation of the financial position of the department. 
The reports shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection. The Board shall annually prepare and submit to the Council, at a time designated by the Council, a budget forecast for the ensuing year. 
(l)  Delegation of powers. The Board may delegate in writing any of its powers to officers or employees responsible to it. 
(m)  The Board shall advertise and call for bids on all items to be purchased by bid for the department as prescribed in this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1009, passed at the Nov. 2, 1999 election) 
Sec. 7-6. - General provisions. 
(a)  Disposition of public utilities. The City shall have no authority to cease to operate, sell, lease, abandon, or in any other way dispose of any public utility owned by it without the approval of a majority of the votes cast by the registered voters of the City, at a general election or a special election held for the purpose. 
(b)  Existing obligations. Contracts and obligations relating to the utility system of the City incurred prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall not be impaired and shall be binding upon the Board insofar as they apply to the department. 
Article VIII. - Administrative Department 

Sec. 8-1. - Departments created. 
    The administrative functions of the City shall be performed by the following departments: Water, sanitation, streets, police, fire, parks, finance and such other departments as are or may be established by this Charter or ordinances of the City. The City Council may consolidate or merge any of the said departments in order to achieve more efficient operation and administration, except no merger shall be made involving the Utilities Board. 
Article IX. - Boards and Commissions 

Sec. 9-1. - General provisions. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Council, shall be advisory in character, shall serve without compensation but shall be paid their necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their official duties, and shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by this Charter or by resolution. Initial appointments by the Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure, and thereafter all appointments shall be for the full term specified. All members shall be subject to removal by the Council at its pleasure and at any time without cause. The Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Each board and commission shall choose its own chairman and vice-chairman from its citizens-at-large members and shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the proper conduct of its business. 
Sec. 9-2. - Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
    There is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of five years. Members shall be qualified tax-paying electors, residents of the City for at least one year immediately preceding the date of their appointment, and the holders of no other offices or positions in the City administration. 
    The Board shall have the power to hear and determine appeals from the issuance or refusal of building permits; to make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent; and to authorize variances from the strict application of the zoning regulations in such situations and subject to such limitations as may be set by ordinance. The findings and decisions of the Board shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
    The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote taken, and keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
    The Board shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City; and where not otherwise provided by ordinance or charter, the Board shall have the power to perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Sec. 9-3. - Library Board. 
    There is hereby created and established a Library Board consisting of five members to be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
    The Library Board shall be advisory in character and it shall prepare and submit to the Council a master plan for the development and maintenance of a modern library system. 
    The Library Board shall have the additional power to administer gifts and trusts. 
    The Library Board is authorized, subject to Council approval, to cooperate with any public or private agency in obtaining space, facilities, books or materials for library purposes. 
    The Board shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City; and where not otherwise provided by ordinance or charter, the Board shall have the power to perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Sec. 9-4. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    There is hereby created and established a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of seven members to be appointed by the Council, five (5) of whom shall be citizens-at-large with overlapping five-year terms, and two of whom shall be incumbent Councilmembers. The citizens-at-large members shall be qualified electors, shall be residents of the City at least one year immediately preceding the date of their appointment, and they shall hold no paid offices or positions in the City administration. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. It shall prepare and submit to the Council for its approval a master plan for the physical development of the City; all plats of proposed subdivisions shall be submitted to it for its recommendations thereon to the Council; and it shall assist the Council in considering and recommending a plan for capital improvements. Where not otherwise provided by Charter or ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Article X. - Legal Department 
Part 1. - City Attorney 

Sec. 10-1. - Appointment. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The attorney shall have been a duly licensed attorney in the State of Colorado for least five (5) years immediately prior to his or her appointment and have such further qualifications as deemed appropriate by the City Council. The Council shall fix the compensation of the City Attorney. The City Attorney may have such assistants or special counsel as the City Council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1106, passed at the November 7, 2007 election; Ord. No. 1133, passed at the November 3, 2009 election) 
Sec. 10-2. - Duties. 
    The City Attorney shall advise the Council and City officials relating to their powers and duties and he or his assistants shall represent the City in all legal proceedings, except as provided in this Charter. The City Attorney or his assistants shall supervise the drafting of all ordinances and the preparation of all other legal documents. He or his assistants shall attend all Council meetings and shall perform all services incident to his position as may be required by this Charter or the ordinances of the City. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Utilities Board from employing separate counsel if it deems necessary. 
Sec. 10-3. - Special counsel. 
    The Council may, on its own motion, or upon the request of the City Attorney, in special cases, employ counsel to serve under the direction of the City Attorney. Special counsel may be engaged in regard to irregularities found by audit, or any alleged dereliction in the duties of any officer or employee, or when the City Attorney has a conflict of interest, to serve independently of the City Attorney. 
Part 2. - Municipal Court 

Sec. 10-4. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a municipal court vested with exclusive original jurisdiction of all causes arising under the Charter and ordinances of the City of Lamar. The Council shall appoint one or more judges for said court to serve at the pleasure of the Council, and the judge or judges shall receive such fixed compensation as may be established by resolution of the Council, but such compensation shall not be based upon the fees or fines assessed by the court nor the number of cases handled. In the absence of the judge or judges so appointed, the Council shall designate one or more substitute judges to serve. 
    Terms of the municipal court and procedure therein shall be enacted by the Council, and the Council shall, by ordinance, provide for trial by jury and the imposition of costs. 
Part 3. - Miscellaneous Legal Provisions 

Sec. 10-4.5. - Contract requirements. 
    All contracts in writing binding the City shall be signed by the Mayor, or in his absence, by the mayor pro tem, and attested by the City Clerk under the seal of the City. 
Sec. 10-5. - Sale of real property. 
    Conveyances of any interest in real property of whatever nature or use may be authorized by ordinance passed by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council. Conveyances shall be signed by the Mayor, or in his absence, by the mayor pro tem, and attested to by the Clerk under the seal of the City. 
Sec. 10-6. - Recovery of compensation. 
    No action for the recovery of compensation for any form of tort liability claimed against the City shall be maintained unless all statutory notices of said claim are strictly complied with by the claimant, it being the intention of the City to not waive any protection of sovereign immunity available to it. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Sec. 10-7. - Bonds and oaths. 
    All officers and employees of the City and Utilities Board shall be bonded under a blanket bond. The bond on the City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be for at least $50,000.00 each. The amount of bond for all other officers and employees shall be set by the City Council. Costs of such bonds shall be borne by the City. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, every officer shall take and subscribe before a judge of a court of record, and file with the City Clerk, an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Colorado, this Charter, and the ordinances, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
Sec. 10-8. - Previous contracts. 
    Nothing in this Charter shall abridge the rights, duties or obligations heretofore obtained or incurred by contract or ordinance and legally entered into or passed by the City. 
Sec. 10-9. - Right of eminent domain. 
    The City, in any capacity governmental or otherwise, within or without its corporate limits, shall have the right of eminent domain, as provided by the Constitution and the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Sec. 10-10. - Authority to levy taxes. 
    The Council may levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes subject to the right of referendum as in this Charter provided; and it may levy and collect special assessments for local improvements as provided in this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 10-11. - Cooperative contracts. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements for the joint use of buildings, equipment or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services. 
Sec. 10-12. - Bequests, gifts and donations. 
    The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple or in trust for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such gifts, bequests and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest or trust. 
Article XI. - Finance Administration[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities organized pursuant to statute (not home rule municipalities) are governed by fiscal procedures set forth in pt. 2, art 20 of title 31, C.R.S. § 31-20-201. 

Part 1. - Budget 

Sec. 11-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January and end on the last day of December of each year. 
Sec. 11-2. - Proposed annual budget. 
    Not later than the first regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council in October of each year, the City Council shall submit the proposed annual budget which shall present a complete financial plan for the City for the ensuing fiscal year. 
    There shall be a budget for the City of Lamar and a budget approved and adopted by the Utilities Board, which latter budget shall include therein an amount for the next fiscal year for transfer to the general fund of the City. The revenues of the Utilities Board shall be appropriated for the necessary requirements of the Board, including debt service, and from any remaining revenue there may be assessed and payable to the general fund of the City, and appropriated by the City Council as an expense of the Board in the annual budget and appropriations ordinance, a sum not to exceed twelve percent (12%) of the average of the gross annual operation revenues for the three calendar years preceding such annual appropriation ordinance, such a charge as made shall be included as a cost of service component in the design of rate structures, as a condition of service, and shall be in recognition of the operating privilege and for the use of general City facilities and benefits both within and without the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 873-A, passed at the Nov. 7, 1989 election) 
Sec. 11-3. - The budget messages. 
    The budget messages shall contain the recommendations of the City Council concerning the fiscal policy of the City, and the recommendations of the Utilities Board concerning the fiscal policy of the Utilities Board; descriptions of the important features of the budget plans; explanations of all major increases or decreases in budget recommendations as compared with prior years, and summaries of the proposed budgets showing comparisons similar to those required in the budget proper, itemized by principal sources of revenue and the main items of expenditures; and estimates of the cash surplus in each fund at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit in each fund to be made up by appropriation, and the balance between the total estimated expenditure and the total anticipated revenues from all sources, taking into account the estimated surpluses or deficits in the various funds. 
Sec. 11-4. - Public hearings. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held at and by a joint meeting of the Council and Board on a date prior to October 15 and at a place to be fixed by the Council. The Council shall cause notice of the time and place of such hearing to be published one time at least five days prior to the hearing. Copies of the proposed budget shall be made available for use of the public. 
    After the conclusion of such public hearing, the Board, as to the utilities budget, and Council, as to the remainder of the budget, may insert new items of expenditure or may increase, decrease or strike out items of expenditure, except that no item budgeted for debt service or transfer to the general fund shall be reduced. 
    If the Board shall decrease the total proposed expenditures in the utilities budget, such decrease may be reflected in the full proposed revenue. If the Board shall increase the total proposed expenditures in the utilities budget, such increase may be reflected in the utilities rates or by appropriate changes in other revenues. 
    If the Council shall decrease the total proposed expenditures in the remainder of the budget, such decrease shall be reflected in the full proposed revenue. If the Council shall increase the total proposed expenditures in the remainder of the budget, such increase shall be reflected in the tax levy or by appropriate changes in other revenues. 
Sec. 11-5. - Scope of annual budget. 
    The budget adopted by the Council shall contain: 
(a)  An estimate of anticipated revenue from all sources other than the tax levy for the ensuing year; 
(b)  An estimate of the general fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation; 
(c)  The estimated expenditures necessary for the operation of the several departments, offices, and agencies under the jurisdiction of the Council; 
(d)  Debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the sum required to be raised by the tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year, and the rate of levy necessary to produce such sum based on the percentage of collection, not exceeding the lowest percentage of current levy collection experienced during the three preceding complete fiscal years; 
(f)  A balance between the total estimated expenditures and total anticipated revenue from all sources, taking into account the estimated general fund cash surplus or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. 
All estimates shall be in detail, showing revenues by sources and expenditures by organizational units, activities, character or object. 
Sec. 11-6. - Adoption of budget and appropriation. 
    Not less than thirty days prior to the first day of the next fiscal year, the Council shall adopt an ordinance for the budget and an ordinance for the annual appropriation. 
Sec. 11-7. - Public record. 
    The budget shall be a public record in the office of the City Clerk and shall be open to public inspection. Sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of the Council and the public. 
Sec. 11-8. - Certification of tax levy. 
    Not later than October 16, or such date as may be required by state law, the Council shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City, and shall cause the same to be certified to the county as required by law. If the Council should fail in any year to make such levy as above provided, the rate last fixed shall be the rate for the ensuing fiscal year, which rate shall be levied as by law. 
Part 2. - Finance Administration 

Sec. 11-9. - Administrative officers. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Treasurer and a City Clerk, who shall have the right to hire the required personnel for their respective offices to operate in a businesslike manner. 
    The City Council shall also appoint a qualified independent auditor for the purpose of making an annual audit of all purchases. 
(Ord. No. 1109, passed at the November 7, 2007 election) 
Sec. 11-10. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The City Treasurer: 
(1)  Shall establish a system of accounting and auditing for the City; show that established systems will reflect the financial condition of all operations of the City and that all legal provisions affecting finances have been complied with; establish cost accounting systems whenever practicable; and establish a system of accounting for the Utilities Board using systems as prescribed by the Colorado PUC and the Federal Power Commission. 
(2)  Shall attend regular Council meetings and keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future financial needs. 
(3)  Shall consolidate the recommendations for the annual budget made by the heads of all departments under the jurisdiction of the Council and present same to the Council by September 1. 
(4)  Shall cause to be purchased, stored and distributed all supplies needed by the various departments of the City under Council control; and shall advertise and call for bids on all items to be purchased by bid for departments under Council control as prescribed in this Charter. 
(5)  Shall furnish the Utility Board of Commissioners and the utility superintendent with all information and reports needed by them to operate the utilities of the City. 
(6)  Shall be responsible for all billing. 
(7)  Shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by resolution. 
(b)  The City Clerk: 
(1)  Shall be the clerk of the Council and secretary of the Utilities Board, and shall attend all regular meetings of the Council and the Utilities Board, and shall keep a permanent journal of minutes of the proceedings of these meetings. 
(2)  Shall be the custodian of the City seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be the custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(3)  Shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted by the Council. 
(4)  Shall have the power to administer oaths of office. 
(5)  Shall have the custody of all monies of the City and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City. 
(6)  Shall receive and receipt for all monies of the City. 
(7)  Shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the Council. 
(8)  Shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and procedures to be established by the Council and the Utilities Board. 
(9)  Shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection of all City charges as are conferred by action of the Council or the Utilities Board. 
(10)  Shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1109, passed at the November 7, 2007 election) 
Sec. 11-11. - General fund. 
    There is hereby established a fund to be known as the General Fund. The general fund shall comprise all revenues of the City not specifically belonging to any other fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the general fund. 
Sec. 11-12. - Water fund. 
    There is hereby established a Water Fund. The water fund shall comprise all revenues of the water department, and all functions of the water department shall be financed by expenditures from the water fund. 
Sec. 11-13. - Special funds. 
    Additional funds which shall be known as Special Funds shall be created by ordinance to provide for monies held for depreciation and obsolescence of structures, machinery and equipment not within the jurisdiction of the Utilities Board, for debt service, for special services and for local improvements. The ordinance creating a special fund shall specify its source of income and the purpose for which expenditures from the special fund shall be made. Special funds created by ordinance may be abolished by ordinance, subject to existing trusts, and the remaining assets of any special fund shall be transferred to the general fund. The ordinances creating special funds may provide for annual, periodic or continuing appropriations for such funds. 
Sec. 11-14. - Capital improvements fund. 
    The Council may make appropriations for the benefit of a fund to be known as the Capital Improvements Fund, established for the purpose of paying the cost of capital improvements for which the City is authorized to issue bonds, and for no other purpose. The Council shall also have power to transfer, from time to time, any portion of the general fund surplus not otherwise appropriated to the capital improvements fund. 
Sec. 11-15. - Contingent account. 
    The general fund may contain an item for contingencies. Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to contingencies, but instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for contingencies shall be transferred to the logical account, and the expenditure charged to such account. No such transfer shall be made without the express approval of the Council, and then, only for expenditures which could not be readily foreseen at the time the budget was adopted. 
Sec. 11-16. - Fairmount Cemetery investment fund. 
    The provisions of section 13 of ordinance 237 of the City of Lamar pertaining to the Fairmount Cemetery fund shall not be amended or repealed. 
Sec. 11-17. - Utility fund. 
    There is hereby established a Utility Fund. The utility fund shall comprise all revenues of the Utilities Board, and all functions of the Utilities Board shall be financed by expenditures from the utilities fund. 
Sec. 11-18. - Transfer of funds. 
    The City Council may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one classification of expenditure to another within the same department, office or agency administered by them. The Council may, after October 31 of each year, by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department, office or agency within its jurisdiction to another. The Utilities Board shall order the transfer in equal monthly installments on the 12th day of each month the amount provided by the budget for such year to be transferred from the utility fund to the general fund. 
Sec. 11-19. - Departmental appropriations lapse. 
    Any annual departmental appropriation or any portion thereof remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year shall lapse. 
Sec. 11-20. - No liability without appropriation. 
    Except as herein otherwise specifically provided, the City expenditures in any one year shall not be increased over and above the amount provided in the annual appropriation ordinance, and no contract involving the expenditure for any improvement to be paid out of the general or special funds of the City or defraying the expenses and liabilities of the City shall exceed, in any one year, the amount provided in the annual appropriation ordinance to be paid out of the said general and special funds so appropriated and set apart, but the said several funds shall be maintained for, used and devoted to the particular purposes specified in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
Sec. 11-21. - Capital improvements appropriations. 
    Appropriations for construction or other permanent improvements from the capital improvements fund shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, any project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three fiscal years elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. Any unappropriated balance in the capital improvements fund may be transferred by the Council and used for the payment of outstanding bonded indebtedness of the City. 
Part 3. - Bonded Indebtedness 

Sec. 11-22. - General obligation bonds. 
    The Council shall have the power to issue general obligation bonds of the City for any public purpose, upon a majority vote of the electors of the City voting at any special or general election, provided that water bonds may be issued without an election upon a determination to that effect by the Council. The total outstanding general obligation indebtedness of the City, other than water bonds, shall not at any time exceed ten percent of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the City, as shown by the last preceding assessment for tax purposes. General obligation bonds of the City, other than water and utility bonds, shall mature in not more than twenty years from the date and shall be payable in annual installments commencing not later than five years after the date of said bonds. Water and utility bonds shall mature and be payable as provided by ordinance authorizing the issue of said bonds. 
(Ord. No. 647, passed at the Nov. 6, 1973 election) 
Sec. 11-23. - Revenue bonds. 
    The City may issue revenue bonds for any public purpose without first submitting the question of their issuance to the qualified electors, and may pledge the revenues from the income-producing project to pay the bonds and interest thereon, provided that if any such bonds pledge the revenue of any other City-owned utility, property or facility, or if the said bonds are in any way made a general obligation of the City, then such bonds shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon before they may be issued; except issuance of revenue bonds on the electric utility must be approved by a majority of the whole Utilities Board at a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 647, passed at the Nov. 6, 1973 election) 
Sec. 11-24. - Refunding bonds. 
    The Council may authorize by ordinance, without an election, issuance of refunding bonds for the purpose of paying or providing for the payment by escrow deposit or otherwise outstanding bonds of the City, including special improvement bonds. 
Sec. 11-25. - Special and local improvement district bond issuance. 
    The City shall have the power to construct or install special or local improvements of every character within designated districts in the City by: 
(a)  Order of the Council; or 
(b)  On petition of the majority of the property owners in the designated district, subject in either event to protest by twenty percent of the owners of the frontage or area to be assessed. 
The right to protest and notice of public hearing shall be given as provided by ordinance. All protests shall be considered, but, if the public welfare warrants, the Council shall have the final decision. Such improvements shall confer special benefits on the real property within said districts and general benefits to the City at large. The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the method and manner of making such improvement, of assessing and cost thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of constructing or installing such improvements. 
Sec. 11-26. - Special or local improvement district bonds-Special surplus and deficiency fund. 
    Where all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the payment of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and cancelled three-fourths of its bond issue, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and interest due thereon, and there is not sufficient money in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the City shall pay the bonds when due and interest due thereon and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the districts. 
Sec. 11-27. - Same-General benefits. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the City Council may levy annual taxes on the taxable property within the City, not exceeding two mills in any one year, to be disbursed, as determined by the City Council, for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessments levied against the City itself in connection with bonds issued for special or local improvement districts, and for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein; provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the City Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred to any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. As long as any bonds issued for special or local improvement districts hereafter organized remain outstanding, the tax levy or equivalent transfer of money to the special fund created for the payment of said bonds shall not be diminished in any succeeding year until all said bonds and the interest thereon shall be paid in full, unless other available funds are on hand therefor, or such bonds and interest are paid by the City as required in section 11-24 of this Charter. 
Sec. 11-28. - Bond sales; limitations. 
    Refunding bonds shall be sold at public or private sales or exchanged as may be determined by the City Council. All other bonds shall be sold to the highest and best bidder for cash at public sales after advertisement for public sales, and if all bids are rejected, they may be sold at private sales and to the best advantage of the City. Each bond issue may contain provisions for the redemption of bonds prior to their respective maturity dates on such terms as may be provided by the City Council, including, without limitation, the payment of a premium. 
(Ord. No. 647, passed at the Nov. 6, 1973 election) 
Part 4. - Receipts and Expenditures 

Sec. 11-29. - Receipts and expenditures. 
    The City Treasurer will cause the total receipts and itemized expenditures, except individual employee's salaries, to be published monthly in a newspaper of general circulation. Gross salaries of individual municipal employees shall be published semi-annually, in a newspaper of general circulation, with said individual employee's gross salary for July being thus published in August of each year, with the individual employee's gross salary for January being published in February of each year. 
(Ord. No. 880, passed at the June 5, 1990 election) 
Sec. 11-30. - Publication cost. 
    Price is to be governed by current state statute governing legal publications. 
Article XII. - Utilities and Franchises 
Part 1. - City-Owned Utilities 

Sec. 12-1. - Authority and powers. 
    The City shall have and exercise with regard to City-owned utilities, including water and water rights and acquisition thereof and bonded indebtedness in connection therewith, all the authority and powers now provided by the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, including those statutes hereinafter established by act of the general assembly. In addition, the City shall have the power to exchange water rights owned by it for water rights owned by other persons, municipalities or quasi-municipal corporations. The City shall also have the right to contract with such aforementioned persons or entities for the purpose of forming consolidated water or sewer districts or for furnishing any municipal services, provided any agreements or contracts arising therefrom would clearly benefit the inhabitants of the City. 
Sec. 12-2. - Water rights in annexation. 
    The City shall have the power to purchase or obtain such existing water rights as may be used upon any land which is annexed to the City from time to time. 
Sec. 12-2.5. - Services to private correctional facilities. 
    No City-owned utility shall provide any water or wastewater services to a private correctional facility, as defined in Section 14-1 of this Charter, wherever such facility is located, unless having first obtained authorization from the eligible electors of the City of Lamar, in the manner described in Section 14-5 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1078, passed at the November 1, 2005 election) 
Part 2. - Franchises and Public Utilities 

Sec. 12-3. - Definition. 
    The term "public utility" or "public utility corporation," when used in this Charter, shall mean any person, firm or corporation operating heat, power or light systems, communication systems, water, sewer or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public. It shall not include any person, firm or corporation owning or operating sidetracks or switches for the accommodation of manufacturing plants and business houses, or private telephone lines, and shall not include municipally-owned utilities. 
Sec. 12-4. - Present franchises. 
    All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions and terms until the expiration dates provided in such ordinances. 
Sec. 12-5. - Franchises granted upon vote. 
    No franchise shall be granted except upon the majority vote of the qualified tax-paying electors voting thereon at a general or special election called for that purpose. Such election shall be held within ninety days after deposit with the City Clerk of the expense (to be determined by the City Clerk) of such submission by the applicant for such franchise. 
Sec. 12-6. - Term, compensation, and restriction. 
    No franchise shall be granted for a period longer than twenty years, or without reserving to the City such fair fee arising from the use thereof as shall be fixed in the grant of such franchise. This compensation shall not exempt the grantee or his assignees from any lawful assessment upon his property or from other tax not related to the franchise privilege, or pertaining to the physical operation thereof, but shall exempt the grantee or his assignees from any occupancy tax, license, tax, permit charge, or similar tax on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, as shall be fixed in the grant of any franchise. The franchise fee established by ordinance shall be paid as provided and be subject to mutual periodic renegotiation, and failure to pay such fee shall result in forfeiture of the franchise at the option of the Council. 
Sec. 12-7. - Railroad tracks and crossings. 
    The Council may require by ordinance and by fair apportionment of the cost, subject to arbitration, any railroad or other transportation system to elevate or lower any of its right-of-way or tracks running over, under, along or across any public thoroughfare; and to construct and maintain all street crossings, bridges, viaducts or other conveniences in good condition with proper approaches and safety devices. 
Sec. 12-8. - Extension of territory. 
    With respect to any franchise, after negotiation or mutual agreement, the Council may, by ordinance, extend the area to include streets, alleys or public places and property not embraced in such franchise when public convenience and necessity requires, subject to all the terms and conditions of such original franchise, and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified tax-paying electors. 
Sec. 12-9. - Revocable licenses. 
    After public hearing, the Council, by ordinance, may grant a license, revocable for cause, to lay sidetracks and switches along or across any public thoroughfare, in accordance with standards and procedures to be adopted by the Council. 
Sec. 12-10. - Revocable permits. 
    The Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley or public place. Such permits shall be revocable by the Council at any time, whether or not the right is expressly reserved in the permit. 
Sec. 12-11. - Condemnation or purchase. 
    The right of the City to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and statutes, is expressly reserved. 
Sec. 12-12. - Assignment. 
    Assignment or leasing of a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless application therefor be made to the City and consent given by the Council by ordinance, with such change of conditions or terms as they may deem necessary. The Council reserves the right to deny any assignment of franchise. 
Sec. 12-13. - Books and records. 
    The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all public utility franchises heretofore and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the grantee and any assignees. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual reports, and such other matters of information and public interest as the Council may from time to time require. 
Article XIII. - Transitional Period 

Sec. 13-1. - Status of transitional provision. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for an orderly transition from the present City government to a home rule government under the provisions of this Charter. This article shall constitute a part of this Charter during the transition period. 
Sec. 13-2. - Transition period. 
    The period from the effective date of the Charter to January 1, 1963, shall be known as the transition period. During this period, all officers and employees shall proceed with due diligence to put into effect the provisions of this Charter. During the transition period, the Council shall designate by resolution provisions of the Charter to become operative. Resolutions shall fix the dates on which, and the agency or agencies to which, each provision becomes operative. Until superseded by this Charter, or any provision thereof, the state statutes shall be in effect. 
Sec. 13-3. - Present Council and Mayor to continue in office. 
    The Council and Mayor, or their appointed successors, in office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue at their present salaries to serve and carry out the functions, powers and duties of their offices until the 10th day of September, 1962. 
Sec. 13-4. - Retirement plans. 
    This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationships existing on the effective date of this Charter between the municipal government and any officer or employee by reason of any retirement plans in effect. 
Sec. 13-5. - Local improvements. 
    Local improvements not completed on the effective date of this Charter shall be governed until completed by the ordinance under which they were commenced. 
Article XIV. - Correctional Facilities[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1078 passed at the November 1, 2005 election. 

Sec. 14-1. - Private correctional facility defined. 
    The term "private correctional facility," when used in this Charter, shall mean any facility that is used or intended to be used for the incarceration of adults and that is owned or operated by a private correctional facility operator, or proposed to be owned or operated by a private correctional facility operator. 
Sec. 14-2. - Community corrections program not a private correctional facility. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Charter, a community corrections program, as defined in Article 27, Title 17, Colorado Revised Statutes, or corresponding sections of successor legislation, shall not be considered a private correctional facility as defined in Section 14-1 of this Charter. 
Sec. 14-3. - Private correctional facility operator defined. 
    The term "private correctional facility operator," when used in this Charter, shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, business, association, limited liability company, government enterprise (as defined in Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution), or any other entity that is not an agency or political subdivision of the State of Colorado nor an agency of the Federal government, which operates or seeks to operate a private correctional facility. 
Sec. 14-4. - Limitations on construction and operation. 
    No private correctional facility operator may construct or operate a private correctional facility within the City of Lamar except as allowed for in Section 14-5 of this Charter. Nor shall the City of Lamar expend any funds on, nor shall any city employee in his official capacity engage in, the recruitment or promotion of any private correctional facility proposed to be built within Prowers County, except as allowed for in Section 14-5 of this Charter. 
Sec. 14-5. - Authorization powers regarding construction and operation of facilities reserved to people of Lamar. 
    The powers to authorize construction or operation of a private correctional facility within the City of Lamar; to authorize the City of Lamar to expend funds or staff time on the recruitment or promotion of a private correctional facility proposed to be built within Prowers County; and, to authorize city-owned utilities to provide water or wastewater services to a private correctional facility, are reserved to the people of Lamar, and said authorization may only be granted by the eligible electors of the City of Lamar, at a municipal election, on an initiated or referred measure. Any question submitted to the people of Lamar pursuant to this section shall include, at a minimum: the name of the prospective private correctional facility operator, the maximum inmate capacity of the facility, what jurisdictions may place inmates in the facility, and not less than one nor more than five locations at which the private correctional facility might be located. 
    Adopted in Convention this 24th day of May, 1962, and signed in triplicate. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date 
Passed Section  Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 647 11-6-1973 - 11-22, 11-23 - 11-28 Ord. No. 873-A 11-7-1989 - 3-3 - 7-3 - 9-2 - 9-4 - 10-6 - 11-2 Ord. No. 880 6-5-1990 - 3-1, 3-2 - 3-12 - 11-29 Ord. No. 1009 11-2-1999 - 7-5 Ord. No. 1070 11-1-2005 - 2-3 Ord. No. 1078 11-1-2005 - 12-2 Ord. No. 1106 11-7-2007 - 10-1 Ord. No. 1109 11-7-2007 - 3-5 - 11-9, 11-10 Ord. No. 1133 11-3-2009 - 10-1  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title and scope. 
    This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the City of Lamar, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known as the Lamar, Colorado Municipal Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-1-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city and/or any codification of the same, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is intended from the context or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. Additionally, all definitions and construction rules set out in the Charter as applicable to terms in the Charter shall also be applicable to this Code and shall have the same meaning when used in this Code as prescribed in the Charter, unless a different meaning is specifically provided or intended from context. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Lamar, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Lamar, Colorado, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Lamar. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Lamar, Colorado Municipal Code, as published and subsequently amended, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Prowers, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. The abbreviation "C.R.S." means the Colorado Revised Statutes, including all amendments thereto. 
    Law. The term "law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means and is to be construed as meaning violation and is not intended to mean crime or criminal conduct. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a law of the city, provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building, land, motorized vehicle, animal or other real or personal property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety or any other person with a possessory interest in the whole or a part of said building, land, motor vehicle, animal or other real or personal property. 
    Person. The term "person" means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, firm, corporation, business, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall and must. The terms "shall" and "must" are both mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Colorado. 
    Street. The term "street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies all or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Written. The term "written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 1-2; Code 2000, § 1-2-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-3. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this chapter shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. Further, the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Sec. 1-4. - Computation of time. 
    The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Prior Code, § 1-2; Code 2000, § 1-2-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-5. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city, or his or her designated representative. 
(Code 2000, § 1-2-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-6. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Code 2000, § 1-2-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-7. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to this Code and to city ordinances: 
(1)  Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  The term "may" is permissive, and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Prior Code, § 1-2; Code 2000, § 1-2-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-8. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Prior Code, § 1-3; Code 2000, § 1-3-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, and penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-10. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All existing ordinances and portions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature which are inconsistent with any ordinance included in the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency therein as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 2000, § 1-1-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. Additionally, among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways. 
(2)  Naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways. 
(3)  Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of general obligation bonds. 
(4)  Creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvement districts. 
(5)  Authorizing the issuance of specific local improvement district bonds. 
(6)  Making special assessments for local improvement districts and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district bond proceeds. 
(7)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the city. 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. 
(9)  Calling or providing for a specific election. 
(10)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the city. 
(11)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the state, with other governmental bodies or with others. 
(12)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property. 
(13)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers. 
(14)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys. 
(15)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(16)  Appropriating money. 
(17)  Levying a temporary tax or fixing a temporary tax rate. 
(18)  Relating to salaries. 
(19)  Amending the official zoning map. 
(20)  Being temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
(21)  In force at the time the Charter became effective, except when the ordinance conflicts with provisions of the Charter, or except if the ordinance has been amended or repealed by enactments pursuant to the Charter. 
(Code 2000, § 1-1-70; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-12. - Authorized acts. 
    When this Code requires an act to be done which may as well be done by an agent or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed when done by an authorized agent or representative. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-13. - Purpose of Code. 
    The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice and promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-14. - Amending Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the section numbers of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Lamar, Colorado Municipal Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Lamar, Colorado Municipal Code, is hereby amended by the addition of a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:...." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Prior Code, § 1-4; Code 2000, § 1-3-60; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-15. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-70; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-16. - Examination of Code. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall carefully examine at least one copy of the Code adopted by this ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of this Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in this Code, the mayor and city clerk shall carefully examine at least one copy of this Code as supplemented. The copy of this Code as originally adopted or amended shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the city and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-80; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-17. - Copy of Code on file. 
    At least one copy of this Code so certified and sealed most recently shall be kept in the office of the city clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the city clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-90; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-18. - Sale of Code books. 
    Copies of this Code book may be purchased from the city clerk upon the payment of a fee, to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-19. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or official acts of the mayor and/or the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-20. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that if any provision or part of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 1-5; Code 2000, § 1-3-120; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-21. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(4)  Causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing a violation of the Code as defined in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300.00, as set forth in section 3-8 of the Charter, plus any applicable costs or charges incurred in prosecution as may be permitted by law. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  Multiple acts constituting different violations of the Code will be treated as a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by any means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent seeking and obtaining any injunctive, declaratory relief, including any and all available damages. 
(f)  Any penalty or punishment of a jail sentence prescribed in this Code or the Model Traffic Code for Colorado and the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by ordinances of the city is repealed and declared null and void. The sole punishment shall remain a fine of not more than $300.00 for each violation for which a conviction or deferred judgement is entered in the municipal court for the city. 
Sec. 1-22. - Jurisdiction over juveniles. 
(a)  Pursuant to the grant of jurisdiction contained within C.R.S. § 13-10-104, the definition of the term "child" contained within C.R.S. § 19-1-103(18), and Colorado case law, the municipal court is hereby authorized and empowered to hear and try all alleged violations of municipal ordinances of the city, alleged to have been committed by children. The grant of authority and jurisdiction herein contained shall be nonexclusive, and shall be concurrent with the juvenile courts of the state. 
(b)  Any child, within the meaning of C.R.S. § 19-1-103, shall be subject to prosecution in the municipal court, pursuant to the provisions of Rule 204, Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and the provisions of C.R.S. § 13-10-111 regarding "Commencement of Actions - Process," and directing the initiation of prosecution by the issuance of a summons and complaint; provided, however, that no such child shall be subject to the arrest and detention powers contained within said Rule 204. 
(c)  No child, upon conviction of a violation of a municipal ordinance in the municipal court, shall be incarcerated or held in detention by reason of such conviction, but rather, shall be subject to the provisions of C.R.S. § 13-10-113(4) and (5). The fine to be imposed upon any child convicted of a municipal ordinance violation in the municipal court shall be limited to an amount not in excess of $300.00 for each separate offense upon which conviction shall be had. 
(d)  Any conviction of a child upon a municipal ordinance violation shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 2, article IV, division 5 of this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-4-50; Ord. No. 932, §§ 1-4, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-23. - Monitored home detention. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be authorized to utilize monitored home detention, either standing alone or in conjunction with other authorized penalties, as a penalty imposed upon persons, including juveniles under 18 years of age, convicted of violating the municipal ordinances of the city. The municipal court is authorized to enter into such arrangements and agreements as may be necessary to provide for such monitored home detention for convicted defendants, and shall make reports concerning such arrangements to the city council when the same become effective or as may be thereafter amended. 
(b)  All costs and expenses of such monitored home detention shall be borne by the convicted violator, with the municipal court hereby being authorized to compel payment of such costs and expenses in the manner provided for in C.R.S. § 13-10-113. 
(Code 2000, § 1-4-60; Ord. No. 967, §§ 1, 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-24. - Entry onto premises for inspection or investigation. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Code or any ordinance, or whenever there is probable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any public inspector of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials and upon obtaining permission of the occupant, or if unoccupied, the owner, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by ordinance. In the event the occupant, or if unoccupied, the owner, refuses entry to such building or premises, or the public inspector is unable to obtain permission of such occupant or owner to enter such building or premises, the public inspector is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Code 2000, § 1-5-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-25. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers certified with the state, members of the fire department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the city, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics, during the course of employment with a governmental agency, are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the city without invitation from the occupant of the residence at any time such persons have reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant of such premises is incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. 
(Code 2000, § 1-5-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-26. - Announcement of purpose and authority to enter premises. 
    Unauthorized entry pursuant to section 1-25 shall be permissible only after the individuals seeking entry have announced both their purpose and authority in a loud and conspicuous voice and have waited a reasonable period of time for the occupant to respond before making entry. 
(Code 2000, § 1-5-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 1-27. - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal of the city shall consist of the words "City of Lamar, State of Colorado," arranged between two concentric circles, with the word "Seal" in the center, all of which shall be engraved upon a metallic disk, which shall be used to impress the same upon all documents requiring the seal of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1-6; Code 2000, § 1-6-10; Ord. No. 149, § 9) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Applicability of statutory provisions regarding municipal governments, C.R.S. § 31-1-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Procedure for disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of $50.00 or more, the city clerk shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last-known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the city department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the city clerk with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than $50.00, or having no last-known address of the owner, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the city clerk with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(c)  If the city clerk receives no written claim within the above 60-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(d)  If the city clerk receives a written claim within the 60-day claim period, the city clerk shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within 90 days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The city clerk may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(e)  In the event that there is more than one claimant for the same property, the city clerk may, in the city clerk's sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an interpleader action. 
(f)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the city and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(g)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the city clerk shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within 30 days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the city clerk pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(h)  The city clerk is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this article, including compliance requirements for other city officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Code 2000, § 4-4-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANNEXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Colo. Const. art. 2, § 30, right to vote or petition for annexation; Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the city in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-22. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the planning department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation and to obtain an annexation petition. 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-23. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. 
(1)  At least 15 days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the city council, the applicant shall submit to the city the annexation petition, the annexation fee as established by the city council, a minimum of 15 copies of the master plan and annexation map, and a minimum of five copies of all required supportive information. 
(2)  The planning department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy and compliance with C.R.S. § 31-12-107. If all documents are complete and accurate, the planning department shall submit the annexation petition to the city administrator. 
(3)  The city administrator shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the city council, which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the city clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure by certified mail to the clerk of the board of county commissioners and to the county attorney of the county wherein the territory is located. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least 25 days prior to the public hearing. 
(4)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the city council, the planning department shall furnish to the following entities copies of the annexation map and the master plan. The planning department may submit copies of the annexation map and the master plan to additional interested entities as determined by the planning department in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the planning department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and master plan must be submitted to the city in writing no later than seven days after receipt of the annexation map and master plan. 
a.  Telephone companies. 
b.  Franchise utility companies. 
c.  City engineer. 
d.  Fire department. 
e.  Public works department. 
f.  State department of transportation. 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the annexation map, master plan and zoning request at a public hearing evaluating the proposed area's eligibility for annexation pursuant to the criteria set forth in C.R.S. § 31-12-104 and limitations set forth in C.R.S. § 31-12-105, and the planning commission shall submit a written recommendation to the city council. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one inch represents 100 feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of 24 inches by 36 inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description. 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the city and the length of same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the planning department. 
(c)  Master plan. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one inch represents 100 feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of 24 inches by 36 inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Block numbers and lot numbers with approximate dimensions. 
(6)  Proposed gross and net residential density. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the planning department. 
(d)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the annexation map and master plan: 
(1)  Soil description and limitation. 
(2)  Preliminary utility plan. 
(3)  Mailing addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the annexation. 
(4)  Affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned. 
(5)  Vicinity map with a radius of 11/2 miles, at a minimum scale of one inch represents 2,000 feet. 
(6)  Statement on community need for the proposed annexation and zoning. 
(7)  For all annexations in excess of ten acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district governing the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to educate such students. 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-24. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten acres, the city shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation not less than 25 days before the date of the annexation hearing. Such report shall be paid for by the applicant. One copy of the impact report shall be filed with the board of county commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the board of county commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map of the city and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the city in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final pre-annexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the city's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the city's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in section 2-23(d)(7). 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-25. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this article, and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth herein and in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the city council may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the city. In the event the city council considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-26. - Final submission. 
    In the event the city council approves an annexation ordinance, the applicant shall submit to the planning department two Mylars of the final annexation map and two Mylars of the master plan within ten days of the effective date of the annexation ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § 15-1-60; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-27-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Election Code of 1965, C.R.S. § 31-10-101 et seq.; Uniform Election Code of 1992, C.R.S. § 1-1-101; recall elections, C.R.S. § 1-12-101 et seq.; also article II and article IV of the Charter; municipal home rule elections, C.R.S. § 32-2-211. 

Sec. 2-56. - Election wards. 
(a)  The city shall, until amended by the city council, be divided into three election wards for the purposes of municipal elections, as follows, to wit: 
(1)  Ward 1. Ward 1 includes all of that sector of the city being located south of East Olive Street (U.S. Highway 50) and east of South Main Street (U.S. Highway 287), except that portion of the sector being located south of Parkway Drive, north of the Fort Bent Canal, west of Parkview Avenue and east of South Main Street. 
(2)  Ward 2. Ward 2 includes all of that sector within the city being located north of East Olive Street, west of Main Street and east of Eighth Street, extended south to intersect the south city limits and extended north to intersect the north city limits. Further, all that sector being located south of Parkway Drive, north of the Fort Bent Canal, west of Parkview Avenue and east of South Main Street. Further, all of that sector north of Washington Street, west of Eighth Street, south of the Lamar Canal and east of 13th Street. 
(3)  Ward 3. Ward 3 includes all of that sector within the city being located west of Eighth Street and south of Washington Street, extended south to intersect the south city limits. 
(b)  When a street divides two wards, the boundary line is the centerline of the street. 
(Prior Code, § 2-2; Code 2000, § 2-1-10; Ord. No. 149, § 2; Ord. No. 586, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 870, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1082, §§ 1-5, 2005) 
Sec. 2-57. - Election precincts. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by section 2-2 of the city Charter, the following election precincts are established: 
(1)  In Ward 1, one precinct is hereby established and its boundaries shall be identical to and coextensive with the boundaries of such ward. Such precinct shall be known as Precinct One, Ward 1. 
(2)  In Ward 2, one precinct is hereby established and its boundaries shall be identical to and coextensive with the boundaries of such ward. Such precinct shall be known as Precinct One, Ward 2. 
(3)  In Ward 3, one precinct is hereby established and its boundaries shall be identical to and coextensive with the boundaries of such ward. Such precinct shall be known as Precinct One, Ward 3. 
(Prior Code, § 2-3; Code 2000, § 2-1-20; Ord. No. 618, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-58. - Conduct of elections. 
(a)  The Uniform Election Code of 1992, C.R.S. § 1-1-101 et seq., and the requirements and procedures for conduct of elections therein, as set forth in state statutes, is hereby adopted for the regulation of municipal elections within the city. 
(b)  The city council may provide by resolution that municipal elections, when deemed necessary, shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements and procedures of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, C.R.S. § 31-10-101. 
(Code 2000, § 2-1-30; Ord. No. 920, §§ 1, 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-59. - Write-in candidate affidavit. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-10-306, no write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the city clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to 64 days before the day of election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Code 2000, § 2-1-40; Ord. No. 922, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-60. - Cancellation of election. 
    If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office, and if, at the close of business on the Friday before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates who have filed affidavits of intent as required by section 2-59, the city clerk shall certify such fact to the city council, which shall hold a meeting, and may cancel the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected; and, as permitted by C.R.S. § 31-10-507, said candidates shall be deemed elected. The city clerk shall publish notice of such cancellation, if possible, in order to inform the electors of the city, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one other public place. 
(Code 2000, § 2-1-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-61-2-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-79. - Compensation of elected officials. 
(a)  The city shall pay a salary in an amount to be established by the council from time to time. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply or operate to violate the provisions of article XII, section 11 of the state constitution, wherein it is provided that the salary of any elected public officer shall not be increased or decreased during the term of office for which said public officer was elected. 
(Code 2000, § 2-2-10; Ord. No. 983, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-80. - Compensation of officers. 
    The officers of the city shall receive such compensation for their services as may be provided by resolution, charter, ordinance or statute, provided that the emoluments of no officer shall be increased or diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been elected or appointed. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1; Code 2000, § 2-2-20; Ord. No. 149, § 8) 
State Law reference- Emoluments not to be increased, C.R.S. § 31-4-405. 
Sec. 2-81. - Boards and commissions. 
    The city council shall create and appoint members to such boards and commissions as may now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Board of adjustment and appeals; 
(2)  Planning and zoning commission; 
(3)  Airport advisory board; 
(4)  Library advisory board; 
(5)  Parks and recreation advisory board; 
(6)  Tree advisory board; 
(7)  Utilities board; 
(8)  Victims and witnesses assistance and law enforcement board; 
(9)  Water advisory board; 
(10)  Youth services commission. 
(Code 2000, § 2-2-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-82. - Publications presented to city council. 
(a)  Reimbursement to city council. Commencing on February 25, 1976, the city clerk shall require persons requesting city council action requiring publications to pay to the city the anticipated cost of any publications of ordinances, public notices or otherwise, the estimated cost of the same to be fixed by the city clerk. 
(b)  Appeal of cost. If any person who requests action by the city council requiring publication disputes the amount required by the city clerk to be advanced, such person may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the city council at a regular city council meeting. 
(c)  Reimbursement to city attorney. If any person requests city council action requiring the services of the city attorney in drafting any such action, such person shall advance a reasonable fee, to be fixed by the city clerk and paid to the city attorney. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-4-2-6; Code 2000, § 2-2-40; Ord. No. 686, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-83-2-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-108. - Waiver of trial by jury. 
    In all trials before or in the municipal court, in cases arising under this Code or any other ordinances of the city wherein a defendant shall have the right to trial by jury, such defendant may waive trial by jury and proceed to trial by the court, in which event, the municipal judge shall record such waiver and proceed to try the case if the plea is one of not guilty. If the defendant is found guilty, the municipal judge shall fix or determine the punishment, penalty or sentence and render judgment upon such verdict for the punishment, penalty or sentence so determined, and costs. If the municipal judge shall find the defendant not guilty, the municipal judge shall record the same and discharge the defendant without costs. 
(Prior Code, § 8-4; Code 2000, § 2-3-10; Ord. No. 451, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-109. - Procedure under plea of guilty. 
    If any person accused of violating any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinances of the city, having a right to trial by jury, shall plead guilty, the municipal judge, without a jury, shall hear the evidence and fix and determine the sentence penalty or punishment, together with costs, and the municipal judge shall enter judgment and issue execution thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 8-5; Code 2000, § 2-3-20; Ord. No. 451, § 6; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-110. - Summons of jurors. 
    In all trials before or in the municipal court in cases arising under this Code or any other ordinances of the city, or under the statutes and state constitution and the United States Constitution, wherein a defendant shall have the right to trial by jury, such defendant may demand a jury which shall consist of six jurors or a lesser number, not less than three, if the same is agreed upon by the city and the defendant, and thereupon, the municipal court or the municipal judge shall issue a venire for the jury, directed to any person authorized by ordinance or statute to serve writs or other processes issued in cases in the municipal court, which shall be substantially in the following form: 
    STATE OF COLORADO 
    CITY OF LAMAR ss. 
    COUNTY OF PROWERS 
    The People of the City of Lamar, Colorado, to ___________, greeting: 
    We command you to summon _____ persons of the City of Lamar, Colorado, to appear before me at _____, on the ___ day of ________, 20___, who are not of kin to _____, defendant, to make a jury between the City of Lamar, Colorado, and defendant _____, in a plea of not guilty to a charge of a violation of one or more ordinances of the City of Lamar; because the defendant has demanded trial by jury, and have you then and there the names of the jury, and this writ. 
    Witness my hand and seal, this ___ day of ________, 20___. 
    ___________(SEAL) 
    Municipal Judge 
(Prior Code, § 8-6; Code 2000, § 2-3-30; Ord. No. 451, § 1) 
Sec. 2-111. - Failure of prospective juror to answer summons. 
    In all cases where a person shall be summoned as a juror to try any case before the municipal court, and such person shall fail to attend at the time and place appointed in such summons, the municipal court shall have the power to issue an attachment, directed to any person authorized to serve warrants of arrest in cases in the municipal court, commanding him or her forthwith to bring before such court the body of such juror so failing to attend and to show cause why he or she should not be punished for contempt. Upon appearance of such juror on such attachment, it shall be lawful for such court or municipal judge to punish him or her for contempt or wholly discharge him or her if satisfactory excuse is made. 
(Prior Code, § 8-7; Code 2000, § 2-3-40; Ord. No. 451, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-112. - Empaneling of jury; discharge of jurors. 
    If any juror summoned to try any case before the municipal court shall be interested in the event of the case, shall be kin to a defendant, shall have expressed his or her opinion on the matter about to be tried or shall, for any cause to be judged by the municipal judge, be considered as a partial or improper juror, the municipal judge shall discharge such juror. When by such discharge or the failure of any juror to attend, the jury is not complete, the municipal judge shall direct any person authorized to serve writ or other process issued in cases in the municipal court to summon as many persons as shall be required to complete such jury, instantly, from among the bystanders or other persons in the city, which summons shall be verbal. The person so summoned shall be bound to serve on such jury, and on refusal or failure to do so, may be attached and punished for contempt in all cases arising under this Code or any other ordinances of the city wherein a jury trial is had. Each party shall be entitled to three peremptory challenges. 
(Prior Code, § 8-8; Code 2000, § 2-3-50; Ord. No. 451, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-113. - Rendering of judgment; determination of penalty. 
    Upon the return of a verdict of guilty by a jury in the municipal court, the municipal judge thereof shall record the same in the docket and shall proceed to fix or determine the punishment, penalty or sentence and render judgment upon such verdict for the punishment, penalty or sentence so determined and for costs. If the jury returns a verdict of not guilty, the municipal judge shall record the same and discharge the defendant without costs. 
(Prior Code, § 8-9; Code 2000, § 2-3-60; Ord. No. 451, § 4) 
Sec. 2-114. - Compensation of jurors; guilty defendant to be assessed jury costs. 
    Each juror or member of a jury panel who attends the municipal court shall receive compensation therefor, in an amount established by the city council. The cost of such jury and jury panel shall be assessed against the defendant in the event he or she is found guilty. 
(Prior Code, § 8-10; Code 2000, § 2-3-70; Ord. No. 451, § 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-115. - Costs and penalty procedures. 
(a)  The municipal judge is hereby authorized and directed to assess costs against any defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere, who enters into a plea agreement, or who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation. Said costs shall be as set forth in subsection (l) of this section. 
(b)  Jury trials in the municipal court are hereby authorized and are to be in conformity with the provisions of C.R.S. § 13-10-114. 
(c)  The municipal judge is empowered, in his or her discretion, to assess the actual costs and expenses of incarceration of any defendant ordered incarcerated by the municipal court against the defendant. Further, the municipal judge is empowered, in his or her discretion, to assess the actual costs and expenses incurred in the transportation of any defendant ordered incarcerated against the defendant, and in the instance of any juvenile defendant requiring transportation, against the parent or legal guardian of the juvenile defendant. 
(d)  The municipal judge is empowered, in his or her discretion, to order any defendant to perform useful public service, not to exceed 40 hours, upon conviction. The municipal court may cooperate with any public agency with respect to the oversight and supervision of the performance of such useful public service, and may assess actual costs and expenses associated therewith, against the defendant performing the same. 
(e)  The municipal court is empowered to sentence defendants to complete an approved driving school, an approved alcohol and drug abuse treatment program, or both. In the context of this authority, approved schools or programs shall be those that perform in a satisfactory manner as determined by the municipal judge. Costs and expenses with respect to any such school or program shall be borne by the defendant required to attend such programs. 
(f)  The police department is empowered to provide security for the municipal court in session upon request of the municipal judge, and when deemed necessary. 
(g)  Implementation of the provisions of this section shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, state statutes and any rules of procedure adopted by the state supreme court. 
(h)  The municipal court, in its sole discretion, may allow any convicted defendant to pay any fine, fee or cost imposed upon said conviction on a delayed basis, and the municipal court, in its discretion, may impose an additional time payment fee, as set forth in subsection (l) of this section, in any instance wherein the convicted defendant does not pay any such fines, fees or costs within 24 hours after conviction. 
(i)  In the event that any convicted defendant does not make timely payment of all fines, fees and costs ordered by the municipal court, upon conviction, the convicted defendant shall be liable for an additional fee as set forth in subsection (l) of this section, per payment not timely remitted unto the municipal court. 
(j)  In the event that any defendant does not appear before the municipal court as directed by summons, summons and complaint or order of the municipal court, the defendant shall, upon conviction, be liable for the payment of an additional fee for failure to appear imposed by the municipal court. 
(k)  The police department shall charge and collect a fee for service and return on each subpoena on each witness, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in service of the same, such fee to be as set forth in subsection (l) of this section; provided, however, that no such charge shall be imposed or collected for service of subpoena issued on behalf of the people of the city. 
(l)  The amount of any fees or costs referenced in this section shall be as established by the city council pursuant to recommendation by the municipal court judge, which amounts shall be maintained by the clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 2-3-80; Ord. No. 960, 1996; Ord. No. 980, §§ 1-4, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-116. - Local emergency management board (LEMB) established; composition. 
    The local emergency management board (LEMB) is hereby established, and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall be the chairperson. 
(2)  Such deputy directors and chiefs of operating disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution, pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans', professional or other organizations having an official group or organization responsibility as may be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 7-3; Code 2000, § 2-5-30; Ord. No. 450, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-117. - Powers and duties. 
    The LEMB shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To review and recommend for adoption by the city council a local emergency operating plan (LEOP) and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. 
(2)  To meet upon the call of the chairperson, or in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the designated emergency response authority (DERA). 
(Prior Code, § 7-4; Code 2000, § 2-5-40; Ord. No. 450, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-118. - Nonliability of certain persons. 
    No person owning, maintaining or controlling any building or premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such building or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice attack, his or her successors in interest, or his or her agents or employees shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon such building or premises as a result of the condition of such building or premises or as a result of any act or omission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof, except a willful act of misconduct, when such person has entered or gone into or upon such building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during destructive operations or attacks by enemies of the United States, or during a mock or practice attack or test ordered by lawful authority. 
(Prior Code, § 7-11; Code 2000, § 2-5-50; Ord. No. 450, § 12) 
Sec. 2-119. - Certain acts prohibited. 
    No person, during a disaster, shall: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the LEMB in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act prohibited by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 7-12; Code 2000, § 2-5-60; Ord. No. 450, § 9; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-120-2-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-137-2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-156. - Creation of board. 
    There is hereby created a board to be known as the airport advisory board, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board. 
(Code 2000, § 2-6-10; Ord. No. 579, § I, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-157. - Membership qualifications; increase of membership. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be at least 18 years of age, and shall be appointed by a majority of the entire city council. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council; provided, however, that one of said seven members shall be a duly qualified member of the city council and one of said seven members shall be a duly qualified county commissioner. No member of the board, either as an individual or an owner, employee, agent or representative of a company or organization, shall be a lessee of any part of the airport premises or of any concessionaire conducting business thereon. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a person shall not be precluded from being a member of the airport advisory board because that member has leased a portion of the airport premises to house aircraft. 
(b)  A vacancy shall exist on the board when a member's term on the board has expired or when any member dies, resigns or becomes unable to perform the functions of the office, and, in the case of the city council or board of county commissioners members, when said member shall cease to serve as a member of the city council or of the board of county commissioners. Upon such vacancy, the city council shall, within 30 days thereafter, by a majority vote of the entire city council, appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the term of the vacant office. All terms of members upon the board shall be for five years. 
(Code 2000, § 2-6-20; Ord. No. 579, § II, 1968; Ord. No. 889, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 961, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 2-158. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the board, within the limitations of the city Charter, this division and other applicable law, to develop, maintain, operate and supervise the Lamar Municipal Airport, and in order to carry out its duties, the board shall have the following powers, which may be further increased or limited by resolution passed by a majority of the entire city council: 
(1)  To organize and adopt such rules of procedure and bylaws as it shall deem necessary; 
(2)  During any one fiscal year, to spend, without prior city council approval, all or any lesser sum of the money budgeted to the board for such fiscal year; and 
(3)  To prescribe and enforce such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to properly carry out its duties hereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 2-6-40; Ord. No. 579, § IV, 1968) 
Sec. 2-159. - Limitations. 
    The board shall have no authority to: 
(1)  Bind the city on any oral or written contract, except for the expenditure of budgeted money as set forth in this division, unless it obtains prior city council approval; 
(2)  Violate, declare void or dishonor any binding agreement or obligation heretofore made or entered into by the city in connection with said airport; or 
(3)  Buy or sell any interest in real property, or dispose of any personal property without prior city council approval. 
(Code 2000, § 2-6-50; Ord. No. 579, § V, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-160. - Budget. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board to present to the city council, no later than June 30 of each year, an estimate of its revenue for the ensuing year, and an estimate of its costs with respect to operation. 
(b)  Upon an adoption of a budget for the board for any given fiscal year, the city auditor and other appropriate officials are hereby authorized to honor all vouchers and expenditures by the board during said fiscal year, up to the total budget set, and without further city council action. 
(Code 2000, § 2-6-60; Ord. No. 579, § VI, 1968) 
Secs. 2-161-2-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-189. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board, which board shall be composed of seven members appointed by the city council, which members shall be appointed for staggered terms of five years each, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 2000, § 2-8-10; Ord. No. 981, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-190. - Continuation of present members. 
    Present members of the city recreation commission, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, shall continue to serve and carry out the functions, powers and duties of their offices for the remainder of their respective unexpired terms upon the commission, which commission is hereby transformed and changed into the parks and recreation advisory board. 
(Code 2000, § 2-8-20; Ord. No. 981, § 2, 1997) 
Sec. 2-191. - Reservation of seats. 
    One seat upon the board shall be reserved for a representative from the Lamar RE-2 School District, and one seat reserved for a representative from Lamar Community College. 
(Code 2000, § 2-8-30; Ord. No. 981, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-192. - Responsibilities and duties. 
    The advisory responsibilities of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To serve as an advisory body to the city council in the formation of parks and recreation policies designed to improve the quality of life of all users of parks and recreational facilities and programs, and to provide social, leisure and recreational activities for all persons of the community. 
(2)  To be aware of and responsive to the parks and recreation desires and needs of the community and its residents, and to work cooperatively with the city council and city staff to ensure that all such desires and needs are fulfilled, insofar as may be possible with respect to resources available. 
(3)  To be dedicated to the provision of parks and recreational facilities and opportunities to all users of parks and recreation facilities and programs. 
(4)  To exercise the express authority to waive fees at the Lamar Community Building for organized events or sponsors thereof. 
(5)  To exercise approval authority to name parks and recreational facilities and amenities. 
(Code 2000, § 2-8-40; Ord. No. 981, § 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-193. - General administration. 
    The board is expressly subject to the provisions of section 9-l of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Code 2000, § 2-8-50; Ord. No. 981, § 5, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-194-2-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-225. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created and established a tree advisory board for the city, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board, which board shall consist of seven persons, being limited to residents of the county, and who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 2-9-10; Ord. No. 891, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-226. - Membership. 
(a)  Board members shall serve for three-year terms, with the initial appointments to the board being as follows: 
(1)  Three members for a one-year term each; 
(2)  Two members for a two-year term each; and 
(3)  Two members for a three-year term each. 
(b)  Members of the board shall serve staggered terms. 
(c)  If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2000, § 2-9-20; Ord. No. 891, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-227. - Responsibilities and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop plans for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting and removal of trees and shrubs upon public property, and, where consented to, private property. The board shall also serve in an advisory capacity in creating new designs for planting trees and shrubs for the city. All plans, recommendations, designs and expenditures of the board must be submitted to the city council for approval prior to the commencement of any board project. 
(Code 2000, § 2-9-30; Ord. No. 891, § 3, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-228. - General administration. 
    The board shall select its own officers, shall make its own rules, regulations and procedures and shall keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. With consent of the city council, the board may consult with a forester in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 2000, § 2-9-40; Ord. No. 891, § 4, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-229. - Trees; planting and maintenance. 
    The board is hereby charged with the following additional duties: 
(1)  To develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for planting within the city in three size classes, being small, medium and large. 
(2)  To develop and maintain a list of trees not suitable for planting within southeast Colorado. 
(3)  To develop recommendatory guidelines concerning the spacing for plantings of trees, including distances by which trees should be separated from structures, other trees and plantings, and overhead and underground utilities. 
(4)  To develop and make recommendations concerning existing city ordinances pertaining to planting of trees, including the provisions of chapter 30. 
(5)  To develop guidelines concerning the care and maintenance of public trees, being those trees and other plantings now existing or hereinafter established upon public lands. 
(6)  To develop recommendatory guidelines and suggested practices concerning the pruning, removal and ordinary maintenance of trees and plantings of all kinds. 
(7)  To develop recommendatory guidelines concerning the treatment or removal of dead or diseased trees within the city in instances wherein such trees constitute a hazard to life or property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. 
(8)  To educate and disseminate information to the public concerning all of the above. 
(Code 2000, § 2-9-50; Ord. No. 895, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-230-2-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VICTIMS AND WITNESSES ASSISTANCE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

Sec. 2-252. - Creation. 
(a)  There is hereby established the victims and witnesses assistance and law enforcement board, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board. The board shall be composed of five members to be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The terms of office of each member of the board shall be three years. All vacancies upon the board shall be filled by appointment by the city council. 
(c)  Members of the board shall receive no compensation. 
(d)  The chief of police shall serve as an advisory member of the board, but shall be a nonvoting member of the board. 
(e)  The board shall designate one of its members as chairperson, shall establish rules of procedure and order, and shall hold meetings as it might deem necessary. 
(Prior Code, § 2-7; Code 2000, § 2-10-10; Ord. No. 843, § 1; Ord. No. 956, § 1, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-253. - Assessment of surcharge. 
    A surcharge equal to 37 percent of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, including ordinance violations under the model traffic code, is hereby levied on each municipal court action resulting in a conviction or in a deferred judgment and sentence, which violation is charged pursuant to city ordinances. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded up to the nearest whole dollar. If a portion of the fine is suspended, a proportionate amount of this surcharge levied shall also be suspended. If the suspension of the fine is thereafter revoked, the surcharge shall be re-imposed on the total amount of the fine imposed. The surcharges shall be paid to the municipal court clerk by the defendant, and the clerk shall deposit the money so received in the fund hereinafter created. 
(Prior Code, § 2-8; Code 2000, § 2-10-20; Ord. No. 843, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-254. - Administration of surcharge. 
    The victims and witnesses assistance and law enforcement fund is hereby established in the office of the city treasurer, hereinafter referred to in this division as the fund. The fund shall consist of all monies paid as a surcharge, as provided in section 2-253. All monies deposited in the fund shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and all interest earned by monies in the fund shall be credited to the fund. At the conclusion of each fiscal year, all monies remaining in the fund shall remain in the fund for allocation, as hereinafter set forth. 
(Prior Code, § 2-9; Code 2000, § 2-10-30; Ord. No. 843, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-255. - Disbursement of funds. 
    The board shall disburse monies from the fund in the following manner: 
(1)  First, to the payment of all reasonable and necessary expenses and costs incurred by the board in the performance of its duties, including, but not limited to, professional fees, office supplies and meeting expenses. 
(2)  Second, not in excess of 25 percent of the net aggregate of the fund remaining after the deduction of reasonable expenses and costs shall be allocated for the purchase of victims and witnesses services and reimbursements, as hereinafter set forth. 
(3)  Third, any remaining monies may be allocated to the police department for the following purposes, including, but not limited to, purchase of equipment, training programs and additional personnel. Such funds shall not be used by the police department for defraying the costs of routine and ongoing operating expenses. 
(Prior Code, § 2-10; Code 2000, § 2-10-40; Ord. No. 843, § 4) 
Sec. 2-256. - Purpose of disbursement. 
    Disbursement of funds by the board on behalf of victims and witnesses assistance services may be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Provision of services for early crisis intervention; 
(2)  Assistance in the prompt return of a victim's property; 
(3)  Assistance to victims and witnesses in arranging transportation to and from court; 
(4)  Provision of translator services; 
(5)  Protection from threats of harm and other forms of intimidation; 
(6)  Reasonable medical and hospital expenses and expenses incurred for dentures, eyeglasses, hearing aids or other prosthetic or medically necessary devices; and 
(7)  Losses resulting from property damage, including repair or replacement of property damaged as a result of crime or payment of the deductible amount on a residential or motor vehicle insurance policy in an amount not to exceed $250.00. Victims' recovery due to property damage shall not exceed $250.00 for any crime, but in no case shall a loss be compensable if the aggregate property damages are less than $25.00. 
(Prior Code, § 2-11; Code 2000, § 2-10-50; Ord. No. 843, § 5; Ord. No. 941, § 1, 1994) 
Sec. 2-257. - Applications for disbursement. 
    The board is authorized to accept and evaluate all applications for disbursement of funds, whether emanating from victims, witnesses or the police department. Applications for disbursement shall be made upon forms prescribed by the board, and made available by the police department. The board shall establish its own criteria for evaluating applications for disbursement, and nothing herein contained shall obligate the board to make disbursement of any funds available to it. Upon a finding by the board that a disbursement shall be made from the fund, the board shall submit a written request for payment to the city clerk, who shall then remit payment in accordance with the request. 
(Prior Code, § 2-12; Code 2000, § 2-10-60; Ord. No. 843, § 6) 
Secs. 2-258-2-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATER ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-278. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a water advisory board for the city, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board. The present members of the de facto water advisory board heretofore in existence are hereby reappointed and affirmed in like manner as the original appointment to said board was performed. 
(Code 2000, § 2-11-10; Ord. No. 865, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-279. - Membership; appointment. 
(a)  The board shall consist of five citizen-at-large members, to be appointed for a five-year term, and all provisions of said appointments shall be subject to section 9-1 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(b)  A member of the city council shall also be appointed by the mayor to serve as an ex officio member of the board without voting privileges. The city administrator, public works director, water and sewer supervisor and city attorney shall attend meetings of the board as required. 
(Code 2000, § 2-11-20; Ord. No. 865, § 2, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-280. - Purpose. 
    The board shall be advisory and recommendatory to the city council, and shall concern itself with the following matters: 
(1)  To develop, adopt, revise and continually update policy directed toward long-range planning for the development and conservation of adequate raw water supply for the city, including annexations, subdivisions and replats. 
(2)  To develop procedures for the transfer of water rights appurtenant to lands being annexed, subdivided or replatted, if the same should be in the best interest of the city. 
(3)  Upon request by the city council, to review annexations, subdivisions and replats, and recommend to the city council as to the adequacy of water rights, if any, to be transferred, and adequacy of water supply with respect to said annexations, subdivisions and replats. 
(4)  Upon request by the city council, to review all requests for city water supply to service areas outside the city, including extra-territorial water and/or sewer taps, and to make appropriate recommendations upon said subjects to the city council. 
(5)  Upon request by the city council, to review all matters, including pollution, concerning the raw water supply of the city. 
(6)  To recommend to the city council as to the uses, purchase or sale of any water rights affecting the water supply of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 2-11-30; Ord. No. 865, § 3, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-281. - Selection of officers; procedures. 
(a)  The board shall choose its own chairperson and other necessary officers from its citizens-at-large members, and shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the proper conduct of its business. 
(b)  Minutes of all board meetings shall be prepared and distributed on a timely basis to all board members and city councilmembers. 
(c)  Board meeting dates shall be established by the board. 
(Code 2000, § 2-11-40; Ord. No. 865, § 4, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 2-282-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - YOUTH SERVICES COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-311. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a youth services commission, hereinafter referred to in this division as the commission. 
(Code 2000, § 2-12-10; Ord. No. 985, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-312. - Duties. 
    The purpose of the commission is to be an advisory body to the city council, dealing with, considering and making recommendations with respect to all manner of issues which affect the youth of the city, including, but not limited to, recreational issues and programs, youth crime, library services, teen counseling and activities, teen employment opportunities and the like. While it is intended that the commission shall be a city council advisory body and operated as such, it is also contemplated, and the commission is encouraged, to be alert to opportunities to cooperate with other governmental entities, including the RE-2 School District and the county, by way of example, for the purpose of consideration of youth-related issues. 
(Code 2000, § 2-12-20; Ord. No. 985, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-313. - Composition of commission. 
    The commission shall be composed of seven youth members, one sitting member of city council and one city staff member, all of whom shall be appointed by the city council. Youth members shall be the voting members of the commission, with the city councilmember and city staff member being liaison members only and having no vote on the commission. Youth members shall be between the ages of 14 and 18 years, and shall serve for two-year terms; however, when an appointed youth attains the age of 18 years during his or her term, the member's tenure shall terminate, whereupon the city council shall appoint a replacement member for the remaining term of the terminated member. Initial appointments of youth members shall be on a staggered basis so as to provide for overlapping terms, in the interest of continuity of members, i.e., five initial members of the commission now appointed shall continue serving for the term of appointment, two members to be newly appointed shall serve for one-year terms, and two members also to be newly appointed shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(Code 2000, § 2-12-30; Ord. No. 985, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 996, § 3, 1998; Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 2-314. - Conduct of commission. 
    No member of the commission shall receive compensation for service, but members of the commission may be reimbursed necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of duties. All members shall be subject to removal by the city council at its pleasure and at any time without cause. The commission shall choose its own chairperson and vice-chairperson, and shall adopt rules of procedure. 
(Code 2000, § 2-12-40; Ord. No. 985, § 4, 1997) 
Secs. 2-315-2-331. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LAMAR COMMUNITY RESOURCE AND SENIOR CENTER ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-332. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a city community resource and senior center advisory board, hereinafter referred to in this division as the board, which board shall be composed of six members appointed by the city council, and which members shall be appointed for staggered terms of five years each and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 2000, § 2-14-10; Ord. No. 1039, 2001) 
Sec. 2-333. - Term and vacancy provisions. 
    The original board shall be appointed for terms as follows: two for a five-year term, one for a four-year term, one for a three-year term, one for a two-year term and one for a one-year term. Subsequent to the original appointments, each board member shall be appointed to a term of five years. Vacancies on the board shall exist when any member dies, resigns or becomes physically unable to perform the functions of his or her office. Upon such vacancy, the city council shall, within 30 days thereafter, by majority vote of the council, appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the term of the vacated office. 
(Code 2000, § 2-14-20; Ord. No. 1039, 2001) 
Sec. 2-334. - Reservation of seats. 
    One seat upon the board shall be reserved for a representative chosen by the city. One seat upon the board shall be reserved for a representative chosen by the Prowers County Commission. One seat shall be reserved for a representative chosen by Southeastern Colorado Economic Development. Three seats on the board shall be reserved for representatives chosen by the Lamar Senior Citizens, Inc. 
(Code 2000, § 2-14-30; Ord. No. 1039, 2001) 
Sec. 2-335. - Responsibilities and duties. 
    The advisory responsibilities of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To serve as an advisory board to the city council in the use, regulation and care of the Lamar Community Resource and Senior Center. 
(2)  To serve as an advisory board to the city council for the development or revision of policies and procedures designed to improve the quality of life of all users of the facility and participants in the programs and activities occurring within or at the facility. 
(3)  To be aware of and responsive to the desires and needs of the public and community as related to the use of the Lamar Community Resource and Senior Center, and to work cooperatively with the city council and city staff to ensure that all such desires and needs are fulfilled, insofar as may be possible with respect to the available resources. 
(4)  To be dedicated to the provision of a community resource and senior facility and related opportunities for use by the public. 
(5)  To exercise the express authority to waive fees at the Lamar Community Resource and Senior Center as established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(6)  To exercise decisions approving or denying use of the Lamar Community Resource and Senior Center as established by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(7)  To conduct an annual review of any operation plan and/or fee schedule adopted for use of the Lamar Community Resource and Senior Center and make recommendations to the city council as to changes to said plans or fees. 
(Code 2000, § 2-14-40; Ord. No. 1039, 2001) 
Secs. 2-336-2-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LAMAR HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-359. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through: 
(1)  The protection and preservation of the historic and cultural heritage of the city by providing for the designation of historic buildings, landmarks, sites and districts (collectively referred to hereinafter as historic sites) in accordance with this article; 
(2)  The enhancement of property values and the stabilization of historic neighborhoods, sites of historical events and the like; 
(3)  The increase of economic and financial benefits as a result of the attraction of tourists and visitors to the city; and 
(4)  The provisions of educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of the city's unique heritage. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-10; Ord. No. 1042, 2002) 
Sec. 2-360. - Board established. 
(a)  Creation. An historic preservation advisory board is hereby created, to be known as the city's historic preservation advisory board (the board), which shall have principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation as set forth in subsection (i) of this section. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of five members from the city and may include the surrounding area. 
(c)  Appointments and terms of office. Members of the board shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve three-year terms. The city council shall give reasonable opportunity to interested parties to nominate individuals to serve as members of the board. The initial terms for members shall be one member for a one-year term, two members for a two-year term, and two members for a three-year term. 
(d)  Vacancies. The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, any duly appointed member of the board shall continue to serve until the member's successor has been appointed. Members may be appointed to serve successive terms without limitation. Appointments to fill vacancies on the board shall be made by the city council; provided, however, that prior to the appointment of board members to fill vacancies for board members whose terms are ending, the city council shall give reasonable opportunity to interested parties along with the board to nominate individuals to serve as members of the board. 
(e)  Compensation removal. All members of the board shall serve without compensation except for such amounts determined appropriate by the city council to offset expenses incurred by board members in the performance of their duties as board members. All members of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the city council at any time with or without cause. 
(f)  Quorum and voting. A quorum for the board shall consist of a majority of the members of the board, excluding vacant seats. A quorum is necessary for the board to hold a meeting or to take official action. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. A tie vote shall be deemed denial of the motion or recommended action. 
(g)  Officers. The board shall, by majority vote, elect one of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the board's meetings and one member to serve as secretary. The members so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one year and may serve successive terms. 
(h)  Meetings. The board shall hold at least one regularly scheduled meeting per calendar quarter, or as necessary to take action on pending matters. Minutes shall be kept of all board meetings. The board shall comply with all requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act (C.R.S. §§ 24-6-401 and 24-6-402 et seq.) applicable to local public bodies as defined in that Act. 
(i)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The board shall: 
a.  Review applications for designation of sites as being historic pursuant to this division and make recommendations to the city council as to whether the city council should, by resolution, designate the site described in the application for such designation based upon the criteria established in section 2-361 and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
b.  As needed, review the criteria for designation of historic sites set forth in section 2-361 and make recommendations to the city council for amendments thereto which the board believes appropriate or necessary. 
(2)  In addition to the above duties, the board may, at its discretion: 
a.  Advise and assist owners of historic properties on the physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, including nomination to the Colorado Register of Historic Properties and National Register of Historic Places. 
b.  Develop and assist in public education programs including, but not limited to, walking tours, brochures, a marker program of historic properties, lectures and conferences. 
c.  Conduct surveys of historic sites for the purpose of defining those of historic significance and prioritizing the importance of identified historic sites. 
d.  Advise the city council on matters related to preserving the historic character of the city. 
e.  Pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs. 
f.  Perform duties or functions as assigned by the city council. 
(j)  Rules and procedures for board. The board may establish additional rules of operation that are consistent with its duties as enumerated herein. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-20; Ord. No. 1042, 2002; Ord. No. 1215, 12-27-2016) 
Sec. 2-361. - Criteria for designation of historic sites. 
(a)  In order to qualify for designation as an historic site pursuant to this division, the site must be determined to have historic significance due to one or more of the following factors: 
(1)  Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Lamar, County of Prowers, State of Colorado or the United States of America. 
(2)  Its location as a site of a significant historic event. 
(3)  Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City of Lamar, County of Prowers, State of Colorado or the United States of America. 
(4)  Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historic heritage of the City of Lamar, County of Prowers, State of Colorado or the United States of America. 
(5)  Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style. 
(6)  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen. 
(7)  Its identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City of Lamar, County of Prowers, State of Colorado or the United States of America. 
(8)  Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship that represent a significant architectural innovation. 
(9)  Its relation to other distinctive areas that are eligible for preservation according to a plan based on an historic, cultural or architectural motif. 
(10)  Its unique location or singular physical characteristic representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the city. 
(11)  Its potential to make important contributions to the understanding and knowledge of the area's history or pre-history. 
(b)  And in addition, if the site seeking designation comprises a district, it must be geographically definable. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-30; Ord. No. 1042, 2002; Ord. No. 1215, 12-27-2016) 
Sec. 2-362. - Designation of historic sites. 
(a)  Recommendation for designation of historic sites. Pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth in this section, the board may, by written recommendation to the city council, propose the designation as an historic site of any building, landmark, site or district meeting the criteria set forth in section 2-361, as amended from time to time. Each such designation recommendation shall include a description of the characteristics of the site which justify its designation and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic site. The designation recommendation may also indicate alterations which would have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the historic features of the site. Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of this section. 
(b)  Notification requirements. The site included in any such designation shall be subject to the notification requirements set forth in section 2-365. 
(c)  Procedures for designating historic sites for preservation. Applications for designation must be made to the board. The board may require that such application be made in such form as specified by the board. Application shall be made only by the owners of 100 percent of the historic site for which an application is submitted. If the site to be considered is a district, written consent must be demonstrated from at least 70 percent of all property owners within the proposed district. 
(1)  Board review. The board shall review the application for conformance with the criteria for designation established in section 2-361, as it may be amended, and with the purposes of this section. The board shall consider the application at a regularly scheduled or special meeting. The board shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the application. The board shall notify the city administrator within seven days of any decision approving or disapproving an application. 
(2)  City council action. Unless an application is withdrawn by the applicant within 60 days of the date on which the city council is advised of any decision of the board recommending approval or disapproval of an application, the city council shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposed designation. The city council shall advise the board of its decision regarding the designation. 
(3)  Recordation. Within 30 days of designation approval by the city council, such designation will be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-40; Ord. No. 1042, 2002; Ord. No. 1215, 12-27-2016) 
Sec. 2-363. - Limitation on resubmission and reconsideration of proposed designations. 
    Whenever the board or city council disapproves an application for designation of an historic site, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least six months from the effective date of the final city action on the original application. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-50; Ord. No. 1042, 2002) 
Sec. 2-364. - Amendment of designation. 
    Designation of an historic site may be amended to add features or property to the site under the procedures prescribed in section 2-362 for initial designations. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-60; Ord. No. 1042, 2002) 
Sec. 2-365. - Notification. 
    Any owner filing an application for designation of property under this article shall, as a part of the application, agree to notify the board of the owner's intentions to alter, demolish, move or remove the site subject to the application at least 30 days prior to undertaking any such work. Any such owner shall be responsible for notifying any subsequent purchaser of the property of this notification requirement and the board may revoke the designation of the site hereunder unless the subsequent purchaser agrees in writing to the provisions of this section. The board shall review work associated with such notification for adherence to the Secretary of the Interior's standards for the treatment of historic properties and provide comments to the owner to encourage work in keeping with the intent and spirit of these standards. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-70; Ord. No. 1042, 2002; Ord. No. 1215, 12-27-2016) 
Sec. 2-366. - Revocation of designation. 
    If a building or special feature on a designated site has changed or been altered in such a way as to negate the features necessary to retain designation, the owner may apply to the board for a revocation of the designation, or the board shall recommend revocation of the designation to the city council in the absence of the owner's application to do so. 
(Code 2000, § 2-15-80; Ord. No. 1042, 2002; Ord. No. 1215, 12-27-2016) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except human beings. 
    Animal control officer means any person who is employed by the city and authorized by the chief of police to administer and enforce this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means a facility operated by the city, or with which the city may contract, for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals. 
    At large. An animal shall be deemed to be running at large when off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper or lessee, and not under control thereof. An animal shall also be deemed to be running at large when not under control on the common grounds of condominiums, townhomes, apartment complexes and mobile home parks. 
    Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Control. An animal shall be construed to be under control of a person as follows: 
(1)  Confinement within a vehicle, fencing or other adequate enclosure where the animal has no access to passersby; 
(2)  Attachment to a leash not over six feet in length and held by a person of sufficient size and strength to restrain the animal; or 
(3)  Tethered on the premises of its owner, possessor, keeper or lessee such that it does not have access to passersby on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
Nothing herein shall restrict the ordinary uses of Seeing Eye and hearing-aid animals. 
    Humane manner means care of an animal, including, but not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter and wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
    Kennel means any establishment or dwelling unit kept or being used for the purpose of keeping, boarding, breeding, buying, selling, grooming, letting for hire or engaging in the training of animals. 
    Leash or lead means a thong, cord, rope, chain or similar device which holds an animal in restraint and which is not more than six feet in length. 
    Neighborhood means the area within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property where the animal is kept. 
    Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or association owning any animal, or having the same in his or her care, custody or control, or who causes, encourages or suffers the same to remain upon his or her premises for a period of more than three days. 
    Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event other than a circus in which performing animals are used. 
    Pet means any animal customarily kept for pleasure, rather than for utility. 
    Pit bull means any pit bull that is an American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, or any pit bull displaying the physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds, or any pit bull exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics that conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (AKC) or United Kennel Club (UKC) for any of the above breeds. 
    Premises means real property owned, rented, leased, used, kept or occupied by a person. 
    Rabies vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health. 
    Restraint means physical control by use of a lead or leash. 
    Trap means any device used to contain or capture an animal. 
    Veterinary hospital means any premises upon which a licensed veterinarian performs surgery, makes diagnoses and treats diseases of, and injuries to, animals. 
    Vicious animal means an animal that bites or attacks human beings or other animals or in a vicious or terrorizing manner attacks or approaches in an attitude of attack upon a person upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other place or ground, except when in reasonable defense of persons. A dog kept or possessed for protection or security purposes which, by its nature or training, would otherwise come under the foregoing provision shall not be deemed vicious so long as it is securely confined in an enclosure or securely attached to a chain, rope or cord of sufficient size and strength to reasonably secure the animal and keep it physically segregated from persons other than its owner, custodian or possessor. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-10; Ord. No. 859, § 4-1, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1196, §§ 1, 2, 2015) 
Sec. 4-2. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally. All fees established herein are subject to revision by the chief of police or city administrator, and approval by the city council. 
(b)  Adoption. Any person adopting a dog from the animal shelter shall pay a fee as established by the city council. 
(c)  Euthanasia. Any owner of any animal for which a request for euthanasia has been made may pay a fee as established by the city council. Such owner shall submit written verification of ownership of the animal to be euthanized. 
(d)  Impoundment. Any person claiming an animal from the animal shelter or other location of impoundment shall pay a fee as established by the city council, and any other costs of examination, testing and treatment which may reasonably be incurred for the care of the animal. The fees and costs shall be paid when and how more specifically provided herein, or as otherwise required by law. 
(e)  Duration of license. The license provided for by this chapter shall remain in effect for the duration of the registered owner's ownership of the dog. 
(f)  Replacement tag. Any person requesting a replacement tag shall pay a fee as established by the city council for each tag requested. 
(g)  Quarantine. The owner of any animal quarantined pursuant to this chapter shall pay a fee as established by the city council for each day the animal is held in the animal shelter. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-20; Ord. No. 859, § 4-7, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1150, § 1, 2010) 
Secs. 4-3-4-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND VACCINATIONS 

Sec. 4-23. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall, without obtaining a city license therefor, own, keep or harbor any dog over six months of age. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, educational facilities, laboratories, properly licensed commercial establishments and animals kept in connection with farming operations. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-200; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-24. - Deadline for application. 
    An applicant for a dog license shall apply for said license within five days of becoming the owner of any such dog, or immediately after such dog is brought into the city. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-210; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988) 
Sec. 4-25. - Application; where to file; contents. 
(a)  An applicant for a dog license shall apply to the police department or such other locations as designated by the city council. 
(b)  Such application shall be upon forms provided by the city and shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner; 
(2)  The call name, breed, age, color and sex of the dog, and information to properly identify the dog, including microchipping and tattooing information; 
(3)  The signature of the owner attesting to the ownership of the dog. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-220; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988) 
Sec. 4-26. - Proof of vaccination. 
    Any owner applying for a dog license shall obtain a certificate of rabies vaccination from a licensed veterinarian. Said certificate shall accompany the application for license, unless otherwise provided by this article. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-240; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988) 
Sec. 4-27. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    The certificate of vaccination required by this article shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog; 
(2)  The date of vaccination and the type of rabies vaccine used; 
(3)  The date of expiration of the vaccination; and 
(4)  The breed, age, color and sex and any identifying information of the vaccinated dog. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-250; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988) 
Sec. 4-28. - Dog tag requirements. 
(a)  Upon acceptance of the completed license application, the police department shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and year of issuance. 
(b)  The owner or custodian shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the dog so licensed. Said collar or harness shall be worn by such dog at all times that it is outside the owner's premises. 
(c)  A duplicate tag may be obtained upon payment of the required replacement tag fee, as described in section 4-2(f). 
(d)  The police department shall maintain a record of all tags issued according to this article, and such record may be inspected by the public at reasonable hours, but in such a manner as not to interfere unduly with the regular business of the office. 
(Code 2000, §§ 7-6-260-7-6-280; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-29. - License revocation or suspension; exceptions. 
    Upon conviction of violation of this chapter, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of this chapter, the city may revoke the license and require the violator to dispose or sell all animals owned, kept or harbored by the violator. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-290; Ord. No. 859, § 4-3, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 4-30-4-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VIOLATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, C.R.S. § 18-9-201 et seq. 

Sec. 4-47. - Abandonment. 
    It is unlawful to leave any animal unattended for more than 48 consecutive hours without providing for humane care of said animal. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-600; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-48. - Cruelty. 
    It is unlawful to engage or permit any activity that constitutes cruelty to animals as provided in C.R.S. § 18-9-202; no person shall torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal; or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals, or between animals and human beings. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-610; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, C.R.S. § 18-9-201; animal fighting, penalty, C.R.S. § 18-9-204. 
Sec. 4-49. - Confining in vehicle. 
(a)  It is unlawful to confine any animal within a parked, closed vehicle without allowing cross-ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering heat exhaustion, heat stroke or death. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall any person confine any animal in a parked, closed vehicle on any public street, alley or parking lot for a period exceeding 30 minutes. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or police officer observing any animal kept in violation of this article may enter the vehicle and impound such animal to protect its well-being. Any officer making entry into a vehicle for the purposes of this article shall leave written notice in the vehicle informing the animal owner of the impoundment of said animal. 
(d)  Any officer making entry into a vehicle for purposes of this article shall be immune from suit or liability, criminal or civil, for, caused by, or arising out of such entry. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-620; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-50. - Disturbing peace and quiet. 
(a)  No owner of an animal in the city shall permit such animal to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking, whining, howling or making any other noise in a continuous or excessive manner. 
(b)  No owner of any animal in the city shall permit such animal to interfere with the sleep of any person of ordinary sensibilities between sunset and sunrise by barking, whining, howling or making any other noise in an excessive or continuous manner. 
(c)  The animal control officer or police officer has authority, without liability, to use all reasonable means to abate such violation, including the authority to impound such animal upon receipt of a signed complaint when the owner is absent from the premises; provided, however, that this authority does not extend to entering the owner's dwelling or other buildings upon the owner's premises. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-630; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-51. - Animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, keep, have in his or her possession or harbor any domesticated animals which, by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking or otherwise, shall cause annoyance or disturbance to persons in the neighborhood; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to hospitals licensed for the treatment of small animals or to premises occupied or used by the city animal shelter. 
(Code 2000, § 10-9-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-52. - Enclosures; prohibited to open. 
    It is unlawful to, in any manner, open directly or indirectly or aid or assist in opening any pen, fence or other enclosure with intent of releasing any animal confined therein, or to create an opening, which opening will permit the release of the animal so confined without the authorization of the owner or custodian of such animal. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-640; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-53. - Misrepresentation of license application. 
    It is unlawful for any person applying for a city dog license to knowingly make any material misrepresentation in the license application. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-660; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-54. - Tags; prohibited use. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of a license tag for an animal other than the animal for which such tag was duly issued. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-670; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-55. - Poison exposure. 
(a)  It is unlawful to expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that a reasonable person would know or should know that such substance would probably cause animals to be attracted thereto, eat thereof and be poisoned thereby. 
(b)  This article does not prohibit the poisoning of rats or mice with commercial rat poison mixed with vegetable substances, or poisoning conducted by or under the direction of state or federal wildlife officials. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-680; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-56. - Releasing from restraint. 
    It is unlawful to, without the consent of the owner, release any animal from restraint or confinement, except when necessary to preserve the life of such animal, provided that when an animal is released under such necessity, the person making such release shall immediately inform an animal control officer or the police department that he or she has done so, and if possible, immediately return the animal to the owner. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-700; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
State Law reference- Unauthorized release of certain animals, C.R.S. § 18-9-206. 
Sec. 4-57. - Running at large. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner, possessory keeper or lessee of any animal to fail to prevent the same from running at large. Any animal found running at large may be impounded by an animal control officer or police officer, as provided herein. 
(b)  It is lawful for any officer to go upon any property, using such force as may be reasonably necessary, for the purpose of pursuing and capturing any animal running at large for the purpose of securing and/or impounding the animal pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  If any animal is found at any place within the city other than upon the premises of the owner, and not under control, the owner is presumed to have violated this article. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-720; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-58. - Taking without permission. 
    It is unlawful for any person to take and deliver to the animal shelter or elsewhere any animal not his or her own unless first receiving written permission from the lawful owner of such animal, unless authorized by this article. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-730; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-59. - Inhumane trap setting; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful to set any type of steel-jawed trap or any other inhumane trap which, by its nature, may kill or maim any animal or human being. 
(b)  This section does not prohibit the use of common rat or mouse traps or traps set by, or under the direction of, state or federal wildlife officials. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-740; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
Sec. 4-60. - Vicious animals prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, harbor or possess any vicious animal in the city, except as provided by this article. 
(b)  An animal is not a vicious animal because it has bitten or attacked any or all of the following persons: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the unlawful entry into or upon the animal owner's premises where the animal is kept; 
(2)  Any person engaged in the unlawful entry into the animal owner's vehicle wherein such animal is confined; 
(3)  Any person engaged in attempting to stop a fight between such animal and another animal; 
(4)  Any person engaged in attempting to aid such animal when it is injured. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a person is lawfully upon the private property of such owner when he or she is on the property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by the laws of the state or the city, or the law or postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property at the invitation, expressed or implied, of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-760; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988) 
State Law reference- City may adopt non-breed-specific dangerous dog controls, C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5. 
Sec. 4-61. - Vicious animals; warnings and criminal charges. 
(a)  When an animal control officer or police officer of the city deems an animal to be vicious, he or she shall issue a written warning to the owner of said animal, stating his or her determination that such animal is vicious, or he or she may cause charges to be filed as provided by C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5. 
(b)  In the event the municipal court finds that the evidence supports a charge made that an animal is vicious, the municipal judge may order, in addition to the penalties provided in C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5, that the owner be prohibited from keeping such animal within the city limits. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-770; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Unlawful ownership of dangerous dogs, C.R.S. § 18-9-204.5. 
Sec. 4-62. - Kennels unlawful; limitation on number of dogs kept. 
(a)  Limit. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain more than three dogs within the city. It is also unlawful for any person to operate a kennel within the city. 
(b)  Keeping defined. As used herein, the keeping of dogs includes the ownership, possession, care, custody, control or maintenance of a dog. 
(c)  Exemptions. Veterinary clinics, pet stores, dog groomers and circuses are exempt from the provisions of this section. Members of a dog rescue organization who are assisting the rescue organization by temporarily keeping one or more dogs until a proper, permanent home can be found for the animals may temporarily keep these dogs (which are available for adoption), in addition to as many as three dogs which are owned or otherwise kept by the members; provided, however, that the rescue organization is recognized and approved by the chief of police. 
(d)  Grandfather provision. Any person keeping or maintaining more than three dogs at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may register his or her nonconforming status with the police department and may continue to keep and maintain those particular dogs during the dogs' lifetime; provided, however, that each of these dogs must be legally licensed at the time of registration and must remain licensed during its entire grandfather period. Any owner who fails to register within 90 days of the adoption of said ordinance from which this article is derived loses the right to keep and maintain more than three dogs. In the event that a grandfathered dog dies or otherwise is no longer kept or maintained within the city, its owner may not replace the dog. It is the intention of this provision that eventually all grandfathered dogs will, at the conclusion of their natural lifetimes, result in all owners being in compliance with the limitations imposed by this section. If an owner fails to maintain proper licensing, that owner will also lose grandfather status in regard to the unlicensed dog and this section may be enforced by requiring the owner to remove the unlicensed dog from his or her ownership, possession, care, custody, control or maintenance. If a grandfathered owner should move outside of the city and then attempt to return, the owner must comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-790; Ord. No. 1150, § 3, 2010) 
Sec. 4-63. - Keeping of certain animals prohibited. 
    Except as provided for in section 30-170 et seq., no person shall keep any horse, ass, mule, sheep, swine, goat, goose, turkey, chicken or fowl within the city, and the keeping of the same within the city is a nuisance. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-810; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-64. - Pit bulls required to be spayed or neutered. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog within the city that the person in possession knew, or should have known, was a pit bull that has not been spayed or neutered. 
(b)  Exceptions to the requirement that a pit bull be spayed or neutered include the following: 
(1)  The pit bull is under eight weeks of age. 
(2)  The pit bull cannot be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to a physical abnormality. A veterinarian must certify such a condition exists in the animal and the period of time after which the pit bull can be spayed or neutered. 
(3)  The pit bull has been present in the city for less than 30 days. 
(4)  The owner, keeper or harborer has obtained a license to keep an intact pit bull. 
(c)  License for keeping an intact pit bull: 
(1)  An owner, keeper or harborer of a pit bull which is either a show dog or a breeding dog may obtain a non-transferable intact pit bull license valid for a period of one year. The license may be obtained from the police department if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The applicant has provided a copy of the American Kennel Club (AKC) or United Kennel Club (UKC) registration, registration number, and pedigree documents for the dog. 
b.  If the intact pit bull will be used for breeding, the applicant must possess a city business license. If more than one owner, keeper or harborer is involved in the breeding process, each party must apply for and be granted a business license and an intact pit bull license. Sections 4-1 and 4-62 shall apply. 
c.  If the intact pit bull is a show dog, the owner, keeper or harborer must provide documentation that the animal has participated in at least one sanctioned dog show within the previous 365 days. 
d.  The application shall be accompanied by a license fee for the dog. The license fee shall be in accordance with section 4-2. 
e.  Upon approval of the application and the payment of the applicable fee, an intact pit bull tag shall be issued for the dog. 
(2)  The intact pit bull license must be renewed annually for so long as the owner, keeper or harborer continues to maintain the intact animal. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-820; Ord. No. 1196, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 4-65. - Exotic, dangerous and unusual animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, sell or in any other manner traffic in any of the following animals, except as specifically provided for herein, such animals being: 
(1)  Poisonous reptiles; 
(2)  Gorillas, chimpanzees, baboons, orangutans and any other primate that normally grows to more than 30 pounds in weight; 
(3)  Any species of felines not falling within the category of ordinary domesticated house cats; 
(4)  Bears of any species; and 
(5)  Foxes, wolves, coyotes or other species of canines other than dogs. 
(Prior Code, § 4-26; Code 2000, § 7-6-800; Ord. No. 644, § 1; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-66. - Exceptions to restriction. 
(a)  Section 4-65 shall not apply to any of such animals as may be a part of any circus, carnival or similar show duly licensed to perform within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything heretofore in this article, any person engaged in the capture of any animal named in section 4-65, not for profit, but for the purpose of supplying the same to persons or entities outside of the city for medical or other such research, may keep any of the same within the city for a period not to exceed 30 days and then only in such pens, cages or other places of confinement as may be approved in advance by the police department. 
(Prior Code, § 4-27; Code 2000, § 7-6-830; Ord. No. 644, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 859, § 4-5, 1988; Ord. No. 1196, § 4, 2015) 
Secs. 4-67-4-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, vaccination and reporting requirements, C.R.S. § 25-4-3601 et seq. 

Sec. 4-91. - Rabies control; requirements. 
(a)  Inoculation required. The owner of every dog over the age of six months shall keep said animal vaccinated against rabies. No such rabies vaccine shall be administered until after a ten-day observation period has expired after any dog has inflicted a bite on any person or other animal. 
(b)  Attachment of tags. Concurrently with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to herein, the owner of the vaccinated animal shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance. Said collar or harness shall be worn by such animal at all times it is outside the owner's premises. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-500; Ord. No. 859, § 4-4, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-92. - Bites; reporting and quarantine. 
(a)  The owner of any animal that bites a human being shall report the occurrence to the animal control section of the police department when such bite incident is known to said owner, or is reported to him or her. Said owner shall provide any further information requested of him or her. 
(b)  Any animal that bites a human being shall be quarantined for a period of not less than ten days from the date of the bite. The animal shall be quarantined at the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital at the owner's expense. If the owner cannot be immediately notified, the animal shall be quarantined at the animal shelter or veterinary hospital until such time as the owner is located. The expenses of such quarantine shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(c)  Failure to quarantine is a violation of this article. 
(d)  Reporting of rabies cases and bites by rabid or suspected animals per C.R.S. § 25-4-601 et seq. Every person having knowledge thereof shall report to the animal control section of the police department any suspected or positively diagnosed occurrence of rabies and any biting by any suspected or confirmed rabid animal. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-510; Ord. No. 859, § 4-4, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 4-93-4-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Impounded animals, costs of impoundment, care, provision, and disposition, C.R.S. § 18-9-202.5. 

Sec. 4-113. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal may be impounded if the animal is the subject matter of a violation, or an investigation of a violation, of any provision of federal, state and local law, including the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of an animal that has been impounded because of alleged violation of this chapter may prevent disposition of the animal by filing a payment for impoundment, care, and provision costs with the court in an amount determined by the city council to be sufficient to provide for the animal's care and provision at the impound agency for at least 30 days, including the day on which the animal was taken into custody. Animals impounded shall be kept, cared for and disposed of as provided by this Code. 
(c)  Animals impounded for rabies or suspected rabies shall be treated as provided by C.R.S. § 25-4-601 et seq., or any other rules as may be established by the appropriate local or state agency responsible for rabies control. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-400; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988) 
Sec. 4-114. - Notice procedure. 
(a)  Upon the impoundment of an animal, it shall be the duty of the police department to make a reasonable investigation to determine the owner or custodian of the animal and to notify the owner or custodian, if known, of the animal's impoundment and the requirements for its release, and the time and place the animal will be offered for sale, if applicable; and if the animal is not claimed within six business days from the date of notification, it will be considered to be abandoned and be disposed of in accordance with this article. 
(b)  A written notice shall be posted in the police department daily, listing all animals impounded within that time period. Said notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location for a period of five business days, shall contain a description of the animals impounded and the date of impoundment, and shall state that if the animal is not claimed within six business days from the date of said notice, it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-410; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Procedure for disposal of impounded animals, C.R.S. § 18-9-202.5. 
Sec. 4-115. - General procedure. 
(a)  All animals impounded shall be kept for the period provided by law to ensure the protection of the general welfare of the public and for the safety of the animal. No female animal in estrus shall be released unless the owner or custodian has facilities for the caring and confining of the animal in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that the female cannot come into contact with a male animal, except for planned breeding. 
(b)  No animal shall be released until the production of satisfactory proof of ownership thereof, payment of all applicable fees and incurred expenses, and submission of proof of all applicable licensing and inoculation. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of six business days from the date of impoundment, all unclaimed animals shall be considered abandoned, and may be adopted by any person upon payment of all applicable fees and submission of evidence of applicable licensing and inoculation. Said evidence shall be submitted to the police department no later than 72 hours after the date of adoption. All animals not claimed or adopted shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the chief of police. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to restrict or limit the rights and procedures set out in C.R.S. § 18-9-202.5, including the owner's right to require examination by a veterinarian within 72 hours, have a hearing or any other procedure outlined in statute. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-420; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-116. - Disposal or adoption authorization. 
(a)  Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within the time period established in section 4-115 may be humanely euthanized or adopted. 
(b)  Any animal may be euthanized or adopted prior to the expiration of said time period if specifically requested by the lawful owner. Said request shall be made in writing, on forms furnished by the police department. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-440; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-117. - Injured or sick animals. 
(a)  If, in the judgment of an animal control officer or police officer, an impounded animal is in need of immediate treatment for illness or injury, the officer may take the animal directly to a licensed veterinarian. The costs of treatment shall remain the responsibility of the owner and may be recovered by the city. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, an impounded animal is experiencing extreme pain or suffering or is severely injured past recovery, severely disabled past recovery, or severely diseased past recovery, the animal may be euthanized without a court order, pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-9-202.5. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-450; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988) 
Sec. 4-118. - Release of animals. 
    An animal control officer shall not release, except to a veterinarian, any animal which is reasonably thought to be vicious and a threat to public safety, or shows signs of rabies infection. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-460; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 4-119. - Costs, fees and charges. 
    An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall be assessed a fee as set forth in section 4-2, which shall be paid prior to the animal being released to the owner or at the owner's direction. In addition, the owner shall pay all costs incurred in veterinary fees for the animal, if any. 
(Code 2000, § 7-6-470; Ord. No. 859, § 4-2, 1988) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  An administrative official designated by the city council shall administer and enforce this chapter. He or she may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. 
(b)  If the administrative official shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-10; Ord. No. 839, § 900.01, 1986) 
Sec. 6-2. - Building permits. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of this article, unless the administrative official has received a written order from the board of adjustment and appeals in the form of an administrative review, special exception or variance, as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-20; Ord. No. 839, § 900.02, 1986) 
Sec. 6-3. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of any buildings already existing; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative official, including any existing or proposed buildings or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the buildings and land; the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this chapter. 
(b)  One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he or she shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved, and attested to the same by his or her signature on such copy. The original and one copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-30; Ord. No. 839, § 900.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-4. - Certificates of zoning compliance. 
(a)  It is unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use of a structure, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the administrative official, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the administrative official for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building, pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(c)  The administrative official shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance and a copy shall be furnished, upon request, to any person. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-40; Ord. No. 839, § 900.04, 1986) 
Sec. 6-5. - Expiration of building permit. 
(a)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and shall be cancelled by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
(b)  If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-50; Ord. No. 839, § 900.05, 1986) 
Sec. 6-6. - Construction and use to be as authorized. 
    Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this article, and punishable as provided by section 30-738. 
(Code 2000, § 16-19-60; Ord. No. 839, § 900.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 6-7-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM STANDARDS CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-31-6-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-49. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the building code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Building Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health. 
(Code 2000, § 18-1-10; Ord. No. 975, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 2002; Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-50. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Building Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-1-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-51. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 101.4.1, Electrical, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(3)  Section 101.4.4, Plumbing, is amended by deleting the final sentence reading: "The provision of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems." 
(4)  Section 101.4.7, Energy, is deleted and replaced with the following: 
"All new and remodeled structures will have a minimum of R-13 insulation in the walls and R-30 in the ceilings. Windows will be the thermal type, and exterior doors will have storm doors or will be of the insulated type, which includes solid core wood." 
(5)  Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, is amended by changing "24" to "48" and "5,000 gallons" to "10,000 gallons" in paragraph 9, and by deletion of "accessory to one- and two-family dwellings." 
(6)  Section 107.3, Temporary power, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code " with "current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(7)  Section 108.3, Building permit valuations, is amended by adding the phrase "by means of the Building Valuation Data Sheet as printed in the latest edition of the Building Safety Journal or other accepted means" to the last sentence. 
(8)  Section 109.3.5, Lath and gypsum board inspection, is amended by deleting the exception. 
(9)  Section 110.1, Use and occupancy, is amended by the addition of "Exception: Group U occupancies." 
(10)  Section 110.2, Certificate issued, is amended by the deletion of paragraphs 1, 7 and 11. 
(11)  Section 201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is amended by the addition of "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado" after "International Mechanical Code." 
(12)  Section 406.1.4, Separation, is amended by changing "1/2-inch (12.7 mm)" to " 5/8 -inch Type X." 
(13)  Table 1004.1.1, Maximum floor area allowance per occupant, is amended by inserting "Dancing, 5 gross." 
(14)  Section 1301.1.1, Energy efficiency, is amended as follows: 
a.  "International Energy Conservation Code" is deleted and replaced with the following: 
"All new and remodeled structures will have a minimum of R-13 insulation in the walls and R-30 in the ceilings. Windows will be the thermal type, and exterior doors will have storm doors or will be of the insulated type, which includes solid core wood." 
b.  The following exception is added: 
"Commercial or industrial applications that will not be heated to more than 52 degrees Fahrenheit. In which case, the walls will have R-11 insulation and ceilings will have R-11 insulation." 
(15)  Table 1607.1, Minimum uniformly distributed live loads and minimum concentrated live loads, is amended by changing habitable attics and sleeping areas from "30" to "40." 
(16)  Section 1805.2.1, Frost protection, is amended by replacing "below the frost line of the locality" with "32 inches deep." 
(17)  Section 1805.4.5, Timber footings, is deleted in its entirety. 
(18)  Section 1805.5.6, Wood foundations, is deleted in its entirety. 
(19)  Section 1808.1, Definitions, is amended by deleting "Timber piles" and its definition. 
(20)  Section 1809.1, Timber piles, is deleted in its entirety. 
(21)  Section 1907, Details of enforcement, is amended by the addition of a new section 1907.5.1 as follows: 
"Minimum lap of deformed reinforcement bars. Reinforcement bars will be lapped a minimum of 36 bar diameters and will be tied a minimum of twice." 
(22)  Section 2303.4.2, Metal-plate-connected trusses, is deleted in its entirety. 
(23)  Section 2701.1, Scope, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(24)  Section 2901.1, Scope, is amended by deleting "Private sewage disposal system shall conform to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code." 
(25)  Section 3103, Temporary structures, is deleted in its entirety. 
(26)  Chapter 32, Encroachments into the public right-of-way, is deleted in its entirety. 
(27)  Chapter 33, Safeguards during construction, is deleted in its entirety. 
(28)  Section 3401.3, Compliance with other codes, is amended by deleting "International Private Sewage Disposal Code" and "ICC Electrical Code" and inserting "current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(29)  Section 3410, Compliance alternatives, is deleted in its entirety. 
(30)  Chapter 35, Referenced standards, is amended by deleting "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" and replacing it with "The electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(31)  Appendix A, Employee qualifications, is deleted in its entirety. 
(32)  Section B101.2.1, Alternate members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(33)  Section B101.2.2, Qualifications, is deleted in its entirety. 
(34)  Section B101.2.7, Compensation of members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(35)  Section B101.3, Notice of meeting, is amended by replacing "chairperson" with "building department." 
(36)  Section B101.4.1, Resolution, is amended by deleting "Certified." 
(37)  Appendix D, Fire districts, is deleted in its entirety. 
(38)  Appendix E, Supplementary accessibility requirements, is deleted in its entirety. 
(39)  Appendix G, Flood-resistant construction, is deleted in its entirety. 
(40)  Appendix H is amended as follows: 
a.  Section H104, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
b.  Section H109.1, Height restrictions, is amended by replacing "100 feet" with "45 feet." 
c.  Section H110.4, Height of open signs, is amended by replacing "75 feet" with "24 feet" and replacing "40 feet" with "24 feet." 
d.  Section H110.5, Height of closed signs, is amended by replacing "50 feet" with "24 feet" and replacing "35 feet" with "24 feet." 
e.  Section H115, Reference standards, is amended by deleting "ICC EC-06" and replacing it with "The electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(41)  Appendix K, ICC Electrical Code, is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Building Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-1-30; Ord. No. 975, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 978, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-52. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance for any person to maintain any property, building or any other structure in the city in a condition which is in violation of the building code or chapter 30. 
(Code 2000, § 18-1-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 6-53-6-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-78. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the electrical code of the city, by reference thereto, the National Electrical Code, 1999 edition, and all appendices, tables and examples thereto as may be updated and amended from time to time, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269. The purpose of the adopted code is to protect the health, safety and lives of the residents of the city. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive rules and regulations governing materials, methods of installation, inspection and other matters pertaining to the practical safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. 
(Prior Code, § 9-1; Code 2000, § 18-2-10; Ord. No. 609, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-79. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-2-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-80. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Code 2000, § 18-2-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 6-81-6-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-104. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the mechanical code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards relating to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling and refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the city for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 2000, § 18-3-10; Ord. No. 975, § 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 6, 2002; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-105. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Mechanical Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-3-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 6, 2002; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-106. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by adding "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 101.2.1, Appendices, is deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  Section 104.6, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 104.8, Department records, is amended by replacing "as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence" with "as required by state law." 
(5)  Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, is amended by inserting "as established by the City of Lamar." 
(6)  Section 106.5.3, Fee refunds, is amended by: 
a.  The insertion of "100" in paragraph 2; and 
b.  The insertion of "100" in paragraph 3. 
(7)  Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended by inserting "misdemeanor," "$300.00" and "90 days." 
(8)  Section 108.5, Stop work orders, is amended by the insertion of "$100.00" and "$300.00." 
(9)  Section 109.2.1, Qualifications, is deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 109.2.2, Alternate members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(11)  Section 109.2.6, Compensation of members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section 201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(13)  Section 301.2, Energy utilization, is deleted in its entirety. 
(14)  Section 301.7, Electrical, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(15)  Section 303.3, Prohibited locations, is amended by the deletion of exception 3. 
(16)  Section 306.3.1, Electrical requirements, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(17)  Section 306.4.1, Electrical requirements, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(18)  Section 306.5.2, Electrical requirements, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(19)  Section 307.2.3.1, Water level monitoring devices, is deleted in its entirety. 
(20)  Section 312.1, Load calculations, is amended by deleting "using the design parameters specified in Chapter 3 of the International Energy Conservation Code." 
(21)  Section 513.11, Power systems, is amended by replacing "the ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(22)  Section 513.12.1, Wiring, is amended by replacing "the ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(23)  Section 514.1, General, is amended by deleting "International Energy Conservation Code." 
(24)  Section 602.2.1.1, Wiring, is amended by replacing "the ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(25)  Section 604.1, General, is amended by the deletion of "and the International Energy Conservation Code." 
(26)  Section 903.3, Unvented gas log heaters, is deleted in its entirety. 
(27)  Chapter 15, Referenced standards, is amended by replacing "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(28)  Appendix B, Recommended permit fee schedule, is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-3-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 6, 2002; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 2007) 
Secs. 6-107-6-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 6-126. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the plumbing code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive regulations governing materials, installation methods and other matters pertaining to plumbing for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 2000, § 18-4-10; Ord. No. 975, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-127. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Plumbing Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-4-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-128. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 101.2, Scope, is amended by the addition of the following: 
"All water, gas and sewer lines running from the service line to any building will be inspected before being covered." 
(3)  Section 104.6, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 104.8, Department records, is amended by replacing "as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence" with "as required by state law." 
(5)  Section 106.5.1, Approved construction document, is amended by the deletion of "the construction documents shall be endorsed in writing and stamped 'APPROVED.' Such approved...." 
(6)  Section 106.5.3, Expiration, is amended by replacing "the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work" with "and paid for." 
(7)  Section 106.6.2, Fee schedule, is amended by inserting "as established by the City of Lamar." 
(8)  Section 106.3, Fee refunds, is amended by inserting "100" in paragraphs 2 and 3. 
(9)  Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended by inserting "misdemeanor," "$300.00" and "90 days." 
(10)  Section 108.5, Stop work orders, is amended by inserting "$100.00" and "$300.00." 
(11)  Section 109.2.1, Qualifications, is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section 109.2.2, Alternate members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(13)  Section 109.2.6, Compensation of members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(14)  Section 109.6.1, Resolution, is amended by the deletion of "Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official." 
(15)  Section 201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(16)  Section 305.6.1, Sewer depth, is deleted in its entirety. 
(17)  Section 311, Toilet facilities for workers, is deleted in its entirety. 
(18)  Section 312.9.1, Inspections, is deleted in its entirety. 
(19)  Section 312.9.2, Testing, is amended by the deletion of "and at least annually." 
(20)  Section 502.1, General, is amended by replacing, "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(21)  Section 504.3, Shutdown, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(22)  Section 701.2, Sewer required, is amended by the deletion of "where available, or an approved private sewage disposal system in accordance with the International Private Sewage Disposal Code." 
(23)  Section 904.1, Roof extension, is amended by insertion of "12" and "305." 
(24)  Chapter 13, Referenced standards, is amended by replacing "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(25)  Appendix A, Plumbing permit fee schedule, is deleted in its entirety. 
(26)  Appendix C, Gray water recycling systems, is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Plumbing Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-4-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 2007) 
Secs. 6-129-6-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 6-155. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the fire code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Fire Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-3401. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards designed to prevent fires. The purpose of the adopted code is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-5-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 8, 2002; Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-156. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Fire Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-5-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, § 8, 2002; Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-157. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 109.3, Violation penalties, is amended by inserting "misdemeanor," "$300.00" and "90 days." 
(3)  Section 111.4, Failure to comply, is amended by inserting "$100.00" and "$300.00." 
(4)  All sections that refer to the "ICC Electrical Code" are changed to the "State of Colorado Electrical Code." 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Fire Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-5-30; Ord. No. 975, § 5, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 8, 2002; Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-158. - Authority of fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have police authority in times of fire. He or she is authorized to make arrests and call upon others for assistance, and to exercise such authority as may be necessary to make the fire department effective in times of fire. 
(b)  The deputy fire chief or any person authorized to act in place of the fire chief shall, in the absence of the fire chief, have the same authority that the fire chief would have if present. 
(Prior Code, § 10-2; Code 2000, § 18-5-50; Ord. No. 2, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-159. - Application. 
    Every application for a permit to use, handle, store or sell gasoline or other flammable liquids shall be made in writing to the city clerk, who, upon receipt of the application and fee, shall refer the application to the fire department, which shall then cause an inspection to be made of the premises proposed to be used in such sale, storage, use or handling, and the means of distribution. The fire department shall then make a written recommendation upon such application to the city clerk, who shall, if the circumstances justify, issue a permit for the installation of the system or equipment in accordance with the written recommendation of the fire department. Any person aggrieved by the provisions of this article shall make written appeal of the matter to the board of adjustment and appeals, which appeal shall be filed within 15 days after the action complained of. The board of adjustment and appeals shall thereafter have 30 days to hear the matter, and to uphold the decision of the fire department and city clerk in regard to such application, or grant a variance thereto. The fire chief shall represent the city at all such hearings. 
(Prior Code, § 10-9; Code 2000, § 18-5-80; Ord. No. 806, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-160. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit to install any tank, pump or apparatus for the storage or handling of gasoline or other flammable liquids shall be as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 10-10; Code 2000, § 18-5-90; Ord. No. 304, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-161. - Inspection of installations. 
    Before any installation under this article is covered from sight, a notification in writing shall be given to the fire chief, who shall inspect the installation within 24 hours after the receipt of such notification, and give his or her written approval or disapproval. Upon failure of the fire chief to inspect within the specified time, the installation may be covered, but shall then be subject to inspection by the fire chief at the expense of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10-12; Code 2000, § 18-5-100; Ord. No. 304, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-162. - Aboveground storage. 
(a)  Aboveground storage shall be allowed in I-2 and I-P zones, according to the official zoning map of the city. 
(b)  Each individual container shall be located in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(Prior Code, § 10-18; Code 2000, § 18-5-110; Ord. No. 304, § 11; Ord. No. 526, § 1; Ord. No. 547; Ord. No. 591, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-163. - Oil burners. 
    Oil burners and systems for domestic heating in stoves and furnaces shall not be used or installed unless approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, and installed in accordance with the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters. Such standards are hereby made a part of the requirements of this article. This section shall not apply to oil burners using a wick. 
(Prior Code, § 10-22; Code 2000, § 18-5-130; Ord. No. 304, § 16) 
Secs. 6-164-6-181. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 6-182. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the residential code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Residential Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041. The adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of buildings and structures for the purposes of safeguarding life or limb, health and public welfare. All references in this code to the International Residential Code are to the edition referenced above. 
(Code 2000, § 18-6-10; Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 2002; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-183. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Residential Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-6-20; Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 2002; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-184. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section R101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section R104.5, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  Section R105.2, Work exempt from permit, is amended by replacing "24" with "48" in paragraph 7. 
(4)  Section R106.3.1, Approval of construction documents, is amended by inserting a period after "approved" and deleting the rest of the paragraph. 
(5)  Section R107.3, Temporary power, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(6)  Section R110.3, Certificate issued, is amended by deleting paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 7 and 8. 
(7)  Section R301.2, Climatic and geographic design criteria, is amended by adding the following: 
Ground snow load 20 lbs. Wind speed 100 mph Seismic design category A Subject to damage from: a. Weathering Severe b. Frost depth 32 inches c. Termites Moderate to heavy Winter design temperature 5° F Ice barrier underlayment required No Flood hazards November 17, 1982 Mean annual temp 50° F  
(8)  Table R301.5, Minimum uniformly distributed live loads, sleeping rooms, is amended by replacing "30" with "40." 
(9)  Section R309.2, Separation required, is amended by replacing "1/2-inch" with " 5/8 -inch type X." 
(10)  Section R310.1.1, Minimum opening area, is amended by deleting the exception. 
(11)  Section R311.2.1, Under stair protection, is amended by replacing "1/2-inch" with " 5/8 -inch type X." 
(12)  Section R319.1.2, Ground contact, is amended by deletion of the section and replacing it with the following: 
"All wood in contact with the ground shall be approved pressure preservative-treated wood suitable for ground contact use, except untreated wood may be used where entirely below groundwater level or continuously submerged in fresh water." 
(13)  Section R319.1.4, Wood columns, is amended by deleting exceptions 1 and 2. 
(14)  Section R320.1.2, Field treatment, is deleted in its entirety. 
(15)  Section R401.1, Application, is amended by inserting the sentence "Wood foundations are not allowed." at the end of the section. 
(16)  Section R402.1, Wood foundations, is deleted in its entirety. 
(17)  Section R404.2, Wood foundation walls, is deleted in its entirety. 
(18)  Section R405.2, Wood foundations, is deleted in its entirety. 
(19)  Section R504, Pressure preservative-treated wood floors (on ground), is deleted in its entirety. 
(20)  Section R907.3, Re-covering versus replacement, is amended by the deletion of paragraph 4 and exception 2. 
(21)  Chapter 11, Energy efficiency, is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following: 
"All new and remodeled structures will have a minimum of R-13 insulation in the walls and R-30 in the ceilings. Windows will be the thermal type, and exterior doors will have storm doors or will be of the insulated type, which include solid core doors." 
(22)  Section G2415.4, Piping through foundation wall, is deleted in its entirety. 
(23)  Section G2425.8, Equipment not required to be vented, is amended by the deletion of paragraph 7. 
(24)  Section G2445, Unvented room heaters, is deleted in its entirety. 
(25)  Section P2603.6.1, Sewer depth, is amended by inserting "12 inches." 
(26)  Chapter 33, General requirements, is deleted in its entirety. 
(27)  Chapter 34, Electrical definitions, is deleted in its entirety. 
(28)  Chapter 35, Services, is deleted in its entirety. 
(29)  Chapter 36, Branch circuit and feeder requirements, is deleted in its entirety. 
(30)  Chapter 37, Wiring methods, is deleted in its entirety. 
(31)  Chapter 38, Power and lighting distribution, is deleted in its entirety. 
(32)  Chapter 39, Devices and luminaries, is deleted in its entirety. 
(33)  Chapter 40, Appliance installation, is deleted in its entirety. 
(34)  Chapter 41, Swimming pools, is deleted in its entirety. 
(35)  Chapter 42, Class 2 remote-control, signaling and power-limited circuits, is deleted in its entirety. 
(36)  Chapter 43, Referenced standards, is amended by deleting "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" and replacing it with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(37)  Appendix A, Sizing and capacities of gas piping, is deleted in its entirety. 
(38)  Appendix B, Sizing of venting systems serving appliances equipped with draft hoods, Category I appliances, and appliances listed for use with Type B vents, is deleted in its entirety. 
(39)  Appendix C, Exit terminals of mechanical draft and direct-vent venting systems, is deleted in its entirety. 
(40)  Appendix D, Recommended procedure for safety inspection of an existing appliance installation, is deleted in its entirety. 
(41)  Appendix E, Manufactured housing used as dwellings, is deleted in its entirety. 
(42)  Appendix F, Radon control methods, is deleted in its entirety. 
(43)  Appendix I, Private sewage disposal, is deleted in its entirety. 
(44)  Appendix M, Home day care-R-3 occupancy, is deleted in its entirety. 
(45)  Appendix N, Venting methods, is deleted in its entirety. 
(46)  Appendix O, Gray water recycling systems, is deleted in its entirety. 
(47)  Appendix P, Sprinkling, is deleted in its entirety. 
(48)  Appendix Q, ICC International Residential Code electrical provisions/National Electrical Code cross-reference, is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Residential Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-6-30; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 3, 2002; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 2007) 
Secs. 6-185-6-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 6-207. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the fuel gas code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-4533, that code to have the same force and effect as if set forth in this article in every particular, save and except such portions as are added, amended, deleted or replaced in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-7-10; Ord. No. 1052, § 5, 2002; Ord. No. 1102, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-208. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-7-20; Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 2002; Ord. No. 1102, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 6-209. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 101.3, Appendices, is deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  Section 104.6, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 104.8, Department records, is amended by replacing "as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence" with "as required by state law." 
(5)  Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, is amended by insertion of "as established by the City of Lamar." 
(6)  Section 106.5.3, Fee refunds, is amended as follows: 
a.  Paragraph 2 is amended by inserting "100"; and 
b.  Paragraph 3 is amended by inserting "100." 
(7)  Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended by the insertion of "misdemeanor," "$300.00" and "90 days." 
(8)  Section 108.5, Stop work orders, is amended by inserting "$100.00" and "$300.00." 
(9)  Section 109.2.1, Qualifications, is deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 109.2.2, Alternate members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(11)  Section 109.2.6, Compensation of members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section 201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(13)  Section 301.2, Energy utilization, is amended by the deletion of "in accordance with the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted herein." 
(14)  Section 303.3, Prohibited locations, is amended by the deletion of exceptions 3, 4 and 5. 
(15)  Section 303.7, Pit locations, is amended by the deletion of "the surrounding" in the first sentence. 
(16)  Section 306.3.1, Electrical requirements, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(17)  Section 306.5.2, Electrical requirements, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(18)  Section 309.2, Connections, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(19)  Section 404.14.1, Limitations, is amended by the deletion of exception 2. 
(20)  Section 404.14.3, Tracer, is amended by the deletion of the word "yellow." 
(21)  Section 413.9.2.4, Grounding and bonding, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(22)  Section 501.8, Equipment not required to be vented, is amended by the deletion of paragraphs 8 and 10. 
(23)  Section 621, Unvented room heaters, is deleted in its entirety. 
(24)  Section 703.6, Electrical wiring and equipment, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(25)  Chapter 8, Referenced standards, is amended by replacing "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-7-30; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 5, 2002; Ord. No. 1102, § 1, 2007) 
Secs. 6-210-6-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ADDITIONAL CODES 

Sec. 6-252. - Adoption of the International Existing Building Code. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the existing building code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings. 
(b)  At least one copy of the 2006 edition of the International Existing Building Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-9-10; Ord. No. 975, § 6, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1157, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 6-253. - Sign code. 
    The Uniform Sign Code, 1994 edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, is hereby adopted by the city, with the following deletion: chapter 12, entitled Marquees, is hereby deleted. 
(Code 2000, § 18-9-20; Ord. No. 975, § 7, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 6-254. - Energy conservation code. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16- 201 et seq., there is adopted as the energy conservation code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating energy-efficient building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems in structures. 
(b)  At least one copy of the 2006 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-9-40; Ord. No. 975, § 9, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 2008) 
Secs. 6-255-6-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASBESTOS CONTROL 

Sec. 6-272. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Asbestos means any hydrated mineral silicate separable into commercially usable fibers, including, but not limited to, chrysotile (serpentine), amosite (cumingtonite-gruneuete), crocidilite (riebeckite), tremolite, anthophyllite and actinolite. 
    Asbestos-containing material or ACM means materials containing asbestos in an amount greater than one percent by weight or volume, either alone or mixed with fibrous or nonfibrous materials. 
    Asbestos-containing waste material means any waste that contains asbestos, including asbestos mill tailings, asbestos-containing material, asbestos waste from control devices, friable asbestos waste material and bags or containers that previously contained asbestos-containing materials. As applied to repair, demolition and renovation operations, the term "asbestos-containing waste material" includes only friable asbestos waste and asbestos waste from control devices. 
    Asbestos project means any form of work performed in connection with the repair, renovation or demolition of a building or structure which will disturb friable asbestos-containing material in any quantity greater than the threshold amounts established in C.R.S. § 25-7-503(1)(b)(I)(A) for single-family residential dwellings, and C.R.S. § 25-7-503(1)(b)(I)(B) for other buildings or structures. 
    Demolition means the wrecking or taking out of any load-supporting structural member of a facility, together with any related handling operations, including, but not limited to, the transportation and disposal of asbestos-containing materials. 
    Emission permit means a document issued by the state, allowing an individual or business to engage in operations that could potentially generate any air pollutant. 
    Facility means any institutional, commercial, industrial or residential structure, installation or building. 
    Facility component means any pipe, duct, boiler, tank reactor, turbine or furnace at or in a facility, or any structural member of a facility. 
    Friable asbestos-containing material means any material that contains asbestos and, when dry, can be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure and that contains more than one percent asbestos by weight, area, or volume. The term "friable asbestos-containing material" includes non-friable forms of asbestos after such previously non-friable material has become damaged to the extent that, when dry, it can be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure. 
    Renovation means repairing, altering or modifying in any way a facility or one or more facility components. Operations in which load-supporting structural members are wrecked or taken out are excluded. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-10; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006; Ord. No. 1207, 2016) 
Sec. 6-273. - Asbestos projects; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or engage in any asbestos project within the city without first obtaining an asbestos abatement permit for such asbestos project from the city administrator or his or her designee. No city building permit shall be issued until the applicant for such asbestos abatement permit has either received a permit pursuant to this article or represented that the work for which the building permit is sought does not involve an asbestos project; except that the requirements of this section shall not apply to asbestos projects performed by an individual on a single-family residential dwelling that is the individual's residence. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-20; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006; Ord. No. 1207, 2016) 
Sec. 6-274. - Asbestos projects; application for permit. 
(a)  An application for an asbestos project permit shall be submitted to the city administrator on forms provided by the city administrator, together with an application fee in an amount to be established by the city council. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names, street addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant, the general contractor on the project and the owner of the property on which the project will take place, and the street address of such property if different from the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address and telephone number of any person who will transport ACM from the asbestos project site. 
(3)  The name, street address and telephone number of each asbestos disposal site to be used in relation to the asbestos project. 
(4)  A copy of the permit and application required by the state. 
(5)  Proof of general liability insurance with policy limits in an amount acceptable to the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(6)  The signature of the applicant. 
(7)  A copy of the notification required by the state air quality control commission, or, if no such notification is required pursuant to said regulation, the information which would otherwise be contained in such notification. 
(8)  Any other information which the city administrator or his or her designee may require. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of an asbestos project permit to omit, alter or fail to perform on any asbestos project any work or procedure which such person has represented in the application for such permit will be performed. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-30; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-275. - Asbestos projects; compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
    Any person engaged in an asbestos project shall, throughout the course of such project, comply in all respects with all federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, all regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the state air quality control commission. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-40; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-276. - Asbestos transport. 
    Any person transporting ACM in or through the city shall comply in all respects with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to such transportation, including, but not limited to, all regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the state air quality control commission. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-50; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-277. - Asbestos storage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store for any length of time any quantity of ACM within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-60; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-278. - Permit revocation, suspension and denial. 
    The city administrator or his or her designee may revoke, suspend or deny any permit provided for in this article if he or she finds that the permit holder is responsible for any one or more of the following acts or omissions: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Violation of any other local, state or federal law or regulation relating to asbestos. 
(3)  Any misrepresentation, falsehood or omission contained in the application for such permit. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-70; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-279. - Revocation and suspension procedure. 
(a)  If the city administrator or his or her designee determines that an asbestos abatement permit issued pursuant to this article should be revoked or suspended under the terms of this article, notice designating the violation which is the basis for the revocation or suspension shall be given in writing by certified mail, signed by the city administrator or his or her designee, to the permit holder. The permit holder shall have five days from receipt of the notice from the city administrator or his or her designee to cure the default and comply with all provisions of the asbestos abatement permit. 
(b)  An asbestos abatement permit may be revoked or suspended by the city administrator or his or her designee upon the expiration of the five-day notice period if the default is not cured or there is a failure to comply with the asbestos abatement permit provisions. 
(c)  No asbestos abatement permit shall be suspended or revoked without affording opportunity for a hearing before the city administrator. A permit holder shall be deemed to have been afforded opportunity for a hearing if notice of the proposed action and the grounds therefor, which may include notice of the date, time and place of a hearing, is given in the manner provided by ordinance, and: 
(1)  The notice is not delivered because the permit holder has moved from the address stated in the permit or application therefor; 
(2)  The notice is not delivered because the address stated in the permit or application therefor is false or non-existent; 
(3)  The permit holder, having received a notice that action of suspension or revocation will be taken unless a hearing is requested, fails to request a hearing within the time stated in such notice; or 
(4)  The permit holder, having requested a hearing, fails without good cause to attend such hearing in person or by counsel. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-80; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-280. - Violations; public nuisance. 
    Violations of any of the provisions of this article are declared to be public nuisances pursuant to chapter 16, article II and may be abated or enjoined in accordance with said article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-90; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 6-281. - Violations; penalty. 
    Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-21, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Each day that such violation is allowed to continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 18-10-100; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 2006) 
Secs. 6-282-6-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION UNITS 

Sec. 6-311. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  To provide for the health, safety and well-being of its citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of transportation units used as storage facilities and other structures within its boundaries, the city believes it necessary to regulate such a use for transportation units and require such units to comply with all applicable building regulations. 
(b)  Further, the city holds the aesthetics within its geographical boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens. As such, the city council deems it necessary to adopt a companion ordinance amending chapter 30, articles II, VI, IX, X, XI, XII and XIII, to exclude, for aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities and other structures in R-1 residential, floodplain, all commercial, planned unit development and mobile home districts. 
(c)  In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts this new article relating to administration and regulation of transportation units used as storage facilities and other structures, together with an ordinance making necessary revisions to other Code provisions. This article imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of transportation units used as storage facilities and other structures. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-10; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-312. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply in this article. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
    Applicant means any person requesting permission to use transportation units as storage facilities. 
    Department means the department of developmental services. 
    Department inspector means any person authorized by the director of developmental services to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this article. 
    Director means the director of developmental services. 
    In, when used in conjunction with transportation units as storage facilities, means over, above, in, within, on or under the location of the transportation unit. 
    Maintenance and repair means the maintaining of a transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure in a good and suitably aesthetically pleasing condition. 
    Permittee means any person to whom the permit to use and construct a transportation unit as a storage facility or other structure has been granted by the city under this article. 
    Transportation unit means any container of any type previously used in whole or in part on the public highways, roadways, roads, railways, waterways or other travelways to transport goods or products. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-20; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-313. - Administration. 
    The city administrator is the principal city official responsible for the administration of transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-30; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-314. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may place a transportation unit for use as a storage facility or otherwise within the boundaries of the city without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the director to do so. Permits issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the director. 
(b)  Application for a permit is made to the director. Permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete, only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(1)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed transportation unit use and the location of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, rights-of-way and easements. 
(2)  Submission of documentation establishing that the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure complies with or, once installed, will comply with all city building codes in effect at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(3)  Payment of all money due to the city. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-40; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-315. - Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(a)  Permit issuance. If the director determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of the article, the director may issue a permit. 
(b)  Conditions. The director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the transportation unit used as a storage facility, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the public. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-50; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-316. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for location of a transportation unit within the boundaries of the city for use as a storage facility shall be established by the city council or its designated agent. No permit shall be issued without payment of such fees before the issuance of such a permit. 
(b)  Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the director has revoked for a breach of any provision of this article are not refundable. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-60; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-317. - Maximum allowed size of transportation unit. 
    No transportation unit shall be allowed within the boundaries of the city to be used as a storage facility or other structure of a size in excess of eight feet by 24 feet, or in excess of 192 square feet. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-70; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-318. - Other structural and installation requirements. 
    Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures shall at all times be painted and kept properly maintained and repaired. 
(2)  Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures shall be located in such a manner as to comply with all setbacks required by the zoning applicable to their properties. 
(3)  The appearance of the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure shall conform with the surrounding area so as to prevent distraction of the neighboring citizens. 
(4)  A transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure shall be anchored to a concrete slab on grade of at least a four-inch thickness with anchor bolts embedded in the concrete every four feet. The anchor bolts shall be no smaller than one-half inch in diameter with a lock washer and nut to fasten the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure to the concrete slab. 
(5)  A peaked roof shall be constructed over the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure with a required slope of no less than three feet in 12 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-80; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-319. - Nonconformance with structural and installation requirements. 
    The director may issue notice to the owner of the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure for any condition which does not conform to the requirements of section 6-318 or the building regulations applicable within the boundaries of the city. The notice shall state that failure to correct the noncompliance will be cause for removal of the unit from the property and from within the boundaries of the city. Within 15 days after issuance of the notice, the owner of the unit shall present proof to the director that the noncompliance has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-90; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-320. - Inspection. 
(a)  When the work under any permit issued pursuant to this article is completed, the permittee shall notify the chief building official. 
(b)  The permittee shall make the site for the location of the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(c)  At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The director may issue a notice to the applicant for any work which does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions or codes. The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 15 days after issuance of the notice, the applicant shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit. 
(d)  If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall reimburse to the city the city's reasonable costs, including reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-100; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-321. - Other obligations. 
(a)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a permit for installation of a transportation unit as a storage facility or other structure does not relieve a permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state or federal rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(b)  Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the director, no installation of a transportation unit for a storage facility or other structure may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-110; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-322. - Denial of permit. 
    The director may deny a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public, to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of the public or when necessary to protect the public. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-120; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-323. - Work done without a permit. 
    Any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, installs a transportation unit for use as a storage facility or other structure must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said permit, and comply with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-130; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-324. - Indemnification and liability. 
(a)  By reason of the acceptance of the grant of a permit pursuant to this article, the city does not assume any liability for: 
(1)  Injuries to persons, damage to property or any other type of claims brought at any time by persons; or 
(2)  Claims or penalties of any sort resulting at any time from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of the transportation unit for use as a storage facility or other structure. 
(b)  By obtaining or accepting a permit pursuant to this article, a permittee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs, liabilities and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance or repair of the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure, or out of any activity undertaken in or near the area of the unit, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit issued pursuant to this article. By obtaining or accepting a permit pursuant to this article, a permittee further agrees to not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim or award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or repair of the unit, or any activity undertaken in or near the unit, whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit issued pursuant to this article. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city; and the permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-140; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-325. - Future uses. 
    In placing any transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure, or allowing it to be placed, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby. It is not the intent of the city in adopting this article to create any special duty as to any permittee or other person. This article is enacted to protect the general health, welfare and safety of the public at large. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-150; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Sec. 6-326. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city, by the granting of a permit pursuant to this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter granted under the constitution and statutes of the state, the Home Rule Charter of the city or this Code to regulate the use of the transportation unit used as a storage facility or other structure, and the permittee, by its acceptance of a permit issued pursuant to this article agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory powers or police powers, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. Any conflict between the provisions of a permit issued pursuant to this article and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Code 2000, § 7-7-160; Ord. No. 1034, 2001) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is the regulation and registration of businesses operating within the city for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and for the proper collection of taxes to support the city. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-2. - License required. 
    No person, either as principal, officer, agent, servant or employee, shall conduct, pursue, carry on or operate in the city any trade, calling, occupation, employment, profession or business without first obtaining a license and paying to the city clerk the license fee provided in this article, and procuring from the city clerk a license therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 14-1; Code 2000, § 6-1-20; Ord. No. 260, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-3. - Separate license for each location. 
    Any person operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business within the city must obtain a separate license for each location of such trade, profession or business. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-4. - License application. 
    An application for a business/sales tax license shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the city. Every applicant shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for the granting of such license. It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement or misrepresentation in connection with any application for a license. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-5. - License fees. 
(a)  The fee payable to the city for the issuance of a business/sales tax license shall be established by the city council. Said fee shall accompany the application for a business/sales tax license and shall, in addition, be paid for each year or fraction thereof for which a business/sales tax license is renewed. 
(b)  Other licenses. The city council will, from time to time establish and/or amend the amount of all fees for the issuance of licenses. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverage licenses. The fees established for issuance of alcoholic beverage, beer and special event licenses and permits, including renewals, changes and transfers thereof, shall be equal to the maximum amount allowed by the state department of revenue for local licensing authorities. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-50; Ord. No. 987, §§ 1-5, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-6. - Issuance. 
    All annual licenses under this article shall be issued from January 1 and shall expire on December 31. The application shall provide when and in what location such person began business, shall accompany the payment, and shall be filed with the city clerk, unless a license has been issued to him or her for the preceding year. 
(Prior Code, § 14-2; Code 2000, § 6-1-60; Ord. No. 260, § 41; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-7. - Carrying or posting license required. 
    The license for a particular business location shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the place of business. If the business is not operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed location, then the licensee must carry the license upon his or her person when operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the city. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-70; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-8. - License nontransferable. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable from person to person or place to place. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-80; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-9. - Period of license. 
    The license fee levied pursuant to this article shall be for an annual period, unless a shorter time is specifically stated. 
(Prior Code, § 14-3; Code 2000, § 6-1-90; Ord. No. 260, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-10. - Suspension. 
    A license may be suspended: 
(1)  When any money due the city has not been paid. This includes failure to pay civil penalties, fines, taxes, impact fees or any other money owed to the city. 
(2)  When any activity conducted by the licensee or his or her employee or agent violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(3)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(4)  Upon any grounds of suspension provided by this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-11. - Revocation of license. 
    A license may be revoked by the city: 
(1)  When it appears that the license was obtained by fraud, misrepresentation or false statements within the application. 
(2)  When it appears that the activity conducted pursuant to such license is a public nuisance as defined by this Code or statute or violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(3)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(4)  Upon any grounds of revocation provided by this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-12. - Notice and hearing prior to suspension or revocation. 
    All hearings to revoke, suspend or cancel a license shall be before the city council. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge anyone from his or her civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-120; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-13. - Cease and desist. 
    If any business is operating without a license, the mayor may issue an order to the business to cease and desist all further operation until a license is issued for the business. The order shall give the business three days to pay all amounts due the city, or to post a bond in the amount owing the city and to request in writing a hearing with the city clerk. In the event neither alternative is achieved, the business shall cease operations on the third day after the cease and desist order was issued. The hearing will be before the city council. The proceedings shall not relieve or discharge anyone from the civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-130; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-14. - Refund of fees. 
    Upon refusal by the city of any license or permit, the fee therefor paid in advance shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that any license or permit is revoked by the city, all monies paid therefor shall be and remain the monies of the city, and no refund shall be made to any licensee or holder of a permit. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-140; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-15. - Penalty. 
    Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code, as defined in chapter 1. Any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to the violation of this Code shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 1-21. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1-150; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 8-16-8-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-34. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult business. 
(1)  The term "adult business" means any business enterprise: 
a.  That has as a regular and substantial business purpose the sale, display or rental of goods that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that emphasize matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  That has one of the following as a regular and substantial business purpose: 
1.  The providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or 
2.  The providing of services that provide specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in specified sexual activities ancillary to other pursuits. 
(2)  The definition of the term "adult business" also includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following, as defined herein: 
a.  Businesses that offer the following described goods for sale or rent: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment which, as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, slides, films or videotapes, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult news rack means any coin- or card-operated device that offers for sale, by dispensing, printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult newsstand means any freestanding structure, vehicle or booth which, as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult retail establishments means an establishment which, as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent, any one or more of the following: instruments, devices, gifts, sexual aids, sexual novelties or paraphernalia which depict or are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities or graphically depict specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or rented in an adult bookstore as defined herein. 
b.  Businesses that provide the following entertainment: 
    Adult encounter parlor means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the provision of premises where customers congregate, associate or consort with employees and/or performers or private contractors who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual gratification or stimulation to such customers. 
    Adult entertainment business means any enterprise to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and where providing adult entertainment, as defined herein, is a regular and substantial portion of its business. 
    Adult entertainment cabaret means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing adult entertainment which features strippers, male or female impersonators, go-go dancers, live performances or material which is primarily characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment studio (includes the terms "rap studio," "exotic dance studio," "sensitivity studio" or "encounter studio") means an establishment whose premises are physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises, and where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing entertainment which features materials or live performances characterized by an emphasis on or features materials relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an establishment containing a room with seats facing a screen or projection area, where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the exhibition to customers or members of films, videotapes or motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customers and which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means an establishment located in an enclosed building where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing the live performance of activities relating to specified sexual activities or exhibition of specified anatomical areas of live performers, for observation by customers, members or patrons. 
    Body painting studio means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the maintaining, operating or offering for compensation the applying of paint or other substances to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body is displaying for the customers' view specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Businesses that provide the following described services: 
    Adult motel means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public accommodations for consideration for the purpose of viewing closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and which rents room accommodations for less than 24 hours at a time. 
    Bath house means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment means any live activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance, including, but not limited to, talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling for purposes of photography, painting, sketching, drawing, sculpting or otherwise, removal of clothing or any service offered for amusement on the premises where such activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the employee, other employees or patrons, or, if the activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance involves a person who is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human genitals, pubic region, vulva, pubic hair, buttocks, female breasts, or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple, or the human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Adult entertainment business means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member. 
    Contagious and communicable diseases means those diseases which are set out in the Colorado Code of Regulations. 
    Employee , as used in this article, means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, servers, independent contractors and personnel of any description, who work in or at or render any service directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment business. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within the adult entertainment premises as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises. 
    Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business or adult entertainment premises. 
    Premises means any place of business of an adult business which shall include the entire lot and building occupied by the adult business and any other property owned, leased or controlled by the adult business, including any parking areas adjacent to the business which are regularly utilized by employees, entertainers, servers, managers or customers of such business. 
    Public place means any area generally visible to public view, including streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and automobiles, whether moving or not. 
    Regular and substantial portion of its business means: 
(1)  20 percent or more of the gross floor space is devoted to that purpose; 
(2)  20 percent or more of the retail floor space is devoted to that purpose; 
(3)  20 percent or more of the gross sales of the business are derived from that purpose; or 
(4)  20 percent or more of stock in trade is devoted to that purpose. 
    Server means any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment business or adult business. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic regions or pubic hair, buttocks, female breasts, or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola encircling the nipple, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means sexual conduct, being actual or simulated; acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent object in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-10; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-35. - Regulations. 
    The city council shall have the power to promulgate regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as may be necessary and feasible to carry out duties of the office of the city clerk and functions of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-30; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Secs. 8-36-8-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 8-50. - License required for adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult business or adult entertainment business in the city unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained an adult entertainment business license from the city, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any employee to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult business or adult entertainment business. 
(c)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any adult business or adult entertainment business that fails to have posted, in the manner required by this section, an adult business or adult entertainment business license, has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any employee who performs any service or entertainment in an adult business or adult entertainment business in which an adult entertainment license is not posted, in the manner required by this section, had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(d)  Any business enterprise that sells or rents goods that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that emphasizes matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and that excludes minors by virtue of age from all or any part of the business premises shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of determining whether such business enterprise is an adult business or adult entertainment business as defined in this chapter. This entry and inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-210; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-51. - Licenses required for employees. 
    It is unlawful for any person to work as an employee of an adult business or adult entertainment business without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, or to work as an employee at an adult business or adult entertainment business after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-220; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-52. - License, classification and fees. 
(a)  The license year for all fees required under this chapter shall be from each January 1 through December 31. The application for a license issuance or renewal shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this section by certified or cashier's check or money order until such fee is paid. 
(b)  All licenses or renewals shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nonrefundable and nontransferable. 
(c)  The classification of licenses and renewals and fees for each shall be established and, from time to time, amended, by the city council as deemed appropriate. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-230; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-53. - License limited to one identifiable type of adult use. 
    All adult entertainment business licenses shall be issued for only one adult business or adult entertainment business which shall be listed on the application. More than one adult business or adult entertainment business use shall not be allowed on the premises. Any change in the type of adult use shall invalidate the adult business license or adult entertainment business license. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-240; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-54. - License application. 
(a)  Adult business or adult entertainment business license. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate an adult entertainment business or adult business under the provisions of this article shall make a notarized application with the city clerk's office. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the persons proposing to conduct or operate the adult businesses or adult entertainment businesses. All applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, place of birth and Social Security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the adult business or adult entertainment business, a description of the adult entertainment or inventory to be performed or sold on the licensed premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the adult business or adult entertainment business will be located. 
(3)  The names, residence addresses, Social Security numbers and dates of birth of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or other combination of owners; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers, directors and stockholders who own any portion of the corporation. 
(4)  The residence addresses of the applicant, of all partners or of all corporate officers and directors for the five years immediately prior to the date of application. 
(5)  A description of the adult business or adult entertainment business history of the applicant, of the partnership and all partners, or of the corporation and all corporate officers and directors. 
(6)  A statement from the applicant, the partnership and all partners, or the corporation and all corporate officers and directors, whether any such person or entity, in previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had a business license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason therefor, and the activity or occupation subjected to such action, suspension or revocation. 
(7)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant, all partners or joint owners, or of all corporate officers and directors, for the five years preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant, each partner or joint owner or the corporate officers and directors, that each such person has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application; or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application, where such misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, or involved in controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code or other statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each partner or each corporate officer and director has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within five years immediately preceding the application, where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, or has not been involved in controlled substances, illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, other statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(9)  On applications requesting a license to operate a bath house or body painting studio, the applicant shall provide for each person working on the premises a health certificate from a duly licensed Colorado physician stating that, within 90 days prior thereto, the applicant and all other persons working on the premises have been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable diseases as defined herein. 
(10)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the police department, of the applicant, all partners or co-owners if the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or other co-owned or operated business, or all corporate officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation. 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate registration issued by the Colorado secretary of state. 
(12)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses. 
Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application which shall not be processed. 
(b)  Employee license. All employees as defined in section 8-273 desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this article to work in or at or render any service directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment business shall make a notarized application to the city clerk's office. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be an adult business or adult entertainment business employee. All applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, Social Security number and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining or at the business. 
(2)  The name and address of each adult business or adult entertainment business where the applicant intends to work and an intent to hire statement from an adult business or adult entertainment business that is licensed, or that has applied for a license, under the provisions of this article, indicating that the adult business or adult entertainment business intends to hire the applicant as an employee. Failure to provide the intent to hire statement shall not invalidate the application. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from, prosecution or conviction on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application; or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act within five years immediately preceding the application, where such misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, or involved in controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code or other statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance violation within five years immediately preceding the application, where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, or has not been involved in controlled substances, illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined by the Colorado Criminal Code, other statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(4)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the police department, of the applicant. 
(5)  The applicant shall present documentation to the city clerk's office that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be acceptable as documentation of age: 
a.  A valid vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
e.  Any other form of identification issued by a governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the city clerk; or 
f.  Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the city clerk. 
Failure to provide the information required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application which shall not be processed. 
(c)  Facilities necessary. No adult business or adult entertainment business license to conduct a bath house or body painting studio shall be issued unless an inspection by the city's department of building codes reveals that the premises the applicant intends to conduct business from complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the business's operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within any permitted establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(2)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(3)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
The director of the department of building codes shall certify that the proposed business establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section and shall give and send such certification to the city clerk; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of state statutes or municipal ordinances concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. The appropriate city official may recommend the issuance of a license contingent upon the compliance with any requirements of this section. 
(d)  Application process. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult business, adult entertainment business or adult entertainment employee, the city clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of the application to the police department for investigation of the application. In addition, the city clerk shall transmit a copy to the director of the department of building codes. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the police chief to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the applicant is qualified to be issued the license applied for. The police chief shall report the result of the investigation to the city clerk not later than ten working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the director of the department of building codes to determine whether the structure where the adult business or adult entertainment business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. The director of the department of building codes shall report the results of the investigation to the city clerk not later than ten working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the reports from the police chief and director of the department of building codes, the city clerk shall prepare the application for hearing before the city council, for issuance or denial of the license, provided that the license application for an adult business, adult entertainment business or employee of an adult business or adult entertainment business shall be approved or disapproved within 45 days from the date of filing of a completed application with the city clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-250; Ord. No. 1046, 2002; Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 2002) 
Sec. 8-55. - Examination of application; issuance of license; disapproval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for an adult business, adult entertainment business or adult business employee, except an application for renewal, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Schedule a public hearing upon the application not less than 30 days from the date of the application, and shall post and publish the public notice thereof not less than ten days prior to such hearing. Public notice shall be given by the posting of a sign in a conspicuous place on the premises for which application has been made and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the county in which the premises is located. Such notice shall comply with the open meetings law of the state. 
a.  Notice given by posting shall include a sign of suitable material, not less than 22 inches wide and 26 inches high, with letters not less than one inch in height, stating the type of license applied for, date of the application, date of the hearing on the application and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, and if the applicant is a corporation, association or other organization, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of all officers and directors and the manager of the entity. 
b.  Notice of hearing shall conform with the notice requirements provided by C.R.S. § 31-23-304. 
c.  If the building in which the adult business or adult entertainment business is to be operated is in existence at the time of the application, any sign posted as required by this subsection shall be so located on the premises as to be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. If the building is not constructed at the time of the application, the applicant shall post the sign on the premises upon which the building is to be constructed in such a manner that the notice shall be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. 
d.  At the public hearing held pursuant to this section, any party in interest shall be allowed to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. As used in this subsection, the term "party in interest" includes the applicant, a resident of the neighborhood under consideration or the owner or manager of a business located in the neighborhood under consideration. The licensing authority, in its discretion, may limit the presentation of evidence so as to prevent repetitive and cumulative evidence or examination. 
(2)  After the hearing on the application, the city council shall act on the application for license as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The records of the city council and city clerk shall show the action taken on the application, and if the license is granted, the city council shall direct the issuance of the proper license. The license shall state that it is not transferable to other persons and the calendar year for which it is issued. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business that is licensed or where the licensee is working. 
(c)  If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately notified by certified mail to the applicant's last-known address and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license application may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-260; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-56. - License ineligibility and disqualification. 
(a)  No person is eligible, nor shall a license be issued if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in section 8-301(a)(8) during the time period set forth therein; 
(2)  The applicant has had an adult business or adult entertainment business license revoked in this or any other city, county or state within the last five years; 
(3)  If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bath house or body painting studio and has not produced a health certificate as required herein for all persons working on the premises; 
(4)  If the applicant provided incomplete, false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; or 
(5)  If the applicant fails to show full compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  No licenses shall be issued unless the proposed site meets and maintains the requirements in sections 30-836 and 30-837. 
(c)  No application for an adult business or adult entertainment business employee license shall be issued if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not have or is ineligible to receive an adult business or adult entertainment business license for any of the reasons stated in subsection (a) or (b) of this section; 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in section 8-301(a)(8) during the time period set forth in said section; 
(3)  The applicant failed to provide all information required on the application; 
(4)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; or 
(5)  The applicant has had an adult entertainment or adult business employee license revoked or suspended in this or any another city, county or state within the past five years. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-270; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-57. - License posting or display. 
(a)  Every person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under this article as an adult business or adult entertainment business shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult business or adult entertainment business premises. 
(b)  Every person holding an adult business or adult entertainment business employee license shall post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult business or adult entertainment business premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by city authorities responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-280; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Secs. 8-58-8-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-62. - Standards of conduct. 
    The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult business and adult entertainment business licensees, their employees and patrons of adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses, while on or about the premises of the business: 
(1)  Identification cards. All or any employees issued a license by the city under the provisions of this article shall, at all times when working in an establishment subject to the provisions of this article, have in their possession valid identification cards issued by the city, bearing the permit number, the employee's physical description and a photograph of such employee. Such identification cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration. 
(2)  Age restriction. Except for individuals licensed to work in an adult business or adult entertainment business as provided for in section 8-301(b), only persons 21 years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult business or adult entertainment business. 
(3)  Exterior observation and display. No adult business or adult entertainment business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation or display of performers or employees engaged in any erotic depiction or dance or any material, persons, caricatures, animals or any portion thereof depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or any books, cards, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, slides, films, motion pictures, DVDs or videotapes which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, from any exterior source, including, but not limited to, by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(4)  Nudity prohibited. No employee or patron of an adult business or adult entertainment business other than a licensed bath house shall appear nude, unclothed, in less than opaque attire or in any fashion that exposes to view any specified anatomical area. 
(5)  Certain acts prohibited. 
a.  No employee shall perform any specified sexual activities, as defined herein, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical areas, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities, as defined herein, or participate in any act of prostitution. 
b.  No employee or patron of an adult business or adult entertainment business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person or knowingly touch the specified anatomical area of said employee or patron, whether such specified anatomical area is clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. 
c.  No employee of an adult business or adult entertainment business shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business or adult entertainment business while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any specified anatomical area. 
d.  No adult business or adult entertainment business employee shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron or customer for any act prohibited by this article and no such adult business or adult entertainment business employee shall receive any payment or gratuity from any patron or customer for any entertainment, except as follows: 
1.  While such employee is on the stage or platform, a customer or patron may place such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage; or 
2.  While such employee is not on the stage or platform and is clothed so as to not expose to view any specified anatomical area, a customer or patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the employee's hand or under a leg garter worn by such employee at least four inches below the bottom of the pubic region. 
e.  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult business or adult entertainment business shall: 
1.  Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or malt beverages to be brought upon or consumed on the premises; 
2.  Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises; 
3.  Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of 21 years of age to be in or upon the premises, except for those individuals licensed as employees of the adult business or adult entertainment business pursuant to section 8-301(b); 
4.  Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises; or 
5.  Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article or any other city ordinance provision or state law. 
(6)  Signs required. All adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses shall have conspicuously displayed in the common area at the principal entrance to the premises a sign, of which uppercase letters shall be at least two inches high, and lowercase letters at least one inch high, which shall read as follows: 
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED AND LICENSED BY THE CITY OF LAMAR, COLORADO 
ENTERTAINERS AND CUSTOMERS ARE: 
Not permitted to engage in any type of illegal conduct or prostitution on the premises or to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron or other entertainer to fondle, cress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said entertainer, employee or patron. 
Not permitted to be nude, unclothed or in less than opaque attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic region, buttocks or genitals. The entertainers are to be upon a stage at least two (2) feet above the customer floor and a sufficient distance from the customers to prevent the customers from touching the entertainers. 
Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any customer for entertainment, except as follows: 
While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage, or 
While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either placing such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand or under the entertainer's leg garter. 
CUSTOMERS ARE: 
Not permitted to be on the stage at any time. 
Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, server, manager or entertainer or engage in solicitation for prostitution. 
(7)  Lighting required. 
a.  The interior premises of all adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present in or on the premises. 
b.  The exterior premises of all adult businesses or adult entertainment businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination equivalent to not less than one foot-candle in all parking areas and on the general grounds of the premises, as measured at the ground level. There shall be illumination to the equivalent of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the ground level at each entrance and doorway area, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  Closed booth or room prohibited. 
a.  The premises of all adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a common area of the premises. The use of video cameras to meet this requirement is not allowed. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. The manager shall be required to position himself or herself so as to be able to view the entire interior portion of the premises while on duty. 
b.  Only one person shall be allowed in any booth, cubicle, room or stall at a time. Such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall be constructed out of metal or such other material as is incapable of perforation by any customer or employee on the premises. Other than the entryways, there shall be no openings, holes, access doors or any other manner of accessibility between any booth, cubicle, room or stall and any other booth, cubicle, room or stall. 
(9)  Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Separate dressing rooms and restrooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition. 
(10)  Hours of operation. No adult business or adult entertainment business may be open or in use between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon of the following day. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-310; Ord. No. 1046, 2002; Ord. No. 1056, §§ 2, 3, 2002) 
Sec. 8-63. - Manager on premises. 
(a)  A manager shall be on duty at any adult business or adult entertainment business at all times the premises is open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person who provides adult entertainment or works as an employee within the premises possesses a current and valid license as required by this article and that such licenses are prominently displayed and posted. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the manager to ensure that persons under the age of 21 years, other than those individuals licensed as employees of the adult business or adult entertainment business pursuant to section 8-301(b), do not enter upon the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-320; Ord. No. 1046, 2002; Ord. No. 1056, § 4, 2002) 
Sec. 8-64. - Inspector and inspections. 
    All adult businesses and adult entertainment businesses shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure that the business is complying with all applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-330; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Secs. 8-65-8-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, NONRENEWAL OR RENEWAL 

Sec. 8-79. - Suspension, revocation or nonrenewal. 
(a)  Whenever the city clerk has information that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of any adult business or adult entertainment business or a holder of an adult business or adult entertainment business employee license has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of an adult business or adult entertainment business knew or should have known that such violations were committed; 
(3)  The adult business or adult entertainment business license or the employee license was obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; 
(4)  The adult business or adult entertainment business licensee or employee licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for the license, or renewal thereof; 
(5)  The owner or operator, any partner or any corporate officer or director holding an adult business or adult entertainment business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this article; or 
(6)  The holder of an employee license issued pursuant to this article has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this article; 
then the city council shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, the city council may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Suspend the license for up to 90 days. 
(2)  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year. 
(3)  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of the article occur; and if after a hearing, a subsequent violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-410; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-80. - Renewal. 
(a)  A license may be renewed by making application to the city clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be submitted between December 15 and December 31. 
(b)  Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided for in this article. 
(c)  If the application for the renewal of a license is not made during the time period in subsection (a) of this section, the expiration of such license shall not be affected, and a new application shall be required. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-420; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Sec. 8-81. - Judicial review; stay of enforcement of orders. 
    Following the entry of an order by the city council suspending or revoking a license issued pursuant to this article, or disapproving the renewal application for a license, such licensee or applicant may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. The city council may stay enforcement of such order for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, pending the filing and/or final disposition of proceedings for judicial review. 
(Code 2000, § 6-10-430; Ord. No. 1046, 2002) 
Secs. 8-82-8-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 8-96. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Retail license means a grant to a licensee to sell fermented malt beverages or a grant to a licensee to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors pursuant to state law. 
    Retail licensee or licensee means the holder of a license to sell fermented malt beverages or the holder of a license to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors pursuant to state law. 
(b)  All other terms shall be defined as set forth in the provisions of the Colorado Beer Code, the Colorado Liquor Code and special event permits, as the definitions presently exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-97. - Application of state statutes; exemption of Lamar Community College. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, pursuant to a declaration of the General Assembly, the Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. § 12-46-101 et seq., the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 12-47-101 et seq., and Special Event Permits, C.R.S. § 12-48-101 et seq., as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended, shall apply to the sale of fermented malt beverages, alcoholic beverages, special malt liquors, spirituous liquors and vinous liquors in the city. 
(b)  The distance restriction set forth in C.R.S. § 12-47-313(1)(d)(I) is eliminated as to Lamar Community College. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-20; Ord. No. 1017, 2000; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-98. - Power and purpose. 
    The city is authorized and will issue, renew, transfer, suspend and revoke various licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to the application and fee requirements, standards, investigation and hearing procedures established by state law. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Local licensing authority, C.R.S. § 12-47-309 et seq.; standards for consideration at hearing on application, C.R.S. § 12-47-312; notice requirements for hearing, C.R.S. § 12-47-311. 
Sec. 8-99. - Application form. 
    All applications for new city liquor licenses and fermented malt beverage licenses shall be made on forms provided by the state liquor enforcement division, and all applicants shall fully furnish all information requested thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 14-7; Code 2000, § 6-2-40; Ord. No. 581, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-100. - Fingerprinting of applicants. 
    All applicants for new licenses or renewals shall be fingerprinted by the police department. If the applicant is other than an individual, then the person who will actively manage the business shall be the one so required to be fingerprinted. 
(Prior Code, § 14-7; Code 2000, § 6-2-50; Ord. No. 581, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-101. - Renewals. 
    Applicants who seek to renew a license and who have heretofore complied with section 8-38 shall not be required to again submit to such fingerprinting unless there has been a change in personnel of such a nature as to place the active management of the business under one or more persons who have not previously been fingerprinted under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14-7; Code 2000, § 6-2-60; Ord. No. 581, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-102. - Licensing fees. 
    Licensing fees shall be paid to the city clerk by the applicant at the time of the filing of the application or request as established by state statute. 
(Prior Code, § 14-7.1; Code 2000, § 6-2-70; Ord. No. 700, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Local license fees for liquor licenses, C.R.S. § 12-47-505; local license fees for fermented malt beverages, C.R.S. § 12-46-107. 
Sec. 8-103. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Whenever a decision of the city council, acting as the local licensing authority (hereinafter authority), suspending a retail license for 14 days or less becomes final, whether by failure of the retail licensee to appeal the decision or by exhaustion of all appeals and judicial review, the retail licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition the authority for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having his or her retail license suspended for all or part of the suspension period. Upon the receipt of the petition, the authority may, in its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition if it is satisfied: 
(1)  That the public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(2)  That the books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcoholic beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(3)  That the retail licensee has not had his or her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license. 
(b)  The fine accepted shall be equivalent to 20 percent of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of alcoholic beverages during the period of the proposed suspension, except that the fine shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $5,000.00. 
(c)  Payment of any fine pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be in the form of cash, certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city clerk and shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to this section, the authority shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. 
(e)  In connection with any petition pursuant to this section, the authority is limited to granting stays only when necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings. 
(f)  If the authority does not make the findings required in subsection (a) of this section and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the authority. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-80; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Additional penalties, suspension, revocation and fines for violations, C.R.S. § 12-47-601. 
Sec. 8-104. - Optional premises. 
(a)  Optional premises licenses and optional premises for hotel and restaurant licenses may be issued by the authority. 
(b)  The following standards shall be applicable to the issuance of a license under this section, in addition to all other applicable standards set forth in the Colorado Liquor Code for optional premises licenses and optional premises for a hotel and restaurant licenses. 
(1)  Eligible facilities. Outdoor sports and recreational facilities, as used in C.R.S. § 12-47-310, are eligible for licensing as an optional premises or an optional premises for a hotel and restaurant. 
(2)  Number of optional premises. There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one licensee may have on an outdoor sports or recreational facility. 
(3)  Minimum size of facility. There is no restriction on the minimum size of an outdoor sports or recreational facility which would be eligible for issuance of an optional premises license or optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license. 
(c)  The application for an optional premises license or optional premises for a hotel or restaurant license shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises requested; 
(2)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use; and 
(3)  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional premises for the future use on the optional premises. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-90; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-105. - Regulations for non-alcohol events for underage persons on licensed premises. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
    Licensed premises means any premises for which a license to sell fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors is granted pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 12-47-101 et seq., with the exception that licensed premises, as used in this section, shall not include: 
(1)  A restaurant, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-47-103(30), serving a meal as defined by C.R.S. § 12-47-103(20). 
(2)  A bowling alley or other facility where the sport of bowling occurs. 
(3)  A club as defined in C.R.S. § 12-47-103(6). 
(4)  Any licensed premises, as defined in this subsection, during which a private party is occurring. 
    Non-alcohol event means any activity for which an underage person is admitted to a licensed premises. 
    Private party means an event which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The licensed premises is reserved by an identifiable person or organization that pays a fee to have exclusive use of the licensed premises for an event where attendance is by invitation only. 
(2)  The licensed premises is closed to the public for a specific period of time during which the person or organization has exclusive use of, and the host of the event and owner or manager of the licensed premises jointly control access to, the premises and preclude those persons under the age of 21 years from obtaining and consuming alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(3)  No fee or remuneration, inclusive of ticket sales or purchases, is assessed against those attending the event. 
(4)  The owner or manager of the licensed premises has submitted an application to the police department which complies with the following requirements: 
a.  The application is submitted to the police department during the police department's business hours of Monday through Friday (excluding holidays) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
b.  The application is submitted at least 48 hours before the event is scheduled to occur; and 
c.  The application is made on a form approved by the police department setting forth information which includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization that has reserved the licensed premises for private party use; 
2.  The duration during which the licensed premises will be used for the private party; and 
3.  The purpose for which the licensed premises are being reserved for private party use. 
    Underage person means any person younger than 21 years old. 
(b)  Underage persons are prohibited from being on licensed premises for any purpose other than the participation in a non-alcohol event within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The licensee, owner, operator or manager of a licensed premises shall notify the police department at least 48 hours in advance of any date on which underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. 
(d)  Each such non-alcohol events notice shall specify the date on which the event is to occur and the time of commencement. All notices shall be filed with the police department during normal working hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and shall be given on forms prescribed by the police department. 
(e)  After a non-alcohol event notice has been given, the licensee, owner, operator or manager of a licensed premises may cancel an event only by giving like notice to the police department in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Regardless of the date given, all notices shall expire and be deemed cancelled no later than the date of expiration or revocation of the license to sell alcoholic beverages applicable to the licensed premises. 
(g)  During the period of any non-alcohol event, a notice card approved by the police department shall be posted at all public entrances to the licensed premises notifying the general public that no alcoholic beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises during the event. 
(h)  Once a non-alcohol event has commenced, no alcoholic beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises until the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises. 
(i)  During the period of any non-alcohol event, all alcoholic beverages shall be stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises in a secure place out of the sight and physical reach of any patron present, and shall be under the direct and immediate control and supervision of the licensee, owner, operator or manager of the licensed premises. All beer taps and automatic dispensers of alcoholic beverages shall be either disconnected, disabled or made inoperable during the time allocated for the non-alcohol event and continuing into the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2-100; Ord. No. 1044, 2002; Ord. No. 1077, §§ 1, 2, 2004) 
Secs. 8-106-8-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 8-120. - Generally. 
    Every person operating any place of amusement, theater, picture show or other such place not specifically provided for in this article, at any time during the year, shall pay an annual license fee as established by the city council, and the license under this article shall not apply to schools, churches or charitable benefits, as distinguished from any place operated as a commercial enterprise. 
(Prior Code, § 14-8; Code 2000, § 6-3-10; Ord. No. 294, § 1; Ord. No. 416, § 1; Ord. No. 808, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-121. - Circus or menagerie. 
    Every person operating a circus, menagerie, or circus and menagerie combined shall pay a license fee as established by the city council, which shall cover two entertainments during 24 hours, and which shall cover all side shows showing under one management. For the purposes of this section, two entertainments means showings that occur consecutively, whether it is the same or different shows. 
(Prior Code, § 14-10; Code 2000, § 6-3-20; Ord. No. 260, § 14; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-122. - Carnivals. 
    Every person operating a carnival or street carnival shall apply for a license as required by this chapter and pay a license fee as established by the city council, which shall cover all shows and concessions that are showing under one management. Carnivals shall be required to show proper licensing and approval for all rides as required under 7 C.C.R. 1101-12, as may be amended. A license issued by the city shall in no way be intended as an exemption from state licensing requirements, including the requirements of 7 C.C.R. 1101-12. 
(Prior Code, § 14-11; Code 2000, § 6-3-30; Ord. No. 260, § 15; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-123. - Amusement rides. 
    Any person operating any amusement rides, including, but not limited to, merry-go-rounds or Ferris wheels, shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-12; Code 2000, § 6-3-40; Ord. No. 260, § 12; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-124. - Exhibitions generally. 
    Every person conducting exhibitions for pay not otherwise provided for in this article shall pay a license fee as established by the city council; provided, however, that those exhibitions sponsored by nonprofit organizations and entities shall be exempt from payment of license fees. 
(Prior Code, § 14-14; Code 2000, § 6-3-50; Ord. No. 260, § 19; Ord. No. 808, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-125. - Smoking. 
    No person shall smoke cigarettes, cigars, e-cigarettes or pipes in any theater or place where moving pictures are being shown, or any theatrical or other public performance is being given, in the city, while an audience is gathered therein for any such show or public performance, unless permission for such smoking shall have first been given by resolution duly adopted by the city council and approved by the fire chief, provided that any such permission may be revoked at any time by the city council, in its discretion. 
(Prior Code, § 3-5; Code 2000, § 6-3-70; Ord. No. 340, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin-operated amusement devices, games, arcade machines or any similar device used for testing one's skill or otherwise means any amusement device placed in operation by a coin, provided that the term "coin-operated amusement devices, games, arcade machines or any similar device used for testing one's skill or otherwise" shall not include any machine used for gambling. 
    Merchant means any person using, renting or otherwise displaying for hire one or more amusement devices for the use of the public in a place of business under his or her control. 
    Operator means any person owning or controlling one or more amusement devices which are rented, displayed or otherwise used in a place of business. 
(Prior Code, § 3-6; Code 2000, § 6-4-10; Ord. No. 354, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-127. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Every operator, as defined by this article, shall be required to have a license as provided for in this article. 
(b)  No merchant or person shall display, let or otherwise permit to be used, within the city, a coin-operated amusement device belonging to an operator, unless such operator has an operator's license, as provided by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 3-7; Code 2000, § 6-4-20; Ord. No. 354, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-128. - Operator's license. 
    Upon application to the city clerk, and upon payment of the annual license fee as established by the city council, an operator's license under this article will be issued to any person, provided that such person shall be in compliance with all local, state and federal laws regulating the business, including zoning and building regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 3-8; Code 2000, § 6-4-30; Ord. No. 354, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-129. - Annual license period. 
    The annual period for which licenses under this article shall be issued shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Prior Code, § 3-13; Code 2000, § 6-4-40; Ord. No. 354, § 13; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-130. - Revocation; confiscation of devices. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this article to any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be revoked, and any game or device operated in violation of the terms of this article may be confiscated and destroyed or disposed of as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 3-14; Code 2000, § 6-4-50; Ord. No. 354, § 12; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-131. - Use of devices for gambling prohibited; liability of merchant. 
(a)  No person shall permit gambling upon any coin-operated amusement device or issue checks or slugs payable in such games. 
(b)  The owner or operator of the place of business in which any amusement device is used is hereby specifically charged with knowledge and made liable for the use of such games or devices, and if any such game or device is used for gambling, the owner or operator of such place of business shall be liable the same as if he or she had authorized such use. 
(Prior Code, § 3-15; Code 2000, § 6-4-60; Ord. No. 354, §§ 9, 10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-132. - Dealing with unlicensed merchants and operators prohibited. 
    No merchant shall use amusement devices belonging to an operator whose license to operate has been suspended, during the time of such suspension. It shall be the duty of a merchant or operator to know whether any person with whom he or she is dealing is duly authorized under this article, and, that his or her license has not been suspended. 
(Prior Code, § 3-16; Code 2000, § 6-4-70; Ord. No. 354, § 11; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 8-133-8-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-147. - License fees. 
    General building contractors, minor subcontractors and major subcontractors shall be required to obtain a license and shall pay such license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 5-4; Code 2000, § 6-5-10; Ord. No. 748, § 13; Ord. No. 974, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-148. - Liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance. 
(a)  All licensed general building contractors and subcontractors within the city must procure, and exhibit to the building official as a condition of licensing, general public liability insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 and conditioned upon satisfactory and adequate performance of all contracting and building activities undertaken by the holder of such license. 
(b)  Additionally, all licensed building contractors and subcontractors within the city must procure, and exhibit to the building official as a condition of licensing, either: 
(1)  Proof of workers' compensation insurance on any and all employees of the contractor or subcontractor, with such coverage being in compliance with the requirements of the Workers' Compensation Act of Colorado, as amended from time to time; or 
(2)  Proof of the contractor's or subcontractor's rejection or exemption from the coverage required by the Workers' Compensation Act of Colorado, as amended from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 5-4.1; Code 2000, § 6-5-20; Ord. No. 748, § 14; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1067, § 1, 2003) 
Secs. 8-149-8-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE SUPPRESSION CONTRACTORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State registration required, local registration authorized, C.R.S. § 24-33.5-1206.1. 

Sec. 8-164. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire suppression contractor means any individual, firm, corporation, association, or organized group of persons, that, individually or through others, offers to undertake, represents itself as being able to undertake, or does undertake to sell, layout, fabricate, install, modify, alter, repair, maintain, or perform maintenance inspections of any fire suppression system. For the purposes of this article, the term "fire suppression contractor" shall include the following: 
(1)  Any person who installs, retrofits, adds to, services, repairs or inspects automatic fire sprinkler and stand pipe systems of all types, including, but not limited to, backflow preventers; 
(2)  Any person who installs, retrofits, adds to, services, repairs or inspects special hazard fire suppression systems, including necessary control, alarm and detection components; 
(3)  Any person who installs, retrofits, adds to, services, repairs or inspects portable fire extinguishers, including necessary control, alarm and detection components; and 
(4)  Any person who performs hydrostatic testing of portable fire extinguishers. 
(Code 2000, § 6-6-10; Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 1999) 
Sec. 8-165. - License regulations and requirements. 
    Every fire suppression contractor shall be subject to the following regulations and license requirements by applicable category: 
(1)  Fire Suppression Contractor A. 
a.  Authorized activities. Recipients of a Fire Suppression Contractor A license are hereby authorized to install, add to, alter, service, repair and inspect automatic fire sprinkler and stand pipe systems of all types as well as retrofit existing systems with backflow preventers. 
b.  Mandatory compliance. Recipients of a Fire Suppression Contractor A license are required to obtain permits from the fire department for installation or alteration of such systems pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, as amended, and the Uniform Fire Code, as amended. 
c.  Requirements. A Fire Suppression Contractor A license shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Receipt of proof of a current certificate of registration to the fire suppression program from the state division of fire safety; and 
2.  Receipt of proof of current liability insurance coverage in the amount of $600,000.00 or greater. 
(2)  Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer B. 
a.  Authorized activities. Recipients of a Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer B license are hereby authorized to install, add to, alter, service, repair and inspect portable fire extinguishers and special hazard fire suppression systems inclusive of their necessary control, alarm and detection components, and to perform hydrostatic testing of portable fire extinguishers. 
b.  Mandatory compliance. Recipients of a Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer B license are required to obtain permits from the fire department for installation or alteration of such systems pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, as amended, and the Uniform Fire Code, as amended. 
c.  Requirements. A Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer B license shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Receipt of proof of a current certification from at least one manufacturer of special hazard systems, which certification qualifies the recipient to install and service such system; 
2.  Receipt of proof of a currently maintained DOT registration as an approved cylinder requalification facility or a contract with an outside cylinder requalification facility for which proof is provided of that facility's registration with the DOT, liability insurance coverage of at least $600,000.00 and identification on the cylinders of the company actually performing the hydrostatic test; 
3.  Receipt of proof of current liability insurance coverage in the amount of $600,000.00 or greater; 
4.  Satisfaction of the minimum equipment list as set forth at the fire department; and 
5.  Provision of names and qualifications of employees of the contractor/dealer who will be performing the installations, additions, alterations, services, repairs and inspections. 
(3)  Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer C. 
a.  Authorized activities. Recipients of a Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer C license are hereby authorized to install, service, recharge, repair, inspect and hydrostatically test portable fire extinguishers. 
b.  Requirements. A Fire Suppression Contractor/Dealer C license shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Receipt of proof of a currently maintained DOT registration as an approved cylinder requalification facility or a contract with an outside cylinder requalification facility for which proof is provided of that facility's registration with the DOT; 
2.  Receipt of proof of current liability insurance coverage in the amount of $600,000.00 or greater; 
3.  Satisfaction of the minimum equipment list as set forth at the fire department; and 
4.  Provision of names and qualifications of employees of the contractor/dealer who will be performing the installations, recharges, services, repairs and inspections. 
(4)  Commercial, Industrial or Institutional Non-Contractor/Dealer D. 
a.  Authorized activities. Recipients of a Commercial, Industrial or Institutional Non-Contractor/Dealer D license are hereby authorized to install, recharge, service, repair and inspect portable fire extinguishers which are the property or under the care and control of the license applicant. 
b.  Requirements. A Commercial, Industrial or Institutional Non-Contractor/Dealer D license shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Receipt of proof of current liability insurance coverage in the amount of $600,000.00 or greater; 
2.  Receipt of a detailed explanation of his or her qualifications to service portable fire extinguishers; 
3.  Satisfaction of the minimum equipment list as set forth at the fire department; and 
4.  Provision of names and qualifications of employees of the licensee who will be performing the installations, recharges, services, repairs and inspections. 
(Code 2000, § 6-6-20; Ord. No. 1008, § 3, 1999) 
Sec. 8-166. - License and registration fees. 
    The annual license and registration fees for those individuals installing, repairing and servicing fire extinguishers and fire suppression systems shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 6-6-30; Ord. No. 1008, § 4, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 8-167-8-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MARIJUANA BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-181-194. - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City may prohibit and/or provide reasonable regulations of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation and infused products manufacturing, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-310. 

Sec. 8-195. - Medical marijuana. 
    Under the authority granted in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., and the Charter of the city, the ordinance from which this article was derived is adopted by the city council and prohibits certain businesses and land uses related to medical marijuana in the city, and in furtherance of its stated intent, the city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., authorizes a regulatory structure for the retail, sale, distribution, cultivation and dispensing of medical marijuana, marijuana-infused products and optional premises cultivation. Through that regulatory structure, the scope and authority of amendment 20 to the state constitution is further defined. 
(2)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code also specifically authorizes the governing body of a municipality to vote to prohibit the licensure and/or operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing within the municipality. 
(3)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code also specifically authorizes a municipality to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses based on local government zoning, health, safety and public welfare laws for the distribution of medical marijuana. 
(4)  After due and careful consideration of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, article XVIII of the state constitution, the Controlled Substance Act (21 USC 811), the Colorado Uniform Controlled Substance Act (C.R.S. § 18-18-10 et seq.) and the real and possible effects of cultivation and dispensing of marijuana and/or the manufacturing and sale of marijuana-infused products, those businesses, operations and land uses have been found to adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(5)  Therefore, it is and shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit to be operated a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing or sale facility, business or operation related thereto in the city, and no city licenses shall be issued for the same. 
(Code 2000, § 6-11-10; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-196. - Definitions. 
    All definitions provided in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. are adopted herein unless specifically amended hereby. 
    Marijuana shall have the same meaning as the term "usable form of marijuana," as set forth in article XVIII, section 14(1)(I) of the state constitution or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. The term "marijuana" may alternatively be spelled "marihuana." 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., and for a purpose authorized by article XVIII, section 14 of the state constitution. 
    Medical marijuana center means any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., who sells marijuana in any form to registered patients or to primary caregivers as defined in article XVIII, section 14 of the state constitution; except, however, a primary caregiver as defined herein shall not be considered a medical marijuana center. 
    Medical marijuana-infused product means any product infused with or containing marijuana that is intended for use or consumption other than by smoking, including edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
    Medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer means a person licensed pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., to operate a business as described in C.R.S. § 12-43.3-404. 
    Medical use shall have the same meaning as is set forth in article XVIII, section 14(1)(B) of the state constitution or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation means a person licensed pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., to grow and cultivate marijuana for a purpose authorized by article XVIII, section 14 of the state constitution. 
    Patient has the same meaning as set forth in article XVIII, section 14(1)(C) of the state constitution. 
    Possess or possession means having physical control of an object or control of the premises in which an object is located, or having the power and intent to control an object, without regard to whether the one in possession has ownership of the object. The term "possession" may be held by more than one person at a time. Use of the object is not required for possession. 
    Primary caregiver has the meaning set forth in article XVIII, section 14(1)(F) of the state constitution, and as the same may be clarified or construed by C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. 
    Produce or production means: 
(1)  All phases of growth of marijuana, from seed to harvest; 
(2)  Combining marijuana with any other substance for distribution, including storage and packaging for resale; or 
(3)  Preparing, compounding, processing, encapsulating, packing or repackaging, labeling or relabeling of marijuana or its derivatives, whether alone or mixed with any amount of any other substance. 
(Code 2000, § 6-11-20; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-197. - Applicability and effective date. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all property and persons within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation under this article for a person to establish, operate, cause or permit to be operated or continue to operate within the city and within any area annexed to the city after December 31, 2010, a medical marijuana center, a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility, an optional premises cultivation operation or any business, facility or any other operation requiring a license under C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 6-11-30; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-198. - Patients and primary caregivers. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit, regulate or otherwise impair or be construed to prohibit, regulate or impair the cultivation, use or possession of medical marijuana by a patient and/or by a primary caregiver for his or her patients, provided that such patient or primary caregiver is acting in accordance with all applicable provisions of article XVIII, section 14(1)(C) of the state constitution, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq., C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106, the regulations promulgated by the state department of public health and environment, the department of revenue or any other agency with regulatory authority, and the laws of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 6-11-40; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2010) 
Secs. 8-199-8-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL USE AND REGULATION OF MARIJUANA[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- City may prohibit marijuana operations through the enactment of an ordinance, Colo. Const. art. XVIII, § 16. 

Sec. 8-213. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Colorado Medical Marijuana Code means C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101 et seq. 
    Consumer means a person 21 years of age or older who purchases marijuana or marijuana products for personal use by persons 21 years of age or older, but not for resale to others. 
    Department means the state department of revenue or its successor agency. 
    Industrial hemp means the plant of the genus Cannabis and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed three-tenths percent on a dry weight basis. 
    Locality means a county, municipality or city and county. 
    Marijuana or marihuana means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof and the resin, including marijuana concentrate. The term "marijuana" or "marihuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drinks or other products. The term "marijuana" or "marihuana" also includes any artificially concocted substance containing delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana or for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility or a retail or wholesale marijuana store. 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana, manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products, and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana center means an entity licensed by a state agency to sell marijuana and marijuana products pursuant to article XVIII, section 14 of the state constitution and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
    Retail marijuana store and wholesale marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers or other marijuana stores. 
    To publicly use, consume, ingest, display, possess, transfer, distribute or sell marijuana means doing any of those acts in a public place without a license to allow the same. A public place is any place on or in any street, alley, road, parking lot, sidewalk, park, stadium, ball park, gymnasium, business establishment, school facility or building, licensed liquor or alcoholic beverage store, licensed 3.2 percent alcohol beer store or 3.2 percent alcohol bar, licensed alcoholic beverage bar or specially licensed liquor and alcohol event, dormitory, arena, fairgrounds, public swimming pool, playground, cemetery, parking lot, building, jail or detention facility, hospital or nursing home, or part thereof, open to the public for business or governmental purposes. None of the prohibited acts may be done in a motor vehicle, motor home, camper or trailer or any other vehicle parked in or on the above public places. 
    Unreasonable or impracticable means that the measures necessary to comply with the regulations require such a high investment of risk, money, time or any other resource or asset that the operation of a marijuana establishment is not worthy of being carried out in practice by a reasonably prudent businessperson. 
(Code 2000, § 6-12-10; Ord. No. 1182, § 1, 2013) 
Sec. 8-214. - Prohibited acts. 
    No business license shall be issued by the city for the operation of any marijuana establishment, marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility or retail or wholesale marijuana store within the city, and it shall be a violation of this article to operate such business in the city. 
(Code 2000, § 6-12-20; Ord. No. 1182, § 1, 2013) 
Secs. 8-215-8-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 8-229. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person who travels within the city, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. 
    Solicitor means any person who travels within the city soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for sale or purchase of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals, real or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, for services to be performed or for the donation of money or financial assistance, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, or whether or not such individual is collecting advance payment on such orders. The term "solicitor" includes any person who, for himself or herself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or other place within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
    Transient merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, property, services and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of said purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad car, hotel, motel, lodginghouse room, apartment, shop, street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares, services and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. The person so engaged is not relieved from complying with the provisions of this article by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer; provided, however, that if all sales made by such person of goods, wares, merchandise or services shall be reported for sales tax collection purposes to the city as made by such local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, and all monies derived from such sales shall be collected by such local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, then such transient merchant shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14-29; Code 2000, § 6-7-10; Ord. No. 798, § 1; Ord. No. 814, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-230. - License requirement. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to engage in any such businesses within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14-29.1; Code 2000, § 6-7-20; Ord. No. 798, § 2) 
Sec. 8-231. - Exceptions to provisions. 
    The terms of this article do not include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property, nor do such terms include the following professions or businesses: news sellers, state-licensed real estate and insurance salespersons and brokers, any public utility and its employees franchised to do business within the city, auto salespersons and any dissemination of information without solicitation of money or other consideration. This article shall not apply to any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant who is a bona fide resident of the counties of Kiowa, Prowers, Baca or Bent of the State of Colorado. Nothing contained in this article prohibits any sale required by statute or by order of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(Prior Code, § 14-29.2; Code 2000, § 6-7-30; Ord. No. 814, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-232. - Contents of license application. 
(a)  Applicants for a license under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name, date of birth, Social Security number and physical description of the applicant; 
(2)  Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant, and in the case of a transient merchant, the local address from which proposed sales will be made; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold by such applicant; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials therefrom, establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  A recent photograph of the applicant, which picture shall be approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  The name of at least two references who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinances, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(10)  The last cities or towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; and 
(11)  A $500.00 surety bond. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk, to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. There shall be no application fee for renewals in the immediately succeeding license period. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such application, it shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this article within 72 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after it has been filed with the city clerk by the applicant. 
(d)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his or her disapproval and his or her reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued. 
(e)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his or her approval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fees, deliver to the applicant his or her license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, show the name and address of the licensee, the kinds of goods to be sold thereunder, and contain the following wording: "The City of Lamar, Colorado, does not endorse the products of licensee," the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business. Each peddler, solicitor or transient merchant must secure a personal license. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 14-29.3; Code 2000, § 6-7-40; Ord. No. 798, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-233. - License fee. 
    Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall pay a fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-29.4; Code 2000, § 6-7-50; Ord. No. 798, § 6; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 8-234-8-247. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 8-248. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, the term "for hire" means for money or other things of value, gratuities, tips and free will offerings, whether paid directly or indirectly, as compensation or consideration for services rendered. The applicability of these provisions includes the term "motor carrier of passengers" as defined by C.R.S. § 40-101(4)(a), as may be amended. 
(Prior Code, § 23-1; Code 2000, § 6-8-10; Ord. No. 346, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-249. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of operating a vehicle for hire in the carrying of passengers on the streets of the city without first obtaining a license therefor. As a condition of maintaining a city license, the person shall be licensed as provided by the state. 
(Prior Code, § 23-2; Code 2000, § 6-8-20; Ord. No. 328, § 1) 
Sec. 8-250. - License issuance, fee and transferability. 
    The city council, within its discretion, may issue a license for the carrying on of the business of operating vehicles for hire for the transportation of passengers within the city to any person deemed by the city council to be properly qualified for such, upon the payment of an annual fee as established by the city council. Such license shall be issued to the proprietor of such business and shall not be transferable. 
(Prior Code, § 23-3; Code 2000, § 6-8-30; Ord. No. 328, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-251. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The city council shall have the right to suspend or cancel any license granted under this article for the violation of any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, and to suspend or cancel any license for the infraction of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city or state law with reference to the operation of motor vehicles on the streets of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 23-4; Code 2000, § 6-8-40; Ord. No. 328, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-252. - Requirements for state vehicle permit. 
    No person shall operate under a license issued pursuant to this article unless such person holds a permit granted by the state public utilities commission for the use and operation of the vehicle to be used in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 23-5; Code 2000, § 6-8-50; Ord. No. 328, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-253. - Promulgation of regulations and rate schedules. 
    The city council shall have the right to make rules and regulations governing the operation of taxicabs and vehicles for hire within the city and the rates charged therefor to passengers. 
(Prior Code, § 23-6; Code 2000, § 6-8-60; Ord. No. 328, § 4) 
Secs. 8-254-8-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES 

Sec. 8-268. - Auctioneers. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auctioneer means any person who engages in the business of auctioning off real or personal property, whether on a full-time or part-time basis. 
    Resident auctioneer means any person who has resided in the city for six months immediately preceding his or her application, and who has, during such six-month period, been engaged in business or otherwise gainfully employed in the city. 
    Transient or itinerant auctioneer means any auctioneer who has resided in the city for less than six months immediately preceding his or her application for a license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to engage in the business of making sales at auction within the city to which the public is invited, without first securing a license therefor and paying the required license fee. 
(c)  The license fee for an itinerant or transient auctioneer shall be as established by the city council. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to auctioneers when engaged in making sales under and by virtue of legal proceedings, or when making sales for any bona fide residents of the city who are selling out or when selling livestock at any regularly established sales yard. 
(e)  Any license issued hereunder is personal and cannot be transferred. 
(Prior Code, § 14-15; Code 2000, § 6-9-10; Ord. No. 260, § 3; Ord. No. 426, § 1; Ord. No. 561, §§ 1-5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-269. - Bankruptcy sales. 
    Exclusive dealers in bankrupt goods shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-17; Code 2000, § 6-9-20; Ord. No. 260, § 11; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-270. - Billiard parlors. 
    Any operator of any billiard or pool parlor for gain or profit shall pay an annual license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-18; Code 2000, § 6-9-30; Ord. No. 260, § 11; Ord. No. 270, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-271. - Bowling alleys. 
    Every person operating any bowling alley shall pay an annual license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-19; Code 2000, § 6-9-40; Ord. No. 260, § 39; Ord. No. 808, § 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-272. - Employment agents. 
    Every employment agent or person operating an employment agency shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-21; Code 2000, § 6-9-50; Ord. No. 260, § 18; Ord. No. 808, § 8; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-273. - Fortune-telling and like practices. 
    Every clairvoyant or fortune-teller engaging in such practice within the city shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-22; Code 2000, § 6-9-60; Ord. No. 260, § 17; Ord. No. 751, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-274. - Hotels, motels, roominghouses. 
(a)  The license fee for conducting a hotel, roominghouse, lodginghouse or cottage camp shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have full power to grant, deny, renew, transfer, suspend during investigation and revoke after notice and hearing the license provided for in this section. Before any license shall be granted or transferred, an application for such license shall be filed with the city council by the applicant for such license, or other person who desires a transfer, stating the location, giving the street number in the city and the number of rooms contained in the hotel, motel, lodginghouse or cottage camp. 
(c)  If the city council concludes after investigation that the applicant is not a person of suitable character to conduct a hotel, roominghouse, lodginghouse or cottage camp, it may deny a license to the applicant, or if the city council finds, after such license has been granted, that the person to whom it has been assigned is conducting said premises, or any activity or conduct therein, in a manner which is in violation of this Code or the state statutes, the city council shall have the power to suspend during investigation, and revoke after notice and hearing, any license which has been granted. 
(d)  Any person, either as principal, agent, clerk or servant, who carries on the business of conducting any hotel, roominghouse, motel, lodginghouse or tourist or cottage camp, shall keep a register of all guests, and every guest shall be required to register before obtaining room or sleeping accommodations. Said register of guests required to be kept by this section shall be made available at all times for inspection by any law enforcement officer of the city, at the request of such officer. 
(Prior Code, § 14-23; Code 2000, § 6-9-70; Ord. No. 260, §§ 32-36; Ord. No. 432, § 1; Ord. No. 808, § 9; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-275. - Manufacturer's agents. 
    Any manufacturer's agent who stores or distributes goods at retail within the city, without a definitely established location, shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-26; Code 2000, § 6-9-80; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-276. - Miniature golf courses. 
    Every person operating any miniature or baby golf course shall pay an annual license fee as established by the city council. Such license fee shall be paid quarterly in advance. 
(Prior Code, § 14-27; Code 2000, § 6-9-90; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-277. - Mobile concessions. 
    Every person operating a mobile concession shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. Mobile concessions are not permitted to sell at the ballparks, community building or swimming pool. 
(Code 2000, § 6-9-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 8-278. - Pawnbrokers. 
    Every pawnbroker or person operating a pawn shop shall pay a license fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 14-28; Code 2000, § 6-9-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Ambulance service; rates and charges generally. 
    Rates and charges for all ambulance services furnished by the city shall be established by city council, which rates and charges shall become effective concurrently with changes in levels of repayment and reimbursement by third parties, including governmental agencies, in order to best maintain the financial integrity of the ambulance service and to avoid subsidization of said service by other funds of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 2-13-10; Ord. No. 959, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 965, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-2. - Annual reports. 
    The fire chief and city treasurer shall, no later than October 1 of each year, make reports to the city council as to rates and charges for ambulance services then in effect, and further report upon the financial condition of the ambulance service provided by the city. 
(Code 2000, § 2-13-20; Ord. No. 959, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 965, § 2, 1996) 
Secs. 10-3-10-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 10-17. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a police department for the city, which shall consist of one chief of police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 2-4-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-18. - Departmental regulations. 
    The police department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be proposed by the chief of police, and approved by the city administrator. 
(Code 2000, § 2-4-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-19. - Chief of police; appointment and duties. 
(a)  The city council, upon the recommendation of the city administrator, shall appoint a chief of police who shall be the head of the police department. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to: 
(1)  See that the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the police department obeyed, and perform such duties as may be required by the city council. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the police department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Arrest any person violating any of the city ordinances and take such violator before the municipal court for trial. 
(4)  Render such accounts of the police department, his or her duties and receipts as may be required by the city council, and keep the records of his or her office open to inspection by the city council at any time, subject to any applicable privilege. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the chief of police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the constitution and laws of the state and ordinances of the city, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Code 2000, § 2-4-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-20. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the police department shall have powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required by the chief of police. 
(2)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the city and shall see that the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state are complied with. They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in the violation in their presence of any provision of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. 
(3)  They shall execute and return all writs and processes to them directed by the municipal judge in any case arising under a city ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 2-4-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-21. - Lost, abandoned and recovered stolen property. 
(a)  Custody of property. 
(1)  The chief of police and/or his or her designee has custody of all lost, abandoned and recovered stolen personal property coming into the possession of the city. The chief of police shall keep a record of all property taken into custody, and shall, pending disposal of the property, cause the property to be stored on property owned or leased by the city or with a private person engaged in the business of storing personal property. 
(2)  If the finder of lost, abandoned or stolen property is an officer or employee of the city and takes possession of such property, the city shall be deemed the finder and the property shall be placed in the custody of the chief of police. 
(3)  Whenever a private person brings property that the person has found to any city employee, the property shall be placed in the custody of the chief of police. Upon the finder's making a report concerning the location and circumstances of the finding, the chief of police shall issue a receipt for the property, which shall declare the finder's contingent right to reclaim the possession thereof. 
(4)  Upon coming into possession of such personal property, the chief shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain the ownership of the property. 
(5)  If the chief of police ascertains the owner of lost, abandoned or stolen personal property, except a motor vehicle, the chief of police shall give notice in writing to the owner that the property is in the possession of the police department, that it may now be reclaimed, and that it will be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city unless the owner reclaims the property in the manner prescribed by law within 60 days after the date the notice is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, to the owner at the owner's last-known address. 
(6)  If the owner of the lost, abandoned, or stolen personal property cannot be ascertained by the chief of police, the chief of police shall periodically, and not less than once each year, cause notice containing the following information to be published for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city: 
a.  A description of the lost, abandoned or stolen personal property then in possession of the chief of police; and 
b.  A statement that the property will be disposed of by the city unless the owner thereof reclaims the property in the manner provided for by law within ten days after the last publication of the notice. 
(b)  Immediate disposal permitted. The chief of police may immediately dispose of any property that reasonably appears to pose a sanitary or health hazard if stored and shall keep a log describing all property disposed of for these reasons. 
(c)  Disposition of property other than motor vehicles. 
(1)  If, at any time prior to the city's disposition of any found personal property, except a motor vehicle, in the manner provided by this section, a person claims to be the property owner, the chief of police shall return the property to such claimant if the claimant submits written evidence of ownership that is sufficient to satisfy the chief of police that the claim is rightful and if the claimant pays the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in obtaining possession of the property, storing the property and publishing or mailing notice related to the property. 
(2)  If an apparent owner has not made claim to the property by the expiration of the time period set forth in the mailed or published notice, the finder of record shall be notified by mail that the finder has ten days to claim the property. If, within the ten-day period, the finder makes a demand for the property and tenders payment to the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in connection with the possession, storage and publication and mailing of notices regarding the property, the property shall be returned to the finder. 
(3)  If the found personal property remains unclaimed after the time following the notice as required in subsection (c)(2) of this section, the city administrator shall cause the property to be disposed of by sale, unless the city administrator decides that the property can be used by the city. 
(4)  If property is to be disposed of by sale, the city administrator shall: 
a.  Cause a notice of such sale to be published for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city setting forth the date, time and place of the sale; a description of the property to be sold; and a statement that the property will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
b.  At the date and place designated for the sale of the lost, abandoned or recovered stolen personal property described in the notice of sale, cause the property to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. If a bid is not made for the article of personal property offered at such sale, the article shall become the property of the city. 
c.  Upon consummation of the sale, the individual exhibiting a receipt of sale to the chief of police shall be entitled to possession of the article purchased. 
d.  The proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to the costs of keeping, providing notice, storage and sale, and the balance shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(5)  There is no right of redemption from a sale and conveyance of the lost, abandoned or recovered property. 
(d)  Disposition of motor vehicles. Motor vehicles shall be disposed of according to the provisions and procedures set out in C.R.S. § 42-4-1801 et seq., for abandoned vehicles on public property; and C.R.S. § 42-4-2101 et seq., for vehicles abandoned on private property. 
(e)  Holding property as evidence. If the city attorney, district attorney or other person charged with the duty of prosecuting violations of the city, state, or federal laws requests that any of the lost, abandoned or recovered stolen personal property be held by the chief of police because it is required in a criminal prosecution, the chief of police shall retain custody and shall not sell the property until written notice is received that the property is no longer needed for prosecution purposes. 
(Code 2000, § 2-4-50; Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 2009) 
Secs. 10-22-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 10-36. - Creation. 
    The mayor and the city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute and enter into an intergovernmental agreement creating an emergency telephone authority, which agreement shall include the city, the county, and all other cities, towns, special districts and other emergency response authorities located within the county. 
(Code 2000, § 5-3-10; Ord. No. 916, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-37. - Charges. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 29-11-102(2) and (3), there is hereby imposed a charge in an amount not to exceed $0.70 per month per exchange access facility, as defined within said statute, upon all telephone exchange access facilities located within the corporate limits of the city. No such charge shall be imposed upon more than 100 exchange access facilities or their equivalent, per customer billing; and, further, such charge shall not be imposed upon any state or local governmental entity. 
(Code 2000, § 5-3-20; Ord. No. 916, § 2, 1993) 
Sec. 10-38. - Administration. 
    The proceeds of said charge shall be utilized to pay for equipment acquisition costs, installation costs and monthly recurring charges billed by the service supplier for the emergency telephone service thus established. 
(Code 2000, § 5-3-30; Ord. No. 916, § 3, 1993) 
Sec. 10-39. - Effective date. 
    The charge herein imposed shall become effective on February 22, 1993. 
(Code 2000, § 5-3-40; Ord. No. 916, § 4, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-40. - Authorization to collect charge. 
    The telephone service suppliers providing telephone service within the city are hereby authorized to collect and remit the emergency telephone charge imposed by this article as provided in the state statutes. 
(Code 2000, § 5-3-50; Ord. No. 916, § 5, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 10-41-10-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means an actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar calamity. 
(Prior Code, § 7-l; Code 2000, § 2-5-10; Ord. No. 450, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 10-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans, including mock or practice drills, within the city in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the coordination of disaster functions of the city with all other public agencies and affected private persons. Any expenditures made in connection with such disaster activities, including mutual aid activities and mock or practice drills, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 7-2; Code 2000, § 2-5-20; Ord. No. 450, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 12 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 12-1. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-10; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-2. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electrical, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard, so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-20; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-3. - Flood loss reduction generally. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters, or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-30; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent annual chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term "100-year flood" does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2 percent chance annual flood). The term "500-year flood" does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500 years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate map for zones that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the state that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, that if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. The term "elevated building" may also include a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(3)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas with special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, a flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles or building access storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home, for the purposes of this chapter, means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for longer than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date a building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include: 
(1)  Land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; 
(2)  The installation of streets and/or walkways; 
(3)  Excavation for a basement, footings, pier or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; or 
(4)  The installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units, or not a part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a wall or roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-40; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-5. - Applicability. 
    This chapter applies to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-50; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-6. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The special flood hazard areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Prowers County, Colorado, and Incorporated Areas," dated April 19, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at the city clerk's office. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-60; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015; Ord. No. 1201, 2016) 
Sec. 12-7. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-70; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-100; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-9. - Floodplain development permit. 
(a)  A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard areas established in section 12-6. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; and 
(2)  Existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location for the foregoing. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in section 12-14; and 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(c)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of the location; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-110; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-10. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city administrator or his or her designee is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-120; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-11. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, ensure that the encroachment provisions of section 12-15 are met; 
(2)  Use of other base flood data. When base flood data has not been provided in accordance with section 12-6, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development within the designated special flood hazard areas in accordance with section 12-14; 
(3)  Information to be obtained and maintained. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement; 
b.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures, verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and maintain the floodproofing certifications required in section 12-9; and 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by section 12-9. 
(4)  Notification of alteration of watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the state water conservation board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
b.  Require that all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area shall meet the standards as provided on section 12-13(4) for channelization, flow diversion, evaluation, maintenance and any alteration activity of a watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; and 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (i.e., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 12-12. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-130; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-12. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Appeal board. 
(1)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment and appeals or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the district court. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the board of adjustment and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; and 
i.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(5)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to, and surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed below the base level, provided that the items in subsection (a)(4) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(6)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (a)(4) of this section, and the purposes of this chapter, the board of adjustment and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(7)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued to afford relief, upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (a)(4) of this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(5)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-140; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-13. - Flood hazard reduction. 
    In all special flood hazard areas, including areas designated as areas of shallow flooding, the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. 
b.  All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be: 
1.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at the intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.  Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
(4)  Alteration of a watercourse. 
a.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
b.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
c.  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
d.  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered state professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
e.  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and local floodplain requirements and regulations. 
f.  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered state professional engineer, that there is not more than a zero-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions in the floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section 12-15. 
g.  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
e.  No new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within special flood hazard areas as designated on the community's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-150; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-14. - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 12-6 or 12-11(2), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In new construction on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  With the exception of critical facilities outlined in subsection (6) of this section, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one foot above the base flood elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered state professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural designs, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained on file by the floodplain administrator. 
c.  On a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Enclosures. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
b.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered state professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4)a of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. 
b.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Critical facilities. 
a.  Classification of critical facilities. Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: 
1.  Essential services. Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
2.  Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing), and laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
3.  At-risk populations. At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
4.  Vital to restoring normal services. Facilities vital to restoring normal services include government operations. 
b.  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard areas shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one of the following: 
1.  Location outside the special flood hazard areas; or 
2.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
c.  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-160; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Sec. 12-15. - Floodways. 
    Located within special flood hazard areas established in section 12-6 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 12-13, 12-14 and this section. 
(3)  Prohibit the placement of any manufactured homes, except in an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. 
(4)  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community. 
(Code 2000, § 16-23-170; Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 2015) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Government includes any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the government of the city. 
    Governmental function includes any activity which a public servant is legally authorized to undertake on behalf of the government. 
    Peace officer , as used in this section, means a peace officer in uniform, or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting at any time during the arrest his or her credentials as such peace officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
    Public building , as used in this section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
    Public servant means any officer or employee of the government, whether elected or appointed, and any person participating as an advisor or consultant, engaged in the service of process or otherwise performing a governmental function, but the term "public servant" does not include witnesses. 
(Code 2000, § 10-1-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-101. 
Sec. 14-2. - Depositing of ashes, coals, etc. 
    No person shall deposit any ashes, cinders or burnt coals containing fire upon any private lot or premises unless the same shall be deposited and kept in an ash pit constructed therefor of brick, stone, cement, iron or other fireproof material, which ash pit shall be so built and constructed as to prevent any danger from fire therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 10-4; Code 2000, § 18-5-60; Ord. No. 112, § 6) 
Sec. 14-3. - Burning restrictions. 
    No person shall burn leaves, brush or other refuse upon the surface or gutter of any street in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10-5; Code 2000, § 18-5-70; Ord. No. 376, § 11) 
Sec. 14-4. - Unlawful conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for two or more persons to come together within the city for the purpose of doing any unlawful act with force and violence against the property of the city, against the person or property of another, against the peace or to the terror of others, or in concert to make any movement of preparation therefor. 
(b)  No persons shall collect together in bodies of crowds for any unlawful purpose or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens or sojourners of the city. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property or to conduct himself or herself in or on such public building or property in violation of any order, rule or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in this section limiting or prohibiting the use, activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or agency having the power of control, management or supervision of the building or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each such officer or agency may adopt such orders, rules or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection and maintenance of such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules and regulations upon the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statues, buildings, grounds and other structures, and any object of scientific, historical or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages and other individual or group usages, including the place, time and manner in which such activities may be permitted; 
(5)  Use of all vehicles as to place, time and manner of use; and 
(6)  Control and limitation of fires and designation of places where fires are permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 17-33; Code 2000, § 10-2-10; Ord. No. 87, §§ 4, 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-9-117. 
Sec. 14-5. - Trespass or interference in public buildings. 
(a)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the city as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of, or to leave any such public building. 
(b)  No person shall, at or in any public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the city officer charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(e)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(f)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section commits an unlawful act. 
(Code 2000, § 10-2-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-6. - Interfering with use of streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or congregating on any public highway, street, alley or sidewalk in the city shall obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free, unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any police officer of the city or other authorized peace officer. 
(b)  No person shall in any manner encumber or obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground within the city; erect any building or stairway, in whole or in part, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground; place or keep merchandise, boxes, bales or any commodities of any kind whatever upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground; or make excavations, holes or ditches or do any other thing to or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, without a permit issued by the city. 
(Code 2000, § 10-2-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-9-107. 
Sec. 14-7. - Damaging or destroying public property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to either willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or in any other manner damage or destroy real property, improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-4; Code 2000, § 10-2-40; Ord. No. 112, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-509. 
Sec. 14-8. - Damage or removal of street signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person without proper authorization to remove, deface, damage or destroy any street sign or sign erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such street. 
(Code 2000, § 10-2-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-509. 
Sec. 14-9. - Littering on property. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or deposit in any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the city any paper, old clothes, cloth of any kind, boots, shoes, hats, leather, hair, grass, junk cars, straw, hay, trash or any other thing, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private property. 
(Code 2000, § 10-2-60; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-511. 
Sec. 14-10. - Criminal mischief. 
    It is unlawful for any person to either willfully, maliciously or wantonly damage or destroy real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to any person where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than $500.00. 
(Code 2000, § 10-3-10; Ord. No. 940, §§ 1, 2, 1994; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-501. 
Sec. 14-11. - Trespassing. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly occupy, use or remain on or in any property, real or personal, without the permission of the owner or persons entitled to the possession thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 10-3-20; Ord. No. 857, §§ 1, 2, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-502 et seq. 
Sec. 14-12. - Theft. 
    It is unlawful for a person to commit theft. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of another without authorization or by threat or deception when the value of the thing is less than $1,000.00, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such a manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person; 
(5)  Knowingly retains the thing of value more than 72 hours after the agreed-upon time of return in any lease or hire agreement; 
(6)  It is unlawful for any person, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, to aid, abet or advise any other person in planning or committing the offense of theft. 
(Code 2000, §§ 10-3-30-10-3-70; Ord. No. 856, §§ 2, 3, 1988; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-4-401. 
Sec. 14-13. - Secondhand stores, junk yards, and swap shops; recordkeeping; age limit. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any secondhand store, swap shop or junk yard operating in the city shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the transactions of such business in the form and manner set forth in this article. 
(b)  The following information shall be obtained by such owner or operator and kept upon forms to be furnished by the police department, with respect to each transaction wherein any item or article comes into possession of such business by purchase, trade or swap and which item is to be resold, traded or swapped by such business in the course of business: 
(1)  A description of the item or article, including any serial or other identifying numbers; 
(2)  The quantity or number; 
(3)  Whether purchased or obtained by swap or trade; 
(4)  The name of the person from whom obtained; 
(5)  The color, sex and date of birth of the person from whom obtained; 
(6)  The date obtained; 
(7)  A personal identification number, e.g., driver's license number, Social Security number, and the like; and 
(8)  Verification of the person by photo identification. 
(c)  Such forms shall be turned over to any member of the police department upon demand. 
(d)  No owner or operator of such business shall enter into any transaction without keeping records of each transaction, or refuse or fail to surrender such records to the police department on demand. 
(e)  No owner or operator of any secondhand store, swap shop or junk yard operating in the city shall transact business with any person under 18 years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 17-29; Code 2000, § 10-3-80; Ord. No. 470, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-13-114. 
Sec. 14-14. - Tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(a)  Any person who connects any pipe, tube, stopcock, wire, cord, socket, motor or other instrument or contrivance with any main, service pipe or other medium conducting or supplying gas, water or electricity to any building without the knowledge and consent of the person supplying such gas, water or electricity commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(b)  Any person who in any manner alters, obstructs or interferes with any meter pit, meter or metering device provided for measuring or registering the quantity of gas, water or electricity passing through said meter without the knowledge and consent of the person owning said meter commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(c)  A person who tampers with property of another with intent to cause injury, inconvenience or annoyance to that person or to another, or if he or she knowingly makes unauthorized connection with property of a utility, commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any licensed electrical or plumbing contractor while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with recognized customs and standards. 
(Code 2000, § 10-3-90; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-15. - Disorderly conduct. 
    A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
(3)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence; 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; or 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1019, § 2, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-9-106. 
Sec. 14-16. - Disrupting lawful assembly. 
    A person commits disrupting lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he or she significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-9-107. 
Sec. 14-17. - Riots. 
    No person shall cause, engage in, incite, instigate or encourage any riot, rout, affray or fight. 
(Prior Code, § 17-28; Code 2000, § 10-4-30; Ord. No. 87, § 8) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-9-101. 
Sec. 14-18. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place, directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, computer system, or other interactive electronic medium in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, computer system, or other interactive electronic medium which is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or 
(8)  Touches or strikes the person of another by any substance or thing put in motion by him or her. 
(b)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "obscene" means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by subsection (a)(4), (5) or (6) of this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-19. - Loitering. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person without a valid reason to lounge in or on, prowl around in or on, or loiter around, in or on any railroad depot or station grounds, bus depot, banking institutions, place of public amusement, motel, hotel, store, shop, public road or alley, public way, public gathering, public assembly, public building, private dwelling, house or other public place. 
(b)  The term "loiter" means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain, abide or tarry in a public place. 
(c)  A person commits a Class 1 petty offense if he or she: 
(1)  Loiters for the purpose of unlawful gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia; 
(2)  Loiters for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviant sexual intercourse; 
(3)  With intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, loiters in a school building or on school grounds or within 100 feet of school grounds when persons under the age of 18 years are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his or her representative or by a peace officer; or 
(4)  Loiters with one or more persons for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing a controlled substance, as defined in section 14-156. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he or she was exercising his or her rights of lawful assembly as part of a peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(Prior Code, § 17-19; Code 2000, § 10-4-60; Ord. No. 87, § 6; Ord. No. 553, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1209, 2016) 
Sec. 14-20. - Assault. 
(a)  An assault is an unlawful attempt of a person, coupled with a present ability, to commit a bodily injury on another person. 
(b)  It is unlawful to assault, beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another. 
(Prior Code, § 17-31; Code 2000, § 10-4-70; Ord. No. 112, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-21. - Fighting. 
    No person shall engage in any fighting, or engage in any dog fight or cock fight, or other fight within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-10; Code 2000, § 10-4-80; Ord. No. 87, § 1) 
State Law reference- Animal fighting prohibited, C.R.S. § 18-9-204; dueling prohibited, C.R.S. § 18-13-104; disorderly conduct prohibited, C.R.S. § 18-9-106. 
Sec. 14-22. - Abandoned containers and appliances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other container or appliance which has a door, lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing said door, lid, snap lock or other locking device. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-23. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
    No person shall throw or shoot any stone or other missile at or upon any person, animal, vehicle, public or private property, building, structure, tree or shrub. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Throwing missiles at vehicles, C.R.S. § 18-9-116. 
Sec. 14-24. - Public indecency. 
    It is unlawful to commit public indecency. Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse or deviant sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure or demonstration of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; 
(3)  A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person; or 
(4)  An act of urinating or defecating. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-130; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-7-301. 
Sec. 14-25. - Indecent exposure. 
    It is unlawful for a person to knowingly expose his or her genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-140; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-7-302. 
Sec. 14-26. - Peeping Toms. 
    No person shall enter upon any private property during the nighttime and peer or look into or through any door or window of any structure designed or used for a dwelling. 
(Prior Code, § 17-24; Code 2000, § 10-4-150; Ord. No. 500, § 1) 
Sec. 14-27. - Aiding and abetting. 
(a)  Any person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be in violation of the ordinances of the city, whether individually or in connection with one or more persons, as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense. 
(b)  Any person who fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any ordinance of the city is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-160; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 18-1-603. 
Sec. 14-28. - Posting of handbills. 
    No person shall attach to, place upon or lean against, or cause or allow any agent or employee to attach to, place upon or lean against any telegraph pole, telephone pole, hydrant, hitching post, awning or other structure or building in or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks or other public ways of the city or upon any public structure or building adjoining any public street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, any bills, notices, letters, pictures or characters of any kind whatsoever, for the purpose of advertising any show, performance, business or entertainment, provided that nothing in this section shall affect the posting of bills, notices, letters, pictures or characters by licensed bill posters upon public property, as may be provided by this Code or any other regulation of the city, and that the owner or occupant of any building shall be permitted to attach securely to such building any sign, etc., advertising the business carried on in such building, so as not to project over 22 inches from such building and elevated over the alley or sidewalk at least eight feet from the surface of the alley or sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 17-1; Code 2000, § 10-11-10; Ord. No. 191, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-29. - Failure to return items to library. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to fail to return any books or other items belonging to the public library in the city, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such library. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to remove or to assist in the removal from such public library any book, plate, picture, engraving, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other item belonging to such library without first having the same charged or checked out by the proper agent or employee of such library, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such library. 
(Prior Code, § 17-18.1; Code 2000, § 10-11-20; Ord. No. 550, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 14-30. - Peddlers and solicitors. 
    It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person, without first obtaining a license, to be in and upon any private residence in the city as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, without having been requested or invited by the owner or occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same. 
(Prior Code, § 17-23; Code 2000, § 10-11-30; Ord. No. 303, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-31. - Spitting. 
    No person shall expectorate upon any city sidewalk or upon the floor or stairway of any building within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-30; Code 2000, § 10-11-40; Ord. No. 112, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-32. - Destroying or defacing trees or shrubs. 
    No unauthorized person shall destroy, mutilate, cut, remove, break, injure or tie any horse or other animal to any tree, shrub, plant or other ornament whatever upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground. 
(Prior Code, § 17-31; Code 2000, § 10-11-50; Ord. No. 112, § 5) 
Secs. 14-33-14-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 14-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage or alcoholic liquor means fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
    Controlled substance means a drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which is declared to be a controlled substance under this article, and also includes marijuana, marijuana concentrate and cocaine. 
    Drug paraphernalia means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment or device which is primarily designed and intended for one or more of the following: 
(1)  To introduce into the human body any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
(2)  To enhance the effect on the human body of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
(3)  To conceal any quantity of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; or 
(4)  To test the strength, effectiveness or purity of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law. 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol, including any alcoholic beverage as defined above. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than 0.5 percent and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    Malt liquor includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Open container means any container other than an original closed container as sealed or closed for sale to the public by the manufacturer or bottler of the liquor or beverage. If an original container has been unsealed, undone or opened in any manner, it is an open container for the purposes of this article. 
    Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his or her person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate presence and control. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately-owned real property which is not open to the public. The term "private property" shall not include: 
(1)  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to C.R.S. title 12, art. 46, 47 or 48; 
(2)  Any establishment which sells alcoholic beverages or upon which alcoholic beverages are sold; or 
(3)  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
    Public place means any place commonly or usually open to the general public or to which members of the general public may resort, or accessible to members of the general public. By way of illustration, such public places include, but are not limited to, public ways, streets, buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, shopping centers, shopping center malls, places of business usually open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles in or upon any such places, but shall not include the interior or enclosed yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes, among other things, brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least 0.5 percent alcohol, and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor except malt liquors and vinous liquors shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Vinous liquor means wine and fortified wines which contain not less than 0.5 percent and not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverages obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-10; Ord. No. 925, § 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-48. - Alcohol-related violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to represent himself or herself to be over the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing within the city any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attempt to purchase, purchase or obtain, either directly or through an intermediary, any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by misrepresentation or any other means. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess or consume, whether actual or constructive, fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(d)  It is unlawful to sell fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors to any person under the age of 21 years, or to permit any fermented malt beverage, malt or vinous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under 18 years of age, or spirituous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under 21 years of age, or to permit any such person to participate in the sale or dispensing thereof. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any person under 21 years of age any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(f)  It is unlawful in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed upon the premises, for any person to beg or to solicit any patron or customer of or visitor in such premises to purchase any alcoholic beverage for the one begging or soliciting. 
(Prior Code §§ 17-8, 17-21; Code 2000, § 10-6-20; Ord. No. 36, § 1; Ord. No. 383, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. § 12-47-901. 
Sec. 14-49. - Duty to report disturbance. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any licensee of any premises in the city, licensed to sell either intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages by the drink, to fail to immediately report or cause to be immediately reported to the police department any fight, disturbance or other breach of the peace happening in or on such licensed premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person in charge of, or acting as manager of, any premises in the city, licensed to sell either intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages by the drink, to fail to immediately report or cause to be reported to the police department any fight, disturbance or other breach of the peace happening in or on such licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, § 17-7.1; Code 2000, § 10-6-30; Ord. No. 625, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-50. - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. 
(a)  Any person under 21 years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the city commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (a) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under 21 years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than 0.5 percent of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(c)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in the city; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in the city. 
(e)  During any trial for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, any bottle, can or other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(f)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under 21 years of age, or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give, or permit the possession and consumption of, ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of 21 years under the conditions described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. This subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to C.R.S. title 12, art. 46, 47 or 48, or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under 21 years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 17-20; Code 2000, § 10-6-40; Ord. No. 434, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-51. - Sales near schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale or gift any fermented malt beverage or any vinous, spirituous or malt liquors within a distance of 500 feet from any private, public or parochial school, said distance to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property lines. However, this prohibition shall not affect the rights of any person holding a lawful permit or license to conduct such business within the restricted area hereby established; nor shall this prohibition prevent the renewal, upon the expiration thereof, of any license in effect at such time authorizing such business within the restricted area hereby established. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-52. - Alcoholic beverages in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall carry or have any open containers of alcoholic beverages on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, in any automobile or on the grounds or in the facilities of any public or private school, college or university, except where authorized by the governing authority of such institution. 
(b)  No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any of the places enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to any place duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-60; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-53. - Open container. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume by open container any alcoholic beverage, whether such possession is actual or constructive, in any public place as defined in section 14-156, upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the city; provided, however, that it shall not be a violation of this provision to store or consume any alcoholic beverage in conformance with, and pursuant to the terms of, any validly issued permit or license. 
(b)  In the event that any violation of this section is alleged to have occurred in a motor vehicle under circumstances such that the complaining party to such incident is unable to identify the person alleged to have possessed or consumed malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages, it shall be presumed that the operator of said motor vehicle is in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  It shall be an exception to this section if the owner or person in possession or control of such property has given express or implied consent to the possession and consumption of malt, vinous and spirituous liquor or fermented malts beverage upon said premises. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-70; Ord. No. 925, § 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-54. - Special permit. 
    The city administrator may grant permission to persons to consume any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage on publicly-owned property for special functions, including, but not limited to, athletic events, artistic events, cultural events, receptions, street closure events or civic events. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-80; Ord. No. 925, § 4, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-55. - Abusing toxic vapors. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "toxic vapors" means the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; freon, including freon 11 and freon 12; hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl ketone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; trichloroethane or xylene. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such substance for the purposes described in this section. This subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away to any other person any substance or product releasing toxic vapors, where the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that such substance will be used for the purpose of inducing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(d)  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that a container lists one or more of the substances described in subsection (a) of this section as one of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 10-6-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-18-412. 
Sec. 14-56. - Definition of drug paraphernalia. 
    The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designated for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the state or city. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state or city; 
(2)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designated for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(3)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(4)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(5)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(6)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
(7)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; or 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-10; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010) 
State Law reference- Definition of drug paraphernalia, C.R.S. § 18-18-426. 
Sec. 14-57. - Definition of marijuana. 
    The term "marijuana" shall have the meaning as set forth in C.R.S. § 18-18-102(18). 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-20; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 14-58. - Drug paraphernalia; determination considerations. 
    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(3)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-30; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 14-59. - Illegal possession of drug paraphernalia by an underage person. 
(a)  No person who is under the age of 21 years shall be in possession of drug paraphernalia or marijuana accessories. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who possesses drug paraphernalia or marijuana accessories in compliance with section 14 of article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, Medical marijuana, and the implementing state statutes and state regulations concerning medical marijuana. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person 21 years of age or older who possesses drug paraphernalia or marijuana accessories and in compliance with the state constitution, article XVIII, section 16, and the implementing state statutes and state regulations concerning personal use of marijuana. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-40; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1195, pt. 1, 2015) 
Sec. 14-60. - Manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia; penalty. 
    No person shall sell or deliver, possess with intent to sell or deliver or manufacture with intent to sell or deliver equipment, products or materials, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that such equipment, products or materials could be used as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-50; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 14-61. - Advertisement of drug paraphernalia; penalty. 
    No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication and who intends thereby to promote the sale of equipment, products or materials designed and intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-60; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 14-62. - Unlawful possession of marijuana. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who is 21 years of age or older to possess, transport, transfer, or use more than one ounce of marijuana for personal use. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess, use, transfer, or transport any amount of marijuana for personal use except as described in subsection (f) of this section. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person within one residence or dwelling who is 21 years of age or older to possess, grow, transport, or process more than six marijuana plants, only three of which shall be maturing flowering plants, for personal use. The growing of said marijuana plants shall take place in an enclosed locked facility and shall not be grown openly or publicly. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to grow marijuana plants except as described in subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person who is 21 years of age or older to transfer more than one ounce of marijuana to another person or to transfer any marijuana for remuneration or to transfer any marijuana to any person under 21 years of age. 
(f)  The provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section shall not apply to any person who possesses, grows, transports, or transfers marijuana in compliance with the state constitution, Medical marijuana, section 14 of article XVIII, provided that the possession, growing, use, transfer, or transport of the medical marijuana is not in plain view or done in a public place. 
(g)  The municipal court may utilize treatment, probation, or deferred sentencing for any person who violates any provision of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-70; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1195, pt. 2, 2015) 
Sec. 14-63. - Open marijuana container prohibited in a vehicle or in a public place. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to have or carry any open container of marijuana on any street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or in any other place open to the public, or in any motor vehicle or other means of conveyance, or in any building or grounds open to the public, except where authorized by law. 
(b)  The term "open container of marijuana" means any receptacle, container or marijuana accessory that contains any amount of marijuana and that has no personal marijuana dispensary seal, or said seal is broken. If the violation takes place in a motor vehicle under circumstances where the complaining party is unable to identify the person possessing the marijuana or container, the operator of the vehicle shall be presumed to have violated the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-80; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1195, pt. 3, 2015) 
Sec. 14-64. - Unlawful manufacture of hash oil. 
    It shall be unlawful to manufacture hash oil anywhere within the city by use of solvents containing compressed flammable gases, including, but not limited to, butane. 
(Code 2000, § 10-12-90; Ord. No. 1195, pt. 4, 2015) 
Sec. 14-65. - Public consumption. 
    It is unlawful for any person to consume marijuana or marijuana products in a public place. 
Sec. 14-66. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, company, association of persons, for profit or not for profit, to operate any marijuana establishment, marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility or retail or wholesale marijuana store within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, company or association of persons, for profit or not for profit, knowingly to possess, use, display, purchase, transport, transfer, store, warehouse, cultivate, sell or distribute to another or to a consumer or any other person or entity, more than one ounce of marijuana for personal use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, company or association of persons, for profit or not for profit, knowingly and openly, in a public place, to publicly use for any purpose, consume, ingest, display, possess, transfer, distribute or sell marijuana to a consumer or to any other person or entity. 
(Code 2000, § 6-12-20; Ord. No. 1182, § 1, 2013) 
Secs. 14-67-14-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC OFFICERS 

Sec. 14-79. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to obstruct government operations. 
(b)  A person commits obstructing government operations if he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the performance of a governmental function by a public official, employee or servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacles. 
(Code 2000, § 10-1-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-102. 
Sec. 14-80. - Impersonating a peace officer. 
    No person shall impersonate a police officer or any other officer of the city by wearing any star, badge or other emblem of office or in any other manner. 
(Prior Code, § 17-9; Code 2000, § 10-1-30; Ord. No. 87, § 12; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-113. 
Sec. 14-81. - Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer made or given in the discharge of the police officer's duties. 
(b)  No person shall, in any way, interfere with or hinder any police officer who is discharging or apparently discharging the duties of the position. 
(c)  It is unlawful to obstruct a peace officer or firefighter. 
(d)  A person commits obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacles, such person knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer acting under color of his or her official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter acting under color of his or her official authority. 
(e)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was acting in an illegal manner, if the peace officer was acting under color of his or her official authority as defined in section 14-5(c). 
(f)  This section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. 
(Prior Code, § 17-18; Code 2000, § 10-1-40; Ord. No. 87, § 12; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-104. 
Sec. 14-82. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It is unlawful to resist arrest. 
(b)  A person commits resisting arrest if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer acting under color of his or her official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
(c)  A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, the peace officer is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by the peace officer. 
(Code 2000, § 10-1-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-103. 
Sec. 14-83. - Assisting in escape of prisoners. 
    No person shall effect the escape or in any manner assist in effecting the escape or make any attempt to effect the escape of any person from the jail or any other place where any such person shall have been incarcerated by virtue of this Code or any other ordinance of the city or any judgment rendered thereunder without having the permission of the appropriate custodian of the jail or incarceration facility. No person shall hold communication with any person so incarcerated by conversation or otherwise without the permission of the appropriate custodian of the jail or incarceration facility, or furnish or deliver or cause to be delivered or furnished to any such person so incarcerated any food, drink or any other thing. 
(Prior Code, § 17-26; Code 2000, § 10-1-60; Ord. No. 87, § 13; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-201 et seq. 
Sec. 14-84. - False reporting to authorities. 
    It is unlawful for a person to falsely report to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; or 
(3)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false. 
(Code 2000, § 10-1-70; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. § 18-8-111. 
Sec. 14-85. - Duty of citizens to aid police officers. 
    A person, 18 years of age or older, shall, upon command by a person known to him or her to be a peace officer, take reasonable steps to provide aid to the peace officer in effecting or securing an arrest or preventing the commission by another of any offense. 
(Code 2000, § 10-1-80; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 14-86-14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation by local governments, C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2007. 

Sec. 14-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the term "fireworks" means any article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall specifically include, without limitation, any such article, device or substance which produces an explosive report and/or is or causes a projectile into the air or along the earth. 
(b)  The term "fireworks" does not include the following: 
(1)  Toy caps which do not contain more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive compound per cap; 
(2)  Highway flares, railroad fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and other emergency signal devices; 
(3)  Educational rockets and toy propellant device type engines used in such rockets when such rockets are of nonmetallic construction and utilize replaceable engines or model cartridges containing less than two ounces of propellant, and when such engines or model cartridges are designed to be ignited by electrical means; 
(4)  Fireworks which are used in testing or research by a licensed explosives laboratory; or 
(5)  Any device defined in C.R.S. § 24-33.5-2001(11) as permissible fireworks. 
(Code 2000, § 10-7-10; Ord. No. 971, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-101. - Sale prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. Persons desiring to sell exempted items as described in section 14-100(b) shall first obtain a permit for the sale of said items. Application for a permit to sell such fireworks from any temporary location shall be made by June 15 of each year, and shall be made to the fire chief. A permit fee, as established by the city council, shall be charged for each sales location proposed and shall be paid to the city clerk. Fifty percent of the permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant if the site of sale of such items is cleaned of all stands, refuse and debris constructed or caused by said sale to the satisfaction of the fire chief by July 10 of each year. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. City sales tax shall be collected and remitted to the city in respect of all sales at such locations. 
(Code 2000, § 10-7-20; Ord. No. 971, § 3, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-102. - Possession or discharge of fireworks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to light, set off, detonate or discharge any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to possess fireworks with the intention to light, set off, detonate or discharge the same within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  A person acts with intent when his or her conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed by this article, being the lighting, setting off, detonation, or discharge of any fireworks within the city. It is immaterial to the issue of specific intent whether or not the result actually occurred. 
(Code 2000, § 10-7-30; Ord. No. 971, § 4, 1996) 
Sec. 14-103. - Displays. 
    The fire chief is hereby authorized to grant supervised public displays of fireworks at any time by fair associations, civic groups and other organizations or groups of individuals. Every display shall be handled by a qualified operator who shall be approved by the fire chief. Every display shall be of such a character and located in a manner which, in the opinion of the fire chief, does not present a hazard to or endanger any person or property. 
(Code 2000, § 10-7-40; Ord. No. 971, § 5, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-104. - Seizure or confiscation. 
    The chief of police may seize, take, confiscate, and remove all items, articles and stocks of fireworks possessed or utilized by any person in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 10-7-50; Ord. No. 971, § 6, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 14-105-14-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS 

Sec. 14-119. - Curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be in or on any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public grounds, public building, vacant lot or other public place within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in pursuit of lawful employment, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor, or unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person of the age of 21 years or more having specific permission of a parent or guardian to have the custody of the child at the time, provided that on Friday and Saturday nights, the curfew hours for children 15 through 17 years old shall be extended to 1:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any child under the age of 15 years to be in or on any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public grounds, public building, vacant lot or other public place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in pursuit of lawful employment, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor, or unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person of the age of 21 years or more having specific permission of a parent or guardian to have the custody of the child at the time. 
(Prior Code, § 17-5.1; Code 2000, § 10-5-10; Ord. No. 608, § 1; Ord. No. 757, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-120. - Arrested child to be taken home. 
    In addition to any other powers he or she may have, any law enforcement officer of the city arresting a child for the violation of any provision hereof is empowered to take such child home and to demand that a parent, guardian or other person having the right to custody of such child take such child home. It is unlawful for any such parent, guardian or other person to fail or refuse to take such child home after demand has so been made upon him or her. 
(Prior Code, § 17-5.3; Code 2000, § 10-5-20; Ord. No. 608, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-121. - Aiding, abetting of minor. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly aid, abet, approve, encourage, allow, permit, tolerate or consent to the violation by any minor child of any provision of this article or any ordinances of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of any child under the age of 18 years to allow or permit any such child to be in or on any public street, highway, alley, park, playground, public grounds, public building, vacant lot or other public place within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in pursuit of lawful employment, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor, or unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person of the age of 21 years or more having specific permission of a parent or guardian to have the custody of the child at the time, provided that on Friday and Saturday nights, the curfew hours for children 15 through 17 years old shall be extended to 1:00 a.m. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of any child under the age of 15 years to allow or permit any such child to be in or on any public street, highway, alley, park, playground, public grounds, public building, vacant lot or other public place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in pursuit of lawful employment, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor, or unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person of the age of 21 years or more having specific permission of a parent or guardian to have the custody of the child at the time. 
(Prior Code, § 17-5.2; Code 2000, § 10-5-30; Ord. No. 608, § 2; Ord. No. 757, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-122. - Encouraging delinquency. 
    It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended or revoked. 
(Code 2000, § 10-5-40; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-123. - False statement; false credentials. 
    It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to make false statements, to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, note or other document for any unlawful purpose, or to furnish, present or exhibit such documents issued to a person other than the one presenting the same for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including beer, liquor, wine or fermented malt beverages as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 10-5-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-124. - Services of others. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(Code 2000, § 10-5-60; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-125. - Loitering and other acts around schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in, about or on any public, private or parochial school, college or seminary grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having some lawful business therein or thereabout or in connection with such school or the employees thereof, or for any person to: 
(1)  Annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any such school; 
(2)  Annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any such school, college or seminary while in any such school building or on any school grounds; 
(3)  Conduct himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in or about any school building or school grounds; or 
(4)  Park or move a vehicle in the immediate vicinity of or on the grounds of any such school, college or seminary for the purpose of annoying or molesting the students or employees thereof or in an effort to induce, entice or invite students into such vehicles for immoral purposes. 
(Code 2000, § 10-5-70; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-126. - Abandoned containers and appliances. 
    No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other container or appliance which has a door, lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door, lid, snap lock or other locking device. 
(Code 2000, § 10-4-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-127. - Furnishing, purchasing or possessing tobacco products. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any business proprietor, manager or other person in charge or control of a retail business of any kind to engage, employ or permit any individual under the age of 18 years to sell cigarettes or tobacco products, as defined by C.R.S. § 18-13-121(5), from any retail business. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any business proprietor, manager or other person in charge or control of a retail business of any kind to stock or display cigarettes or tobacco products in any way which allows a customer to access such products without first securing the physical assistance of a business employee for each transaction. The provisions of this section shall not apply to places where minors are prohibited entry by law. 
(Code 2000, § 10-5-80; Ord. No. 1129, § 1, 2009) 
State Law reference- Teen Tobacco Use Prevention Act, C.R.S. § 25-14-301. 
Sec. 14-128. - Prohibition of commercial non-sale distribution of cigarettes and tobacco products. 
(a)  No person, including, but not limited to, tobacco manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers or any agent or employee representing said manufacturers, wholesalers or retailers, shall engage in the non-sale commercial distribution of any cigarette, tobacco product or coupon for tobacco products. 
(b)  No person shall permit the commercial non-sale distribution of any cigarette, tobacco product or coupon for tobacco products: 
(1)  Anywhere in any public place under the legal control of the person; or 
(2)  Through any agent or employee of the person. 
(Code 2000, § 7-2-140; Ord. No. 1129, § 2, 2009) 
Sec. 14-129. - Definitions. 
    In sections 14-128 through 14-131, the term "minor" means a person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 2000, § 10-10-10; Ord. No. 1057, 2003) 
Sec. 14-130. - Unattended minors at the Lamar Public Library. 
(a)  Every minor under the age of seven years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Public Library during the hours that the library is open for business must be accompanied by an adult or a person who has attained the age of at least 12 years. 
(b)  Every minor under the age of 12 years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Public Library at times when the library is not open for business must be accompanied by an adult, parent or legal guardian or custodian. 
(c)  Every parent, legal guardian or legal custodian who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of violation. 
(d)  Upon the occurrence of a minor being present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Public Library in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, any public official discovering the minor shall, after staying with the minor for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, contact the local law enforcement officials for assistance in contacting the parent, legal guardian or legal custodian of the minor. The local law enforcement officials shall make every effort to locate the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian and return the minor to his or her parent, legal guardian or legal custodian. If the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian cannot be located, the local law enforcement officials shall contact the department of human services. 
(Code 2000, § 10-10-20; Ord. No. 1057, 2003) 
Sec. 14-131. - Unattended minors at the Lamar City Complex. 
(a)  Every minor under the age of seven years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar City Complex during the hours that the complex is open for business must be accompanied by an adult or a person who has attained the age of at least 12 years. 
(b)  Every minor under the age of 12 years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar City Complex at times when the complex is not open for business must be accompanied by an adult, parent or legal guardian or custodian. 
(c)  Every parent, legal guardian or legal custodian who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of violation of this section, and, upon conviction by the municipal court, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-21. 
(d)  Upon the occurrence of a minor being present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar City Complex in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, any public official discovering the minor shall, after staying with the minor for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, contact the local law enforcement officials for assistance in contacting the parent, legal guardian or legal custodian of the minor. The local law enforcement officials shall make every effort to locate the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian and return the minor to his or her parent, legal guardian or legal custodian. If the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian cannot be located, the local law enforcement officials shall contact the department of human services. 
(Code 2000, § 10-10-30; Ord. No. 1057, 2003) 
Sec. 14-132. - Unattended minors at the Lamar Community Building. 
(a)  No minors under the age of 13 years shall be allowed in the cardiovascular and weight room facilities at the Lamar Community Building. 
(b)  Every minor between the ages of 13 years and 15 years who is present in the cardiovascular and weight room facilities at the Lamar Community Building during the hours that the cardiovascular and weight room facilities are open for business must be accompanied by an adult who has attained the age of 18 years. 
(c)  Every minor 16 years or older may use the cardiovascular and weight room facilities at the Lamar Community Building without adult supervision. 
(d)  Every minor under the age of seven years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Community Building during the hours that the Lamar Community Building is open for business must be accompanied by an adult or a person who has attained the age of at least 12 years. 
(e)  Every minor under the age of 12 years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Community Building at times when the Lamar Community Building is not open for business must be accompanied by an adult, parent or legal guardian or custodian. 
(f)  Every parent, legal guardian or legal custodian who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of violation of this section, and, upon conviction by the municipal court, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-21. 
(g)  Upon the occurrence of a minor being present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Community Building in violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section, any public official discovering the minor shall, after staying with the minor for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, contact the local law enforcement officials for assistance in contacting the parent, legal guardian or legal custodian of the minor. The local law enforcement officials shall make every effort to locate the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian and return the minor to his or her parent, legal guardian or legal custodian. If the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian cannot be located, the local law enforcement officials shall contact the department of human services. 
(Code 2000, § 10-10-40; Ord. No. 1057, 2003) 
Sec. 14-133. - Unattended minors at the Lamar Municipal Swimming Pool. 
(a)  Every minor under the age of seven years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Municipal Swimming Pool during the hours that the pool is open for business must be accompanied by a person who has attained the age of at least 16 years. 
(b)  Every minor under the age of 12 years who is present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Municipal Swimming Pool at times when the pool is not open for business must be accompanied by an adult, parent or legal guardian or custodian. 
(c)  Every parent, legal guardian or legal custodian who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of violation of this section, and, upon conviction by the municipal court, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-21. 
(d)  Upon the occurrence of a minor being present in or upon the grounds of the Lamar Municipal Swimming Pool in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, any public official discovering the minor shall, after staying with the minor for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, contact the local law enforcement officials for assistance in contacting the parent, legal guardian or legal custodian of the minor. The local law enforcement officials shall make every effort to locate the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian and return the minor to his or her parent, legal guardian or legal custodian. If the minor's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian cannot be located, the local law enforcement officials shall contact the department of human services. 
(Code 2000, § 10-10-50; Ord. No. 1057, 2003) 
Secs. 14-134-14-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE 

Sec. 14-146. - Unreasonable noise. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. For purposes of this section, members of the police department are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable. 
(Code 2000, § 10-9-10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-147. - Sound systems in vehicles. 
(a)  It is unlawful to make, create or permit any excessive or unusually loud noise by means of any sound system installed or otherwise located within a motor vehicle within the city. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, an excessive or unusually loud noise is a noise which can be heard at a distance of at least 50 feet from its source. Words or phrases need not be discernible. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "sound system" means, but is not limited to, any public address system, radio, stereo, tape player, compact disc player or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound. Sound systems shall not include those devices utilized for the amplification of sound in conjunction with any government-sponsored or permitted activity or those activities conducted pursuant to the express consent of the governmental entity. 
(d)  The complaint may include, but need not be limited to, police officers acting under color of their authority. 
(Code 2000, § 10-9-20; Ord. No. 962, 1996; Ord. No. 1018, §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-148. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to utilize any device designed to control, regulate or allow the release or escape of engine compression so as to slow the speed of said vehicle in such manner that the use of such braking device results in or creates excessive, loud or explosive noise from said vehicle. This section is intended to prohibit the practice commonly referred to as Jake braking, compression braking or cut-out braking. It shall be sufficient for prosecution and conviction of a violation of this offense if the Jake braking or compression braking is overheard and if the motor vehicle is observed to be operating in the general proximity of the occurrence of the noise. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of subsection (a) of this section if the motor vehicle is in an emergency situation and, in an effort to avoid collision with any other vehicle, stationary object, moving object or living person or animal, such Jake braking or compression braking was used in conjunction with the avoidance of a collision as anticipated in this subsection, and the defendant shall be exonerated from any liability under subsection (a) of this section as to the criminal offense anticipated therein. Nothing contained herein shall expand or limit any civil liability, if any. 
(Code 2000, § 10-9-30; Ord. No. 991, 1998; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-149. - Sirens, whistles, gongs and red lights. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry or use upon a vehicle, other than police or fire department vehicles or emergency vehicles for public use, any gong, siren, whistle or red light similar to that used on ambulances or vehicles of the police and fire departments. 
(Code 2000, § 10-9-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 14-150-14-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local government is preempted from regulating travel with weapons in vehicles or private conveyances, C.R.S. § 18-12-105.6; local government may not regulate concerning the issuance of concealed weapon permits, C.R.S. § 18-12-201. 

Sec. 14-164. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following items shall be deemed weapons: 
    Ballistic knife means any knife that has a blade which is forcefully projected from the handle by means of a spring-loaded device or explosive charge. 
    Blackjack includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Bomb means any explosive or incendiary device or Molotov cocktail, as defined in C.R.S. § 9-7-103, or any chemical device which causes or can cause an explosion which is not specifically designed for lawful and legitimate use in the hands of its possessor. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment, weapon or appliance for causing the firing of any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any such weapon. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device, and includes projectiles designed for use in such device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Handgun means a pistol, revolver or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged, the length of the barrel of which, not including any revolving, detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over 31/2 inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds; but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Short rifle means a rifle having a barrel less than 16 inches long or an overall length of less than 26 inches. 
    Short shotgun means a shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches long or an overall length of less than 26 inches. 
    Stun gun means a device capable of temporarily immobilizing a person by the infliction of an electrical charge. 
    Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is handheld and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Weapon means any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, paintball gun or other device from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any provision of this article that the act was committed by a peace officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. 
(Code 2000, § 10-8-10; Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-165. - Carrying concealed weapon; forfeiture. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to wear under his or her clothes or concealed about his or her person, or to display in a threatening manner any dangerous or deadly weapon, including, but not limited to, any pistol, revolver, cross-knuckles or lead, brass or other metal, knife, dirk, dagger or knife resembling a knife, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon unless said person is duly licensed per state statute and in full compliance with state law. 
(b)  Every person convicted of any violation of this section shall forfeit to the city such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies and any regular, special or ex officio police officer or any other law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Prior Code, § 17-5; Code 2000, § 10-8-20; Ord. No. 87, § 11; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-166. - Disposition of confiscated concealed weapons. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer, upon making any arrest and taking such a concealed weapon from the person of the offender, to deliver the same to the municipal judge, to be held by him or her until the final determination of the prosecution for said offense; and upon the finding of guilt, it shall then be the duty of the municipal judge to deliver said weapon forthwith to the chief of police, who shall make disposition of the weapon. 
(Code 2000, § 10-8-30; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-167. - Prohibited use of weapons. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly and unlawfully aims a weapon or firearm at another person; 
(2)  Discharges a firearm or weapon within the city limits; 
(3)  Knowingly sets a loaded gun, trap or device designed to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leaves it unattended by a competent person immediately present; 
(4)  Has in his or her possession a firearm while he or she is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance. Possession of a permit issued under C.R.S. § 18-12-105.1 is no defense to a violation of this section; or 
(5)  Knowingly aims, swings or throws a knife, throwing star or nunchaku at another person, or knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When transporting throwing stars or nunchaku for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, non-accessible container. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prevent the operation of a private firing range within the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such range shall, at all times, be subject to rules and regulations as established by the chief of police with city council approval, and a permit shall first be obtained. 
(2)  Such permit shall be revocable at any time the chief of police or city council determines that the activities on such range are creating a hazard or a nuisance. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of any such instruments in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or residences under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and also in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any type of gun whatsoever, when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of any such instruments by any peace officer as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of his or her duties. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9A-1, 9A-2; Code 2000, § 10-8-40; Ord. No. 543, § 1; Ord. No. 656, § 1; Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 14-168. - Providing weapons to intoxicated persons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol or other weapon or firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of 18 years not in the presence of a parent or guardian. 
(b)  Such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the city to such person. 
(Code 2000, § 10-8-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 16 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is adopted as the property maintenance code of the city, by reference thereto, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, Virginia 22041, that code to have the same force and effect as if set forth in this article in every particular, save and except such portions as are added, amended, deleted or replaced in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-8-10; Ord. No. 1052, § 7, 2002; Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 16-2. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code, as finally adopted, shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the city clerk at a moderate price. 
(Code 2000, § 18-8-20; Ord. No. 1052, § 7, 2002; Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 16-3. - Amendments. 
(a)  The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "The City of Lamar." 
(2)  Section 102.3, Application of other codes, is amended by: 
a.  Replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
b.  Replacing "International Zoning Code" with "Lamar Zoning Code." 
(3)  Section 103.1, General, is amended to as follows, "The department of property maintenance inspection is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Chief Building Official." 
(4)  Section 103.3, Deputies, is amended as follows, "In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical officers, inspectors, code enforcement officers and other employees." 
(5)  Section 103.5, Fees, is amended by inserting "as established by the City of Lamar." 
(6)  Section 104.5, Identification, is deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 111.2, Membership of board, is amended by replacing "three" with "five" as the minimum number of members. 
(8)  Section 111.2.1, Alternate members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 111.2.5, Compensation of members, is deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(11)  Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended by inserting "12 inches" as the allowable height of weeds. 
(12)  Section 304.14, Insect screens, is amended by the insertion of "April 15" and "September 15." 
(13)  Section 307.3.1, Garbage facilities, is deleted in its entirety. 
(14)  Section 307.3.2, Containers, is deleted in its entirety. 
(15)  Section 506.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: "All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to a public sewer system." 
(16)  Section 602.3, Heat supply, is amended by changing "October 1" to "May 1." 
(17)  Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended by changing "October 1" to "May 1." 
(18)  Section 603.2, Removal of combustion products, is amended by the deletion of the exception. 
(19)  Section 604.2, Service, is amended by replacing "ICC Electrical Code" with "the current electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(20)  Chapter 8, Referenced standards, is amended by replacing "ICC EC-06, ICC Electrical Code" with "the electrical code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(b)  The accumulative supplement to the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-8-30; Ord. No. 1052, §§ 2, 7, 2002; Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 2007) 
Sec. 16-4. - Report of costs. 
    Upon the completion of any work by the city contemplated by this chapter, the appropriate designee shall report, in writing, to the city administrator, which report shall make a clear statement of the work done by the city and the expense incurred in so doing, so that the city administrator may determine the cost of such work. A separate report for each lot or parcel of land shall be made. 
(Code 2000, § 7-1-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-5. - Assessment of property. 
    After considering the report required by section 16-1, the city administrator shall determine and assess the whole cost for the abatement thereof, including five percent for the inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, upon the lots and tracts of land from which the nuisance was abated. 
(Code 2000, § 7-1-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-6. - Notice of assessment. 
    The city clerk, as soon as may be after such assessment is made, shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of such lots or tracts of land at the reputed post office address, a notice of such assessment, which notice shall contain a description of the lots or parcels of land, the name of the owner and the amount of the assessment. 
(Code 2000, § 7-1-120; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-7. - Payment of assessment. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner to pay such assessment or object thereto, in writing, within 30 days after the receipt of such notice, and in case of his or her failure to do so, he or she shall be liable personally for the amount of the assessment. The same shall be a lien upon the respective lot or parcel of land from the time of such assessment, and the city shall have all remedies for collection thereof provided by state statutes, for the purpose of having the same placed upon the tax list and collected in the same manner as taxes are now collected. The assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until it is paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(b)  The amount of such assessment may be paid to the city clerk at any time before the tax list is placed in the hands of the county treasurer, but thereafter only to the county treasurer. 
(Code 2000, § 7-1-130; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-8. - Certified assessment. 
    In case the owner shall fail to pay such assessment or object thereto within the required time as provided in section 16-4, then it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify the amount of the assessment to the proper county officers, who shall collect the assessment as provided for by state law for the collection of delinquent general taxes. 
(Code 2000, § 7-1-150; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 16-9-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DECLARATION OF NUISANCES 

Sec. 16-31. - Posting handbills, posters and placards. 
    Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which shall be stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house or other building or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure or vehicle without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 7-2-20; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-32. - Dead animal removal. 
    When any animal dies in the city, it shall be the duty of the owner or keeper thereof to remove the body of such animal forthwith beyond the limits of the city. If such body is not forthwith removed, the same shall be deemed a nuisance, and such owner or keeper will be the author of the nuisance. When the body of any such dead animal is in any street, highway or public grounds in the city, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause such body to be removed forthwith beyond the limits of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 7-2-100; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 16-33. - Removal of animal waste. 
    The owner or keeper of any animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any feces deposited by such animal on any property, public or private, not owned or exclusively occupied by the owner or keeper. 
(Code 2000, § 7-2-110; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 18 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means all animal and vegetable waste attending the handling, preparation, cooking, consumption or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables, excluding dead animals and slaughterhouse offal. 
    Junk includes, but is not limited to, used lumber, scrap metals and materials, discarded furniture, fixtures, appliances and all wrecked, abandoned, demolished, dismantled or inoperable machinery, trailers and other goods that are so worn or deteriorated as to make them unusable in their existing condition. 
    Refuse means all hay, straw shavings, excelsior, grass cuttings, paper and paper products, containers, boxes, glass, cans, bottles and other materials commonly known as rubbish or refuse as are commonly produced in homes, stores and institutions; excluding, however, debris or rubbish from the construction, demolition or repair of buildings and other structures, trees and tree limbs, dead animals, abandoned large machinery, vehicles and furniture. 
    Rubbish and debris mean all waste, refuse and rejected matter and material, whether animal, vegetable, manufactured or natural deposits or accumulations. It shall be unlawful to deposit, accumulate, store, keep or abandon, or to allow the deposit, accumulation, storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, rubbish, debris or scrap material on private or public property within the city other than in areas zoned for such junk, rubbish or debris, if such deposit, accumulation, storage, keeping or abandonment causes harm, danger, detriment, injury, disturbance or undue annoyance to health, safety, welfare or property of persons in the neighborhood or the public in general. 
(Prior Code, § 12-1; Code 2000, § 7-4-10; Ord. No. 606, § 1; Ord. No. 707, §§ 2, 6, 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 18-21. - Collection and removal by city or contractor; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, all garbage and refuse shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the city or by persons under contract to the city. Except as specifically provided for herein, no other person or entity shall collect any garbage or refuse within the city or convey the same through or over any street, alley, road or highway within the city. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prohibit any person from hauling his or her own refuse to the city dump, provided that it is done at a time when the dump is officially open, and the refuse is transported in such a manner as to preclude any of it from being deposited on any street, alley or other property en route. Any person so hauling his or her own refuse shall not be excused from paying the applicable collection charge provided for herein by the city. 
(c)  Any restaurant owner or operator, or the owner or operator of any similar business having garbage fit for livestock feeding, may contract with any other person to haul away such garbage. 
(d)  Any person so hauling away such garbage shall transport the same in covered containers acceptable to the city, and in such a manner as to preclude the emitting of offensive smells and the falling, dripping or spilling of the same on the ground or on the bed of the transporting vehicle. 
(e)  Any owner or operator so electing to dispose of his or her garbage shall not thereby be excused from the payment of the regular charge applicable to him or her for removal by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12-2; Code 2000, § 7-4-20; Ord. No. 606, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 18-22. - Materials too bulky or heavy for containers. 
    All rubbish, trash or other waste materials too bulky or heavy to be placed in city containers, including, but not limited to, debris and rubbish resulting from the construction, repair and demolition of buildings and other structures, trees and tree limbs, industrial refuse, dead animals, machinery, vehicles, furniture and other like items, shall be removed and disposed of by the owner or occupant of the premises where the same are located at his or her own expense, provided that nothing herein shall preclude the city from undertaking to remove any of these items at its option and at charges to be determined by resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 12-4; Code 2000, § 7-4-30; Ord. No. 606, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 18-23. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Garbage and refuse in proper containers, as herein provided for, shall be placed out for collection at a convenient place on the property of the user, adjacent to the street or alley, or at such other convenient place as the city may from time to time determine with respect to individual properties or users. 
(b)  The city may permit a user to place such containers at a place selected by the user; provided that if such spot selected is more than ten feet from the spot for collection designated by the city, the city may make an additional charge to the user over and above the regular collection charge. 
(Prior Code, § 12-5; Code 2000, § 7-4-40; Ord. No. 606, § 6) 
Sec. 18-24. - Collection frequency. 
    Collection shall be made at such times and frequencies as the city may from time to time determine, acting in its administrative capacity. 
(Prior Code, § 12-6; Code 2000, § 7-4-50; Ord. No. 606, § 7) 
Sec. 18-25. - Charges for collection. 
(a)  All charges for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be set by the city by resolution, and may be changed by resolution. 
(b)  Charges for garbage and refuse removed shall be a lien on the property served until paid in full. 
(c)  If payment of any such charge is not made within 90 days after the same is due, the city clerk shall certify such charges as assessed to the county treasurer, to be placed on the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected, with a ten percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by state law. 
(Prior Code, § 12-7; Code 2000, § 7-4-60; Ord. No. 606, § 8) 
State Law reference- Procedures for collection of unpaid taxes and assessments, C.R.S. § 39-10-101 et seq. 
Sec. 18-26. - Matters determined by resolution. 
    The city council may, by resolution, determine and redetermine any of the following matters: 
(1)  The method and manner of transporting garbage and refuse under section 18-21; 
(2)  The size, type, kind and weight of bags to be used; 
(3)  The adequacy of the containers for refuse; 
(4)  The place where garbage and refuse must be placed for collection under section 18-23; 
(5)  The hours, frequencies and routes of collection by the city, and the hours the city dump shall be officially open; and 
(6)  Such other matters as may be necessary to effectively implement the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 12-8; Code 2000, § 7-4-70; Ord. No. 606, § 9; Ord. No. 621, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 18-27. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person engaged as a commercial hauler of garbage and refuse to dispose of said garbage and refuse in the landfill belonging to the city or in any garbage and refuse collection transfer facility belonging to the city, as may now exist or be hereafter established, unless under contract and with permission of the city. 
(b)  A rebuttable presumption is hereby created that any person is engaged as a commercial hauler of garbage and refuse if such person: 
(1)  Publicly advertises or solicits business by offering to collect, remove or dispose of garbage and refuse; 
(2)  Receives any compensation in excess of the actual transportation expense incurred in the collection, removal or disposal of garbage and refuse; or 
(3)  Conducts or operates any regularly scheduled route, either within or outside the city, for the collection and removal of garbage and refuse, or for the disposal of garbage and refuse at any city collection transfer facility or landfill. 
(c)  A commercial hauler of garbage and refuse shall not include any person hauling his or her own refuse, any restaurant or similar business owner or operator contracting with any person to haul away garbage to be used as feed for livestock, or any person hauling garbage and refuse incident to a regular business pursuit engaged in by such person, such as, by way of example, but not limited to, demolition contractors. 
(Code 2000, § 7-4-90; Ord. No. 924, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 18-28. - Disturbing or removing containers. 
    No person shall molest, remove, handle or disturb any garbage or refuse container placed out for collection, provided that this shall not apply to persons legally collecting the same under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 12-9; Code 2000, § 7-4-100; Ord. No. 606, § 10) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Obstruction of streets prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall in any manner encumber or obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground within the city; erect any building or stairway, in whole or in part, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground; place or keep merchandise, boxes, bales or any commodities of any kind whatever upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground; or make excavations, holes or ditches or do any other thing to or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground that may endanger the safety of the public within the city. 
(b)  No person shall fail or refuse to remove any encumbrance or obstruction in any street or to make safe for travel and use by the public any place upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds occupied by him or her, within 24 hours of the time he or she is notified by the chief of police, public works director or other authorized designee of the city to remove or repair the same. 
(Prior Code, § 22-1; Code 2000, § 11-1-10; Ord. No. 112, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-2. - Placing building materials on street during construction. 
    No contractor, builder, owner or other person shall be permitted to occupy a part of any street, not to exceed one-half of the street in front of any lot or premises upon which such contractor, builder, owner or other person is erecting or is about to erect or construct any building or do any work or make any improvement, for a period not to exceed 90 days without first making application 48 hours in advance to the chief of police. 
(Prior Code, § 22-2; Code 2000, § 11-1-20; Ord. No. 112, § 1) 
Sec. 20-3. - Trees and shrubs obstructing streets. 
    No owner or occupant of any lot or premises within the city shall allow or permit any trees, shrubs or plants to grow or be grown upon such lot or premises in such a manner as to obstruct or hinder the free, uninterrupted and safe passage of pedestrians or vehicles along the sidewalks or streets and along and through the alleys within the city. No owner or occupant of any lot or premises within the city shall plant any trees or shrubs upon any such lot or premises within three feet from the lot line of such lot or premises. 
(Prior Code, § 22-7; Code 2000, § 11-1-70; Ord. No. 112, § 7) 
Sec. 20-4. - Sidewalk construction and repair. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed by the owners of property abutting upon the same or at their expense, as provided in this article, throughout the city upon both sides of the streets whenever such streets are laid out, improved and in common use. 
(b)  The city council may order by ordinance the construction or rebuilding of a sidewalk upon any street or part of a street in the city. In the ordinance ordering such construction or rebuilding, there shall be clearly set forth the place where such sidewalk shall be constructed or rebuilt, a description of every lot and parcel of land upon which the same abuts or is contiguous, and the style, dimensions and material of such sidewalk. Any such ordinance may contain orders and directions for the construction or rebuilding of any number of such sidewalks on any number of streets. 
(c)  At any time within 30 days after the publication of an ordinance ordering construction or rebuilding of a sidewalk, the owner of any lot or parcel of land upon which such sidewalk abuts shall, at his or her own expense, construct or rebuild so much of such sidewalk as abuts upon his or her premises. 
(Prior Code, § 22-8; Code 2000, § 11-1-80; Ord. No. 21, §§ 4, 5, 16; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-5. - Failure of property owner to construct or rebuild. 
    In case of the failure of any owner of premises abutting any sidewalk to construct or rebuild such sidewalk as provided in this article, upon order of the city council, it shall be the duty of the public works department to report to the city council such person who has failed to construct or rebuild his or her part of the sidewalk, the length of the sidewalk required to be constructed or rebuilt, and the place where the same should be constructed or rebuilt. Upon order of the city council to be entered of record, the public works department shall proceed to construct or rebuild without delay so much of such sidewalk as shall remain to be constructed or rebuilt in the manner directed in such order, and the city council shall authorize the public works department to incur the necessary expenses therefor. The public works department shall report to the city council, at the next meeting after the sidewalk is completed, the expense of construction or rebuilding such sidewalk along each lot or premises in front of or beside which the same is constructed or rebuilt. 
(Prior Code, § 22-9; Code 2000, § 11-1-90; Ord. No. 21, § 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-6. - Repairs of sidewalks by owners. 
    Whenever any sidewalk in the city is in need of repair, the city council may order the same repaired. It shall be the duty of the public works department to give notice to the owner or person in charge of any property which abuts such sidewalk to have the same repaired within five days. On failure to have such repairs made, the public works department shall proceed at once to make such repairs, at the expense of the city, and to report the expense thereof to the city council at its next meeting. In case it is not known or ascertained, after due inquiry, who the owner or person in charge of such property is, or in case the public security would be endangered for the lack of such repairs immediately, in the opinion of the public works department, it shall proceed to make such repairs without giving such notice. The expense for the repairs shall be collected as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 22-10; Code 2000, § 11-1-100; Ord. No. 21, § 6; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-7. - Assessment and collection of costs. 
(a)  Upon the report of the public works department to the city council of the expense of repairing sidewalks by the city pursuant to this article, and of constructing and rebuilding sidewalks, as provided in section 20-5, the city council shall by resolution assess and determine the amount chargeable against each owner and against each lot or parcel of land, or any part thereof, on account of the construction, rebuilding or repairing of any such sidewalk by the city. Such resolution shall state the total amount charged and assessed against each owner, and the separate sums charged and assessed against each lot or parcel of land, or any part thereof. 
(b)  The cost and expense of constructing, rebuilding or repairing any sidewalk by order of the city council, when the same shall have been assessed, as provided in this section, shall be payable by the owners of the several lots or parcels of land upon which the same shall abut or be contiguous without further demand within ten days after the meeting of the city council to hear appeals from such assessment, as provided by law. Such assessment shall constitute a lien upon such property until the same is paid or the amount thereof has been reduced by the city council. In case of reduction by the city council of the original amount of such assessment upon appeal by the owner of the assessed property, such reduced assessment shall constitute a lien upon such property until the assessed amount is paid. In case of failure to pay any such assessment within ten days after the meeting of the city council to hear the appeal, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify such assessment to the proper officer then having custody of the tax list of the county for the then-current year, to be placed on such tax list for collection, together with a ten percent penalty to defray the collection costs. 
(c)  The city council, as soon as possible after such assessments have been made as provided in this section, shall cause to be published in a newspaper published in the city a notice of such assessments, containing the name of the owners respectively of the several lots or parcels of lands named in such assessment, a description of each lot or parcel of land assessed and the amount of the assessment against each, and shall also specify a time and place at which the owner of any lot or parcel of land so assessed may meet with the city council, appeal any such assessment and be heard as to the justice and correctness of the amount assessed. The city council shall meet and, if necessary, may adjourn from time to time and shall hear any owner of any lot or parcel of land so assessed who may appear before it, at such specified time or at any time to which the city council may adjourn for such purpose, as to the correctness of the amount so assessed against any such lot or parcel of land. Such property owner may appear before the city council either in person or by an agent. In case no appeal is made from an assessment, the same shall stand as assessed. In case any assessment shall be reduced on appeal, such assessment shall stand as reduced. If any assessment is not reduced or discharged, such assessment shall stand as confirmed, and the same, when so reduced or confirmed, shall stand as the assessment for the construction, rebuilding or repair of such sidewalk against the lot or parcel of land described in the assessment. 
(d)  An assessment to any extent and against any number of individuals or lots or parcels of lands may be made in one resolution. 
(e)  The city clerk shall maintain a record of the assessments against any owners of lots or parcels of land, giving the owner's name, when known, and the description of each lot or parcel of land assessed and upon which such assessment would be a lien, and the amount of any such assessment against any person or lot or parcel of land may be paid to the city clerk. In such cases, the city clerk shall give a receipt therefor, enter the record of payment in such book and accompany such record of payment by a sufficient reference to the corresponding assessment of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 22-11; Code 2000, § 11-1-110; Ord. No. 21, §§ 8-12; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-8. - Type of material required. 
(a)  All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete by the parties owning or controlling lots or lands adjoining or abutting upon the streets along which such sidewalks are laid. The same shall be not less than four inches of concrete laid upon a foundation of sand and gravel not less than four inches thick. All sidewalks shall be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner. 
(b)  The repair of any sidewalk shall be made with the same kind of materials used in the original construction of the sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 22-12; Code 2000, § 11-1-120; Ord. No. 21, §§ 2, 13; Ord. No. 74, § 1) 
Sec. 20-9. - Width and grade. 
    All sidewalks shall be of a uniform width on the same street and shall conform to the grade established by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 22-13; Code 2000, § 11-1-130; Ord. No. 21, § 3) 
Sec. 20-10. - Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. 
(a)  Every owner or occupant of any premises within the city having a sidewalk on or adjacent to the premises shall have the duty to keep the sidewalk clean of snow and ice. 
(b)  All snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours of accumulation. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, premises shall mean any lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision of real property, whether occupied or not, and whether or not a structure exists on the lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision. 
(Code 2000, § 11-1-140; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 20-11-20-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROADS AND SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 20-39. - Standards, regulations and specifications. 
    The public works department, in consultation with the city administrator and the public works director, shall utilize CDOT Standard Specification of Road and Bridge Construction, as may be amended, in governing access, utilization and restoration of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city, which standards, regulations and specifications shall not constitute a barrier to the use and excavation of city facilities, but shall preserve the integrity of the facilities at the least possible cost to city taxpayers. 
(Code 2000, § 11-2-10; Ord. No. 968, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 20-40-20-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-68. - Speed limit. 
    No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any of the roadways in any park of the city at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Prior Code, § 18-2; Code 2000, § 11-3-20; Ord. No. 338, § 2) 
Sec. 20-69. - Restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate any minibike, motorcycle, motor scooter or other motor-propelled, two-wheel vehicle in any city parks. 
(Prior Code, § 18-2.1; Code 2000, § 11-3-30; Ord. No. 643, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-70. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding section 20-69, any vehicle which may be legally operated on a public highway within the state may also be operated in any city parks, but only on roadways in such parks which are open to the public for vehicular traffic. 
(Prior Code, § 18-2.2; Code 2000, § 11-3-40; Ord. No. 643, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-71. - Livestock at large in parks. 
    No person shall permit or allow any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or any other livestock to pasture, graze or run at large within the limits of any park owned by the city, whether within or outside the city; provided that this section shall not apply to animals placed therein by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18-3; Code 2000, § 11-3-50; Ord. No. 338, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-72. - Authority of city in parks. 
    The provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the city are extended to and shall be in full force and effect in any parks owned by the city, whether situated inside or outside the city, and all police officers and firefighters of the city shall have the same police power and authority within any city park that they possess within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18-4; Code 2000, § 11-3-60; Ord. No. 338, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-73. - Recreational facilities. 
    All recreational facilities of the city owned by the city, or controlled by it or the city recreation commission, including, but not limited to, the swimming pool, parks and ball fields, are, for the purposes of maintenance, repairs and capital improvements, a part of the parks, cemetery and recreation department of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 18-5; Code 2000, § 11-3-70; Ord. No. 517, § 4) 
Sec. 20-74. - Park curfew. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. of the following day unless permitted, allowed or sponsored by the city. The city administrator may authorize, upon request, use of a public park between 10:30 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. of the following day. 
(Prior Code, § 18-5.1; Code 2000, § 11-3-80; Ord. No. 580, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 2002) 
Secs. 20-75-20-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CEMETERIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-92. - Injuring, defacing of property. 
    No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any public building, structure, fixture or equipment belonging to the city, or any tree, grass, flowers, flower bed, shrubs, sewer, water pipe, hydrant or ditch situated in any cemetery owned by the city, whether situated within or outside the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1; Code 2000, § 11-4-10; Ord. No. 338, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-93. - Speed limit in cemeteries. 
    No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any of the roadways in any cemetery of the city at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Prior Code, § 6-2; Code 2000, § 11-4-20; Ord. No. 338, § 2) 
Sec. 20-94. - Livestock at large in cemeteries. 
    No person shall permit or allow any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or any other livestock to pasture, graze or run at large within the limits of any cemetery owned by the city, whether within or outside the city, provided that this section shall not apply to animals placed therein by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-3; Code 2000, § 11-4-30; Ord. No. 338, § 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-95. - Foundations and stones. 
(a)  To promote aesthetics, safety and maintenance operations in the city cemeteries, persons desiring to install gravestones or markers on gravesites must first secure a permit from city staff. The permit process will ensure the foundation and stone conform to the requirements for placement and construction. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for the placement of gravestones or monuments. 
(c)  Foundation charges shall be as established by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-50; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 2009) 
Sec. 20-96. - Cemetery service charges. 
(a)  For both the Riverside Cemetery and Fairmount Cemetery, charges for cemetery services shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  Disinterments shall not be performed on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. 
(c)  Burials shall not be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-60; Ord. No. 953, § 2, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-97. - Future prices, charges and fees. 
    In the absence of any contrary legislative enactment by any future city council, all prices shall on January 1 of each year thereafter be adjusted by an amount equal to inflation, as defined in article X, section 20(2)(f) of the TABOR Amendment to the state constitution, plus two percent. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-70; Ord. No. 953, § 5, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 20-98-20-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RIVERSIDE CEMETERY 

Sec. 20-125. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a cemetery in the city to be known as Riverside Cemetery. 
(Prior Code, § 6-5; Code 2000, § 11-4-200; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
Sec. 20-126. - Control and supervision. 
(a)  For the purpose of maintenance, repairs and capital improvements, Riverside Cemetery shall be under the control of the parks, cemetery and recreation department. 
(b)  All caskets accepted for burial spaces in Riverside Cemetery shall be enclosed in an industry standard, concrete cement burial vault and approved for use by the city's cemetery director. 
(Prior Code, § 6-6; Code 2000, § 11-4-210; Ord. No. 19, § 2; Ord. No. 769, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1206, 2016) 
Sec. 20-127. - Maintenance of records. 
    The city clerk shall keep all records of Riverside Cemetery and shall have charge of the sale of lots, plots and spaces therein, and such register shall also show the numbers of the lots and blocks wherein such persons were buried. 
(Prior Code, § 6-8; Code 2000, § 11-4-220; Ord. No. 19, § 5; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 20-128. - Price of lots. 
(a)  The price to be charged for lots in Riverside Cemetery shall be as established by the city council by resolution. There shall be no discount for purchase of spaces in excess of one space. 
(b)  Monthly installments in equal amounts may be accepted on the purchase price of cemetery lots, together with interest at the rate of five percent per annum. The minimum monthly installment shall be no less than $25.00, with a term not to exceed 36 months from the date of the lot purchase. Failure to make payment by the tenth day of each month may result in the lot being returned to the cemetery for resale and forfeiture of installments made. No burial shall be permitted unless the price of the lot to which interment will be made is paid in full. 
(c)  Lots, plots and spaces in Riverside Cemetery will be conveyed to the purchaser by deed, subject to the rules and regulations thereof, the provisions of this article and any other ordinances of the city in reference thereto, and to the laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-240; Ord. No. 1123, § 3, 2009) 
Secs. 20-129-20-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAIRMOUNT CEMETERY 

Sec. 20-155. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a municipal cemetery, consisting of land owned by the city, to be known and designated as Fairmount Cemetery. 
(Prior Code, § 6-10; Code 2000, § 11-4-300; Ord. No. 237, §§ 1, 4) 
Sec. 20-156. - Control and supervision. 
(a)  All lots, plots and spaces in Fairmount Cemetery shall be held in accordance with, and subject to the rules, regulations and provisions of, this article or any other ordinance of the city, and the laws of the state. 
(b)  Caskets accepted for burial spaces in Fairmount Cemetery shall be enclosed in an industry standard, concrete cement burial vault and approved for use by the city's cemetery director. 
(c)  Grave markers of granite or bronze, set level or flush with the lawn, may be placed at the head of each grave. Foundations will be required for all monuments, mausoleums and structures of every description placed on lots, plots and spaces, such foundations to be constructed by the city, the rates to be fixed and established by resolution of the city council. No foundations will be required for flat markers. All orders for foundations shall be filed at the office of the city clerk, and payment therefor made to the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-6, 6-10, 6-14; Code 2000, § 11-4-310; Ord. No. 19, § 2; Ord. No. 237, §§ 1, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11; Ord. No. 769, § 1; Ord. No. 1206, 2016) 
Sec. 20-157. - Price of lots. 
(a)  The price to be charged for lots in Fairmount Cemetery shall be as established by the city council by resolution. There shall be no discount for purchase of spaces in excess of one space. 
(b)  Single spaces in Fairmount Cemetery will be sold in blocks numbered 21 to 42, inclusive thereof, and monuments will be permitted therein. 
(c)  Cremation spaces in Fairmount Cemetery will be sold in blocks numbered 105 and 105A, inclusive thereof, and monuments will be permitted therein. 
(d)  Monthly installments in equal amounts may be accepted on the purchase price of cemetery lots, together with interest at the rate of five percent per annum. The minimum monthly installment shall be no less than $25.00 with a term not to exceed 36 months from the date of lot purchase. Failure to make payment by the tenth day of each month may result in the lot being returned to the cemetery for resale and forfeiture of installments made. No burial shall be permitted unless the price of the lot to which interment will be made is paid in full. 
(e)  Lots, plots and spaces in Fairmount Cemetery will be conveyed to the purchaser by deed, subject to the rules and regulations thereof, the provisions of this article, and any other ordinances of the city in reference thereto and to the laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-320; Ord. No. 1123, § 4, 2010) 
Sec. 20-158. - Maintenance of records. 
    The city clerk shall keep all records of Fairmount Cemetery, and shall have charge of the sale of lots, plots and spaces therein and such register shall also show the number of the lot and block wherein such person was buried. 
(Prior Code, § 6-12; Code 2000, § 11-4-330; Ord. No. 237, § 3) 
Sec. 20-159. - Perpetual care. 
    The city shall perpetually care for and maintain all roads, walks, pathways, grass, ground, shrubbery, trees and improvements belonging or appertaining to Fairmount Cemetery, provided that all lot, plot or space owners are to care for and maintain all monuments, mausoleums and markers erected on their lots, plots or spaces, except ordinary care. 
(Prior Code, § 6-13; Code 2000, § 11-4-340; Ord. No. 237, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 20-160. - Monuments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, monuments will be permitted in Fairmount Cemetery, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. No monument, mausoleum or other structure shall be placed in Fairmount Cemetery until a design of the same, with specifications, has been submitted to and approved by the Parks and Cemetery Director thereof. 
(b)  In order to maintain a park-like appearance, no monuments raised above the surface of the ground will be allowed in the following described blocks or lots: all of blocks one and two; lots six to 17 inclusive, in block three; lots nine to 15 inclusive, in block 15; lots six to 17 inclusive, in block 16; all of blocks 17, 18, 19 and 20; and circle lots 38 to 44 and 60 to 67, inclusive. All markers and headstones in such lots shall be set level or flush with the ground. 
(Prior Code, § 6-14; Code 2000, § 11-4-350; Ord. No. 237, §§ 7, 8, 10, 11; Ord. No. 769, § 1) 
Sec. 20-161. - Maintenance of lots. 
(a)  No lot, plot or space may be decorated by its owner or others with any trees or shrubs, nor shall the trees or shrubs planted thereon by the city be disturbed in any way. 
(b)  No lots, plots or spaces in Fairmount Cemetery may be defined or marked by any fence, coping, railing, hedge or embankment, nor shall any lot be filled above the established grade. Boundaries of lots, plots or spaces may be designated, if the owner so desires, by granite corners set level or flush with the ground and inside the corner of the lot, plot or space so marked. Such boundary markers shall be placed and maintained at the expense of the owner of the lot, plot or space. 
(Prior Code, § 6-14; Code 2000, § 11-4-360; Ord. No. 237, §§ 7, 8, 10, 11; Ord. No. 769, § 1) 
Sec. 20-162. - Use of funds. 
    All money received from the sale of lots, plots or spaces in Fairmount Cemetery shall be used for the improvement of such cemetery and the maintenance thereof, or for the payment of any indebtedness incurred in connection therewith or interest incurred thereon. One-half of all money so received shall be invested by the city treasurer under the direction of the city council in municipal, county, state or United States government bonds, or the bonds of school districts of the state of the first and second classes, and all interest derived therefrom shall be exclusively applied, appropriated and used for the perpetual improvement, preservation and embellishment of Fairmount Cemetery and its appurtenances. 
(Prior Code, § 6-16; Code 2000, § 11-4-370; Ord. No. 237, § 13) 
Secs. 20-163-20-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VETERANS SECTION AT FAIRMOUNT CEMETERY 

Sec. 20-193. - Established. 
    The veterans section at Fairmount Cemetery shall be Section A-H on the south end of Fairmount Cemetery for the purpose of burial of honorably discharged veterans of military service to the United States of America. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-400; Ord. No. 1031, 2001; Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 20-194. - Eligibility for interment in the veteran's section. 
    Eligibility for interment in the veterans section at Fairmount Cemetery shall be as follows: 
(1)  Prior to interment, veterans, their family members or representatives must present to the city clerk or his or her designee honorable discharge documentation from any branch of service of the United States of America, including, but not limited to, the Army, Navy, Marines, Air Force, Coast Guard, National Guard, and reserve units of said branches; 
(2)  Veterans must either at some time in their lifetimes or at the time of death have been residents of Prowers County or a community located within 30 miles of Fairmount Cemetery; 
(3)  The current spouse, or surviving spouse of a veteran who is eligible for interment in the veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) of this section; 
(4)  The minor children of an eligible veteran. For purposes of eligibility for this benefit, a minor child is a child who is unmarried and is less than 18 years of age; 
(5)  The unmarried adult child of an eligible veteran who became permanently physically or mentally disabled and incapable of self-support before reaching age 21. Proper supporting documentation must be provided. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-410; Ord. No. 1031, 2001; Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 20-195. - Plot designations. 
(a)  Plots shall be chosen for veterans and/or their eligible family members on the basis of next available, contiguous space. For eligible family members to be interred in adjoining plots, all spaces must be reserved at the time of the first death. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, veterans and/or their spouses may choose the next available, contiguous space at the time of purchase of a monument to be placed on said space; provided, however, that the monument is paid for and placed on the space at the time the space is chosen. 
(c)  Upon written notification of forfeiture from a veteran or spouse, any reserved but unused space shall revert back to the cemetery. Spaces shall not be transferrable. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-420; Ord. No. 1031, 2001; Ord. No. 1036, 2001; Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 20-196. - Fees. 
(a)  Interment as a veteran or eligible spouse in the veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery shall be without assessment of charge or fees by the city for the plot only. It is not the intent of the city to waive any other fees associated with the interment other than the fee for the plot. 
(b)  Eligible family members of a veteran other than the spouse shall be assessed the normal charge or fees for interment by the city, including the usual and customary fee for the plot, as established by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-430; Ord. No. 1031, 2001; Ord. No. 1036, 2001; Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 6-12-2017) 
Sec. 20-197. - Appearance and flag. 
    The veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery shall conform in appearance with all other sections of the cemetery. In addition to conforming appearance, an illuminated flagpole with adjoining landscaping and marker shall be allowed in the veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-440; Ord. No. 1031, 2001) 
Sec. 20-198. - Reservation for expansion of veterans section. 
    The city-owned property immediately adjoining the south side of Section A-H on the south end of Fairmount Cemetery shall be reserved for future expansion of the veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-450; Ord. No. 1031, 2001) 
Sec. 20-199. - Application of rules, regulations and provisions of division 3 of this chapter regarding Fairmount Cemetery. 
    All lots, plots and spaces of the veterans section of Fairmount Cemetery shall be subject to all rules, regulations and provisions applicable to the Fairmount Cemetery as set forth in sections 20-156, 20-158, 20-159, 20-160 and 20-161. 
(Code 2000, § 11-4-460; Ord. No. 1031, 2001) 
Chapter 22 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Plat requirement, C.R.S. § 31-23-101 et seq., authority to regulate subdivision of land, C.R.S. § 31-23-213 et seq.; requirements for local regulations, C.R.S. § 31-23-214. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Jurisdiction. 
    The scope of jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission shall be limited to that area which is included within the corporate limits of the city and such contiguous unincorporated area, within three miles of the boundaries of the municipality not located in any other municipality; except that in the case of any such land lying within five miles of more than one municipality, the jurisdiction of each commission shall terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective municipal limits of such municipalities. The jurisdiction over the subdivision of lands outside the boundary of a municipality shall apply equally to any municipality. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-10; Ord. No. 840, art. I, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-2. - Administration. 
    All plans for public thoroughfares, and all plans, plats, plots and replots of real property proposed in a subdivision or building lot, and all those portions to be dedicated to a public use or the use of owners and purchasers of lots fronting thereon, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval, consistent with the requirements herein and state law, before they may be recorded. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-20; Ord. No. 840, art. I, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public thoroughfare which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which is 20 feet or less in width. 
    Approved public sanitary sewer system means a sewage disposal plant, main sanitary sewer lines and other lines approved by the city council and/or the board of county commissioners and by the state department of health. 
    Approved public water system means a water treatment plant and service lines approved by the city council and/or the board of county commissioners and by the state department of health. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way or parks, etc., or a combination thereof. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround. 
    Design means the location of streets, alignment of streets, grades and widths of streets, alignment of easements, grades and widths of easements, alignment and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers, and the designation of minimum lot area, width and length. 
    Development means the act of building structures and installing site improvements. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
    Final plat means a plan or map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable local regulation, which plat is prepared to be placed on record in the office of the register of deeds of the county. 
    Governing body means either of the following, as may be applicable to the particular area: 
(1)  City council. The term "city council" means the city council of the city. 
(2)  County commission. The term "county commission" means the board of county commissioners of the county. 
    Improvement means street work and utilities that are to be installed or are agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs. 
    Lot means a portion of land in a subdivision, or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Major thoroughfare means a street, highway or roadway designated as such on the official major street plan. 
    Marginal access street or frontage road means a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a major street, highway or railroad right-of-way and provides access to abutting properties. 
    Pedestrian way means a right-of-way dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. 
    Planning and zoning commission means the city planning and zoning commission. 
    Planning area means the city and all land in the county lying outside the city, but within three miles of the nearest point of the city limits, unless otherwise altered by the scope of jurisdiction as set forth in section 22-1. 
    Preliminary plat means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. This map need not be based on an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. 
    Replat means the replanning and/or remapping of areas which have been previously platted and legally recorded, in order to change the existing pattern of land subdivision. 
    Resubdivision includes: 
(1)  Substandard lots of record that are combined into larger, more saleable plots in keeping with contemporary development ideas and in which new streets are opened up or in which recombination of the lots constitutes development; 
(2)  Small parcels and strips transferred to adjoining property owners in order to make minor property line adjustments; and 
(3)  Lots of adequate size that are divided or recombined in such a manner as to not let any fall below standards, but the marketability of the land is improved. 
    Secretary means the secretary of the planning and zoning commission. 
    Setback line or building line means a line on a plat, generally parallel to the street right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected or altered. 
    Street means a right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated to the public use, or a private right-of-way serving more than one ownership, which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
    Subdivider means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for himself or herself, or for others. 
    Subdivision means any parcel of land which is to be used for condominiums, apartments, or any other multiple-dwelling units, unless such land was previously subdivided and the filing accompanying such subdivision complied with applicable regulations in existence pertaining to subdivisions of substantially the same density; or the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-30; Ord. No. 840, art. II, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-4. - Pre-application. 
(a)  Discussion with the city-designated planning and zoning official is in particular recommended in order to obtain the necessary basic information and regulations. Further information should be sought and obtained from an attorney and an engineer or land surveyor by any person contemplating platting a parcel of land. The city-designated planning and zoning official shall consult with and inform other appropriate city officials as necessary regarding any proposed subdivision. 
(b)  In the discussion with the city-designated planning and zoning official, a pre-application sketch plan shall be submitted in order to resolve possible points of disagreement and in order to clarify the developer's intent. 
(c)  The sketch plan and accompanying documents, if any, shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Layout of streets and lots; 
(2)  Existing and proposed covenants and zoning; 
(3)  Available utilities; 
(4)  Construction types and sizes; 
(5)  Price ranges; 
(6)  Proposed commercial uses; and 
(7)  Relation to traffic arteries, schools, churches and shopping. 
(d)  The sketch plan shall be to approximate scale, but need not be drawn mechanically. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-40; Ord. No. 840, art. III, 1986; Ord. No. 979, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-5. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  After reaching the preliminary conclusions regarding the requirements for the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat together with supplementary information to the secretary of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  A filing fee shall accompany the filing of each preliminary plat. 
(c)  The subdivider shall submit ten copies of the preliminary plat and ten copies of a vicinity map, if the vicinity map is not on the preliminary plat, showing the location of the proposed subdivision. These plans shall be filed with the secretary at least ten days prior to the regular planning and zoning commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered. A sample plat is available in the planning department. 
(d)  Preliminary plats shall contain: 
(1)  Name and address of the subdivider; 
(2)  Designer of the subdivision and date; 
(3)  Certificate by a registered and licensed surveyor or engineer; 
(4)  Name of the subdivision; 
(5)  Topography at five-foot intervals; 
(6)  Zoning on the tract; 
(7)  A scale of one inch equals 100 feet, and a true north arrow; 
(8)  Approved control points; 
(9)  Locations and descriptions of monuments; 
(10)  Locations and principal dimensions for all proposed areas to be reserved for parks, schools and other public uses; 
(11)  Proposed sites, if any, for nonpublic use exclusive of single-family residences; 
(12)  Numbers to identify each lot and block; 
(13)  Site data, including the number of lots, typical lot size and total acres; 
(14)  Locations and dimensions, angles, bearings, lines and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves of utilities, tract boundary lines, streets (including names), easements and rights-of-way, property lines, section lines and alleys; 
(15)  Vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area, including: 
a.  Zoning of adjacent property; 
b.  Names of abutting subdivisions; 
c.  Names of the owners of abutting unplatted property; and 
d.  References to permanent survey monuments with ties to sections or quarter sections corners; and 
(16)  Engineering drawings, including the following: 
a.  Profiles and cross-sections of site improvements; and 
b.  Grading plans for streets and lots. 
(e)  In addition to the required preliminary plat information, the subdivider shall also submit the following: 
(1)  Performance guarantee of a type approved by the city; 
(2)  Estimate of the cost of the following: 
a.  Permanent survey monuments; 
b.  Waterlines; 
c.  Fire hydrants; 
d.  Sanitary sewers and manholes; 
e.  Storm sewers and/or drainage improvements; 
f.  Street grading, base, paving, curb and gutter and sidewalk (if required); 
g.  Street trees, signs and lights; 
h.  Gas service lines and risers; 
i.  Electric service, if underground; 
j.  Culverts, bridges or other special requirements; and 
(3)  Mailing address. 
(f)  Planning and zoning commission procedures. 
(1)  Following document submission at the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting, the preliminary plat shall be reviewed in general, and, if acceptable, shall be referred by the planning and zoning commission to the following offices for study: 
a.  City engineer's office; 
b.  Electric company; 
c.  Gas company; 
d.  Telephone company; 
e.  Cable television company; 
f.  All other franchised utility companies doing business in the city; and 
g.  Cities located within five miles of the area to be subdivided, the school district, and, where applicable, special utility districts, and the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Each of these offices shall return its recommendation to the planning and zoning commission within 30 days of receipt of its copy of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Failure to respond within this comment period will be interpreted as no objection, and the city shall have no further responsibility for plat review coordination with nonresponding offices. 
(4)  At the following regular planning and zoning commission meeting, and after discussion with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable, including the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him or her, the planning and zoning commission shall disapprove, approve as submitted, or approve as modified the preliminary plat. 
(5)  Action by the planning and zoning commission shall be conveyed to the subdivider, in writing, within ten days after the official planning and zoning commission meeting at which the plat was considered. In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason for such action and what requirements shall be necessary to meet the approval of the planning and zoning commission. The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. The approval of the preliminary plat shall only be effective for a period of one year, unless an extension is granted by the planning and zoning commission. If the final plat has not been submitted for approval within the specified period, a preliminary plat must be submitted again to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-50; Ord. No. 840, art. III, 1986; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-6. - Final plat. 
(a)  Submission. 
(1)  After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit a final plat for recording purposes to the secretary of the planning and zoning commission. Such plat shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. A sample plat is available in the planning department. 
(2)  The original (on Mylar, tracing cloth or similar material) and ten prints thereof shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning and zoning commission at least ten days prior to the planning and zoning commission public hearing. 
(3)  The names and signatures of the owner or of the property duly acknowledged and notarized shall appear on the original copies submitted. 
(4)  The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet or larger. The size of the sheet on which such final plat is prepared shall be 22 inches by 36 inches. 
(b)  Information. The final plat shall incorporate any required modifications of the preliminary plat and shall show and contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision; 
(2)  Location of section, township, range, county and state, including the descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must be mathematically close. The allowable error of closing on any portion of the plat shall be one foot in 5,000 feet; 
(3)  The locations of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments or the nearest established street lines, including the true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments; 
(4)  The locations of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, and with the length of radii on all curves, and other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions from all curves shall be shown to the lot lines; 
(5)  Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks shall be numbered or lettered clearly in the center of the block. All lots, however designated, shall be numbered in progressive numbers or by blocks in which they are situated, and their precise lengths and widths shall be stated on the map or plat; 
(6)  The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated; 
(7)  Locations and widths of all easements and alleys to be dedicated; 
(8)  Boundary lines and descriptions of the boundary lines of any area, other than streets and alleys, which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use; 
(9)  Building setback lines on the front and side streets, with dimensions; 
(10)  Names and addresses of the developer and the registered professional engineer who prepared the plat; 
(11)  Scale of the plat (scale is to be shown graphically and in feet per inch), date of preparation and north point; 
(12)  Statement dedicating all easements; 
(13)  Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and all other public areas not previously dedicated; and 
(14)  Mailing address of the property after subdivision. 
(c)  Final plat review. 
(1)  At the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting, the planning and zoning commission shall check the final plat for conformity with the approved preliminary plat and other requirements of this chapter, and shall then approve or disapprove the final plat as submitted. 
(2)  As a condition to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider or landowner shall agree to install improvements as noted and specified in article III of this chapter. 
(d)  Recording. 
(1)  Not more than three months after approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall record the final plat in the manner and condition prescribed in section 22-69. After three months, the approving action of the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(2)  Also required is a final survey of utilities, as installed, to be submitted to the city engineer. It can be a simplified version of the engineering drawings, but it should record the necessary minor changes of location that are always made in the course of construction. Certificates of improvements completion will be withheld until this survey is made. 
(Code 2000, § 17-1-60; Ord. No. 840, art. III, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 22-7-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-31. - Blocks. 
(a)  Design. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Length. Intersecting streets which determine block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet existing streets in the neighborhood. In residential districts, where no existing plats are recorded, the blocks shall not exceed 750 feet in length, except that in outlying subdivisions, a greater length may be permitted where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than 600 feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be required by the planning and zoning commission near the center of the block. Such pedestrian ways or easements shall have a minimum width of ten feet. Blocks for business use should normally not exceed 600 feet in length. 
(c)  Width. In residential subdivisions, the block width shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width and depth as may be considered most suitable for the prospective use. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-10; Ord. No. 840, art. III, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-32. - Streets, alleys and public ways. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. 
(1)  The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street widths established herein. 
(2)  Alleys, when required, and street arrangement must also be such as not to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. 
(3)  Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be platted and dedicated as a public way. 
(b)  Streets that are obviously in alignment with other already existing named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. 
(c)  Major streets through subdivisions shall conform with the major street plan as adopted by the planning and zoning commission and the governing body. 
(d)  Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through or non-local traffic. 
(e)  Cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets shall be permitted only when topography or ownership prevents normal subdivision of a tract or plot of ground. Said cul-de-sacs shall normally be no longer than 500 feet, including a turnaround at the closed end having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet, with a street property line diameter of at least 110 feet. 
(f)  Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out to intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles. Where topography or other conditions justify a variation from the right angle intersection, the minimum angle shall be 60 degrees. 
(g)  Where lots front or side, but do not back on, railroad rights-of-way, limited access freeways or principal highways, a marginal access street or frontage road shall be provided, parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such right-of-way. The distance of the street from said right-of-way shall be determined with due consideration given to minimum distance required for approach connections to future grade separations. 
(h)  Dedication of half-streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and is in conformity with the approved major street plan and other requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the requirements may be waived where other definite and ensured provisions are made for service access to off-street loading and unloading areas and to off-street parking areas, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided wherever possible, but if unavoidable, adequate turnaround facilities shall be provided. Alleys may be required in certain residential areas. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-20; Ord. No. 840, art. IV, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-33. - Minimum requirements. 
    All streets, alleys and public ways included in any subdivision hereafter dedicated and accepted shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for each classification, as follows: 
Classification Width Major Streets Arterial 80 feet Collector 70 feet Local street 60 feet Cul-de-sac 50-foot radius on turnaround Marginal Access Streets or Frontage Roads One-way 50 feet Two-way 60 feet Alley 20 feet Pedestrian way 10 feet  
(Code 2000, § 17-2-30; Ord. No. 840, art. IV, 1986) 
Sec. 22-34. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  When existing or anticipated traffic on arterial and collector thoroughfares warrants greater widths of rights-of-way, the additional width shall be provided. 
(b)  Drainage easements shall be required, in addition to street rights-of-way, where the streets adjoin or are parallel with streams or drainage areas, or where lots back on said drainage areas. The width of such drainage easement shall be determined by the city engineer, who shall notify the planning and zoning commission of his or her recommendation, in writing. 
(c)  The grades of streets, alleys and other public ways included in any subdivision shall not be greater than is necessary for the topographical conditions. 
(d)  Minimum horizontal and vertical alignment on all streets, except in unusual cases, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Horizontal alignment. Radii at the centerline: 
a.  Major streets: 300 feet. 
b.  Local streets: 100 feet. 
A tangent shall be provided between all reversed curves to provide for a smooth flow of traffic. 
(2)  Vertical alignment. All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length as to provide for the desired sight distance. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-40; Ord. No. 840, art. IV, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-35. - Lots. 
(a)  The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet, except where additional width is required on corner lots to maintain a front yard on both streets. Said width shall be measured at the building setback line. 
(b)  The minimum lot depth shall be 120 feet, except where additional depth is required on corner lots. Said measurement shall be measured through the center of the lot and shall be perpendicular to the property line or radial to the property line on curved streets. 
(c)  Minimum area shall be subject to the zoning regulations of the district in which the subdivision is located. 
(d)  Lots in subdivisions to be served with an approved public water system, but not with an approved public sanitary sewer system, shall be sized according to soil percolation tests made by a registered professional engineer. Such tests shall be made in accordance with state department of health criteria. In no case shall any such lot contain less than one-half acre, and all lots shall be so proportioned as to permit future replotting consistent with good subdivision design. 
(e)  Lots in subdivisions to be served with an approved public sanitary sewer system, but not with an approved public water system, shall contain not less than one-half acre, unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. All lots shall be so proportioned that future replatting will be consistent with good subdivision design. 
(f)  Lots in subdivisions not served by either an approved public sewer system or an approved public water system shall be sized on the basis of soil percolation tests made by a registered professional engineer. Such tests shall be in accordance with state department of health criteria. In no case shall such lots be less than 21/2 acres in area, and all lots shall be so proportioned as to permit future replatting consistent with good subdivision design. 
(g)  All side lot lines shall bear 60 degrees to 90 degrees from the street right-of-way line on a straight street, or from the tangent of a curved street. 
(h)  Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall have additional width in order that the same setback on both streets may be observed. 
(i)  Double frontage lots shall be avoided unless, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, a variation to this rule will give better street alignment and lot arrangement. 
(j)  Every lot shall abut on a street other than an alley. 
(k)  Building or setback lines shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats for all lots in the subdivision and shall not be less than the setback required by chapter 30. 
(l)  The subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or lot shall not be permitted where said subdivision or resubdivision places an existing permanent structure in violation of the requirements of chapter 30. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-50; Ord. No. 840, art. IV, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-36. - Easements. 
(a)  Where alleys are not provided, permanent easements of not less than 71/2 feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines where necessary for utility poles, wires and conduits; sanitary sewers; gas, water and heat mains; and other public utilities. These easements shall provide for a continuous right-of-way at least 15 feet in width. 
(b)  A 12-foot temporary construction easement shall be provided on each side of the permanent easement required in subsection (a) of this section for initial construction of water, sewer and other utility lines. 
(c)  Where a subdivision is traversed by, or is adjacent to, a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width as may be required for the construction of necessary flood control measures. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-60; Ord. No. 840, art. IV, 1986) 
Sec. 22-37. - Dedication or reservation of public sites and open spaces. 
    In all subdivisions, consideration shall be given to potential needs for sites for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public use areas and open spaces. Any such dedication or reservation shall conform as nearly as possible to the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission with regard to the intent of the comprehensive plan and to the recommendations of other public agencies to be involved. All areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use shall be shown on the preliminary plat, in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate agency. 
(Code 2000, § 17-2-70; Ord. No. 840, art. V, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 22-38-22-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 22-63. - Generally. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause to be installed and constructed all street and road improvements, public utilities, survey monuments and markers and lot grading. All such improvements shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable county and state standards, specifications, codes and regulations. These standards may be obtained, among others, from the city clerk, county clerk, planning and zoning commission, state department of transportation and state department of health. General guidelines for such improvements include the following: 
(1)  Streets shall be surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete or materials and specifications in accordance with the city requirements and shall include curb and storm sewer inlets where applicable. 
(2)  Where an approved public water system is proposed to serve the subdivision, said water lines shall be installed in proper easements or within the limits of the street and alley right-of-way and shall be of a size as approved by the city council. 
(3)  Where an approved public sewer system is proposed to serve the subdivision, the sewer system shall be constructed to provide service to each lot within the subdivision. The system of mains and laterals shall collect the sewage within the subdivision and discharge it into a community disposal system approved by the city council. 
(4)  Street signs will be supplied and erected by the city council. 
(5)  Installation of electric service, power lines, transformers and street lights shall be provided and paid for in accordance with policies established by the utilities board. 
(6)  Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall have a minimum width of five feet unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
(b)  If other improvements are required, such as tree planting, retaining walls, drainage structures, etc., such improvements shall be made in accordance with the recommendations and specifications of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-10; Ord. No. 840, art. VI, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-64. - Financing of required improvements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of required improvements which include the following: 
(1)  Setting of survey monuments and markers; 
(2)  Street and road construction for all minor street improvements, including base, grading, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, pavement, street trees, street name signs, culverts and bridges; 
(3)  Water and sewer line installations, including fire hydrants and manholes; 
(4)  Required storm sewer system and/or other drainage improvements; 
(5)  Lot grading and site preparation; 
(6)  Landscaping and fencing where this is made a provision of any approval; and 
(7)  Any other site improvement made a requirement for development by the planning and zoning commission or city council. 
(b)  The subdivider shall also be responsible for ensuring the installation of the following, by negotiating with public agencies or private companies, or by providing the cash for their installation: 
(1)  Electric lines; 
(2)  Telephone lines; 
(3)  Street lights; 
(4)  Natural gas lines where required by the planning and zoning commission; 
(5)  Street name signs; 
(6)  Cable television service lines; and 
(7)  Permanent survey monuments at locations approved by the planning and zoning commission in conjunction with the city engineer, provided that ordinarily such monuments shall not be more than 1,320 feet nor less than 660 feet apart; and, in addition, monuments of iron pipe, stone or concrete shall be set at all street intersections, at all tangent points, at alley intersections, at all lot corners and at such other points as may be required by the planning and zoning commission to make the retracing of the lines shown on the final plat reasonably convenient. 
(c)  In the event that improvements are required by the planning and zoning commission that are oversized for the improvement capacity required for the subdivision, the city, county, state or responsible district shall pay for improvement installation costs that are in excess of those necessary to meet the requirements of the subdivision. These may include, among others, the following: 
(1)  Street improvements in excess of those for minor or local streets but not including rights-of-way; 
(2)  Trunk sewer and water lines but not including easements; and 
(3)  Storm sewers of a size larger than required for proper drainage of the subdivision. 
(d)  The city may assess a subdivider on a pro rata basis for costs of improvements that have been made that benefit the subdivider or subdivision that would have been necessary costs to the subdivider had they not previously been expended. Such expenditures may have been made by either a governmental agency or by a private individual through arrangements with a governmental agency. Such improvements may include, among others, the following: 
(1)  Street improvements abutting unsubdivided land; or 
(2)  Sewer or water line installations that will serve unsubdivided land when subdivided. Any monies so collected shall be refunded to the agency or individual who made the original investment. 
(e)  The subdivider shall submit an estimate of the costs of constructing the required improvements to determine the amount of performance guarantee to be required. The estimate shall specify the sources used as a basis to determine unit and project costs. The planning and zoning commission shall make any checks and revisions in the estimates as they deem necessary prior to approval. At the request of the subdivider, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a notice-published public hearing prior to making any and all revisions in the subdivider's cost estimate. The cost of publishing notice of the hearing shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-20; Ord. No. 840, art. VI, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-65. - Engineering drawings. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission, in conjunction with the city engineer and other appropriate public agencies, shall approve all engineering drawings and construction plans prior to the commencement of any work by the subdivider. All required supplementary engineering studies or tests as required by the planning and zoning commission shall be approved prior to any construction activities by or for the subdivider. 
(b)  All required engineering studies and exhibits shall be prepared by qualified and legally registered or certified engineers or engineering firms. 
(c)  Contractors engaged by the subdivider to install required improvements shall be licensed, registered, or certified as required by state or local law. 
(d)  A time construction schedule of installation of public improvements shall be submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to the commencement of any and all construction activities. The approved schedule shall be flexible enough to allow delays due to inclement weather or other unavoidable circumstances. In the event that construction at some time can no longer adhere to the approved schedule, the subdivider shall submit a revised schedule to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(e)  It may be desirable, during construction of improvements, for the subdivider to modify some standards and specifications of the approved engineering drawings. In this event, the subdivider shall, prior to making such modifications, submit a schedule of such modifications with reasons of necessity to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(f)  In the event that any modifications as specified in subsection (e) of this section are approved by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall submit as-built drawings. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-30; Ord. No. 840, art. VI, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-66. - Guarantees of performance. 
(a)  Before acceptance of a plat by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall have designated all necessary streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision together with sidewalks, curbs and gutters, in accordance with the requirements that the planning and zoning commission may impose and specify as to grading, paving, width, location, drainage, courts, culverts, bridges and other necessary requirements. The subdivider shall enter into a written agreement with the planning and zoning commission wherein the subdivider shall have deposited a performance bond in an amount established by the planning and zoning commission, or have deposited with the city sufficient funds to cover the cost of such improvements, or provide other improvement guarantees acceptable to the planning and zoning commission and the city council, which shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk. The amount of the performance bond or the funds in escrow shall be determined from the cost estimates as specified in this article. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall also require a maintenance bond to remain in effect for one year after acceptance of said improvements, to be posted by the subdivider to ensure the repairs to any installations after completion and acceptance by the city that are made necessary due to negligence, whether intentional or accidental, by the subdivider. Such required repairs might include, among others, the following: 
(1)  Damage to streets and highways caused by transporting heavy construction equipment over them; or 
(2)  Cutting and breaking street improvements to provide additional utility connections. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-40; Ord. No. 840, art. VI, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-67. - Inspection of improvements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall obtain construction permits for any construction work when required by state or local law. 
(b)  Inspection schedules as required by state or local law shall be adhered to by the subdivider. The subdivider shall notify the appropriate governmental agency, as required by law, when certain stages of construction have been reached. The responsible governmental agency shall, within 24 working hours, inspect the indicated construction and notify the subdivider of its acceptability or unacceptability. If for some reason an improvement is unacceptable, the inspector shall indicate to the subdivider, by reference to an unmet legal requirement, what steps shall be taken by the subdivider to make the improvement acceptable. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-50; Ord. No. 840, art. VI, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-68. - Variances for hardship. 
    Whenever it is found that the land included in a subdivision plat presented for approval is of such size or shape, is subject to or is affected by such topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to such usage that full conformity to the provisions of this chapter is impossible or is impractical, the planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city council, by letter, that the city council authorize a variance or exception in the final plat so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. In recommending such variance or exception, the planning and zoning commission shall find the following: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
(2)  That the variance or exception is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question; and 
(3)  That the granting of the variance or exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to adjacent property. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-60; Ord. No. 840, art. VII, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-69. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Building and zoning permits. No building permit or zoning permit shall be issued for any structure that is located upon a lot in an area that has not been subdivided, unless the subdivision of said lands has been approved according to the requirements in effect at the time of subdivision. 
(b)  Recording. No plat, replat, dedication or deed of a street or public way shall be filed with the register of deeds until such plat, replat, dedication or deed shall have endorsed on it the fact that it has been submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission and by the city council pursuant to the standards and procedures provided in for in this Code. Nothing in this article shall require the acceptance of any dedication or deed by the city council. 
(c)  Certifications required on final plat. When the final plat is approved, certifications shall be made on the final plat, signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted. The original and ten copies of the plat submitted shall carry the signatures of the owners, and shall be duly notarized by a notary public. 
(d)  A registered professional engineer shall sign and place his or her seal on the final plat, certifying that the physical and mathematical details on the plat are correct. 
(e)  Certification of the official approval of the final plat shall provide for date and signature of the following: 
(1)  Chairperson and secretary of the planning and zoning commission; 
(2)  City council, to be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk; 
(3)  Entry for the date and transfer of record with space for the signature of the county clerk; and 
(4)  Space for the recording of the instrument and the name of the register of deeds. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-70; Ord. No. 840, art. VIII, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-70. - Supplemental documents to accompany the final plat. 
(a)  Two prints of profiles of streets to be dedicated, indicating the grades thereon, may be required by the planning and zoning commission for plats submitted. 
(b)  If private restrictions are to be filed affecting the subdivision or any part thereof, two copies shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission with the final plat. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-80; Ord. No. 840, art. VIII, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1030, 2001) 
Sec. 22-71. - Submission to city council. 
(a)  After approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission, such final plat, together with the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, shall be transmitted to the city council for its review and action. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any approved final plat from the planning and zoning commission and its recommendation thereon, the city council shall schedule a public hearing upon said final plat and planning and zoning commission recommendation. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by posting of the premises proposed to be subdivided, and by publication in the manner of other legal publications at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. Following public hearing, the city council, in its discretion, may approve, approve as modified or disapprove any such final plat submitted. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-90; Ord. No. 840, art. VIII, 1986; Ord. No. 979, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-72. - Recorded plats. 
    Ten copies of the recorded plat shall be provided by the subdivider and shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning and zoning commission, for distribution as follows: 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission file; 
(2)  City clerk; 
(3)  City engineer; 
(4)  Building official; and 
(5)  Utility companies (water, gas, electricity, telephone, cable television). 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-100; Ord. No. 840, art. VIII, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-73. - Amendment. 
    The planning and zoning commission and the city council may amend the requirements of this chapter after giving public notice of any such proposed amendment, and after holding a public hearing thereon, as provided by C.R.S. § 31-23-214. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-110; Ord. No. 840, art. IX, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 22-74. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall govern: 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. This chapter shall therefore be regarded as remedial, and shall be liberally construed to further its underlying purposes. 
(2)  Whenever both a provision of this chapter and any other provisions of this chapter or any provision in any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind contain any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(3)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
a.  Any permits issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived; or 
b.  Any easement, covenant or other private agreement. 
(Code 2000, § 17-3-120; Ord. No. 840, art. X, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 24 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions and meaning. 
    Terms used in this chapter which are defined in C.R.S. title 39, art. 26, shall have the same meaning as provided for by the provisions of said state law, unless otherwise stated. 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions applicable to the city. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City clerk means the city clerk of the City of Lamar. 
    City treasurer means the city treasurer of the City of Lamar. 
    Drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription means drugs dispensed in accordance with any prescription or order in writing, dated and signed by any licensed practitioner of the healing arts and sciences, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and address of the person for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. The term "drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription" shall include medical marijuana dispensed following a doctor's written order or recommendation. 
    Sales price means the gross value of all the materials, labor, services and the profit thereon included in the price charged to the user or consumer. 
(Code 2000, §§ 4-1-10, 4-2-70; Ord. No. 577, §§ 1, 37, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1032, § 2, 2001; Ord. No. 1152, §§ 1, 2, 2010; Ord. No. 1222, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions in general. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural producer means a person regularly engaged in the business of using land for the production of commercial crops or commercial livestock. The term "agricultural producer" includes farmers, market gardeners, commercial fruit growers, livestock breeders, dairy persons, poultry persons, and other persons similarly engaged, but does not include a person who breeds or markets animals, birds, or fish for domestic pets nor a person who cultivates, grows, or harvests plants or plant products exclusively for that person's own consumption or casual sale. 
    Aircraft means a device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air. 
    Aircraft part means any tangible personal property that is intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
    Aircraft simulator means a flight simulator training device (FSTD) as defined in part 1 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations that is qualified in accordance with part 60 of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations for use in a Federal Aviation Administration-approved flight training program. 
    Aircraft simulator part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft, and which will also function when it is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft simulator. 
    Airline company means any operator who engages in the carriage by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier for compensation or hire, or the carriage of mail, or any aircraft operator who operates regularly between two or more points and publishes a flight schedule. The term "airline company" shall not include operators whose aircraft are all certified for a gross takeoff weight of 12,500 pounds or less and who do not engage in scheduled service or mail carriage service. 
    Auction means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
    Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. The term "automotive vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. The term "automotive vehicle" shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. 
    Candy means a preparation of sugar, honey, or other natural or artificial sweeteners in combination with chocolate, fruit, nuts, or other ingredients or flavorings in the form of bars, drops, or pieces. The term "candy" does not include any preparation containing flour, products that require refrigeration or marijuana-infused products. 
    Carrier access services means the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: 
(1)  Has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
(2)  Is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    Coins means monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign nation. 
    Collection costs shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, locksmith fees, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Commercial packaging materials means containers, labels, and/or cases that become part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not returnable to said person for reuse. The term "commercial packaging materials" does not include commercial shipping materials. 
    Commercial shipping materials means materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. The term "commercial shipping materials" includes but is not limited to, containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
    Community organization means a nonprofit entity organized and operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, primarily engaged in promoting the common good and general welfare of the community, so long as: 
(1)  No part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 
(2)  No substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; and 
(3)  Which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
    Construction equipment means any equipment, including mobile machinery and mobile equipment, which is used to erect, install, alter, repair, remodel, or otherwise make improvements to any real property, building, structure or infrastructure. 
    Construction materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. The term "construction materials" includes, but is not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of completed structure or project, are not construction materials. 
    Consumer means any individual person or person engaged in business in the city who uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes in the city tangible personal property or taxable services purchased from sources inside or outside the city. 
    Contract auditor means a duly authorized agent designated by the taxing authority and qualified to conduct tax audits on behalf of and pursuant to an agreement with the municipality. 
    Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, the term "contractor" also includes subcontractor. 
    Cover charge means a charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages. 
    Data processing equipment means any equipment or system of equipment used in the storage, manipulation, management, display, reception or transmission of information including, but not limited to, computers, software program, hardware of firmware. 
    Digital product means a modern version of a traditional product including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Digital images which means works that include, but are not limited to, the following, that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "photographs," "logos," "cartoons," or "drawings;" 
(2)  Digital audio-visual works which means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any; 
(3)  Digital audio works which means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones. For purposes of the definition of the term "digital audio works," the term "ringtones" means digitized sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the customer with respect to a communication; and 
(4)  Digital books which means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "books." 
    Distribution means the act of distributing any article of tangible personal property for use or consumption, which may include, but not be limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers guides, catalogs, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services. 
    Dual residency means those situations including, but not limited to, where a person maintains a residence, place of business or business presence, both within and outside the city. A person shall be deemed to have established a legitimate residence, place of business or business presence outside of the city for purposes of dual residence if the person has a physical structure owned, leased or rented by such person which is designated by street number or road location outside of the city, has within it a telephone or telephones in the name of such person and conducts business operations of a regular basis at such location in a manner that includes the type of business activities for which the business (person), as defined in this Code, is organized. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or any portion of a building designed for occupancy as complete, independent living quarters for one or more persons, having direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall and having living, sleeping, kitchen and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Engaged in business in the city means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption within the city. The term "engaged in business in the city" includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a 12-month period. 
    Fabricatin g means an operation which changes the form or state of tangible personal property. 
    Factory-built housing means a manufactured home, sectional or modular home. 
    Farm closeout sale means full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
    Farm equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(33), any implement of husbandry, as defined in C.R.S. § 42-1-102(44), and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least $1,000.00. The term "farm equipment" also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. The term "farm equipment" also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this definition, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural application. The term "farm equipment" also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, the term "farm equipment" does not include: 
(1)  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of C.R.S. § 42-3-103, regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
(2)  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
(3)  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
(1)  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Milk; 
(4)  Honey; and 
(5)  Poultry and eggs. 
    Food for home consumption means food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 USC 2012(k), as amended, for purposes of the federal food stamp program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 USC 2012(l), as amended; except that food does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow foods; prepared salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches; deli trays; and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin-collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
    Garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term "garage sales" includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    Internet access services means services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the Internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing telephone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of internet access services. 
    Internet subscription service means software programs, systems, data and applications available online through rental, lease or subscription, that provide information and services including, but not limited to, data linking, data research, date analysis, data filtering or record compiling. 
    License means a City of Lamar sales and/or use tax license. 
    Linen services means services involving the provision and cleaning of linens, including, but not limited to, rags, uniforms coveralls and diapers. 
    Lodging services means the provision or facilitation of provision of any rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who, for consideration including barter, trade or timesharing uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or other accommodation, including, but not limited to, a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast, apartment, single-family residence, lodginghouse, condominium, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court and part, any portion of a dwelling unit or other area which accommodates a guest, or similar establishment, for a period of less than 30 consecutive days under any rental agreement, sharing or trade agreement, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
    Machinery means any apparatus consisting of interrelated parts used to produce an article of tangible personal property. The term "machinery" includes both the basic unit and any adjunct or attachment necessary for the basic unit to accomplish its intended function. 
    Manufactured home means any pre-constructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit are not licensed as a vehicle. 
    Manufacturing means the operation or performance as a business of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale of for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition under article XVIII, section 14, of the state constitution, and which person holds a valid registry identification card issued by the state pursuant to the state constitution, article XVIII, section 14. 
    Mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment mean those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicle which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which have redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved over the public highways. The definition of the terms "mobile machinery" and "self-propelled construction equipment" includes, but is not limited to, wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches. 
    Modular home means any structure that consists of multiple sections fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation and assembly at the building site, and is constructed to the building codes adopted by the state division of housing, created in C.R.S. § 24-32-706, and is designed to be installed on a permanent foundation. 
    Motor fuel means gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term "motor fuel" does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars of railroad locomotives. 
    Newspaper means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term "newspaper" does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Online garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring online, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by the seller or members of the seller's household. 
    Photovoltaic system means a power system designed to supply usable solar power by means of photovoltaics, a method of converting solar energy into direct current electricity using semiconducting materials that create voltage or electric current in a material upon exposure to light. It consists of an arrangement of several components, including solar panels to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter to change the electric current from DC to AC, as well as mounting, cabling and other electrical accessories to set up a working system. 
    Prepress preparation material means all materials used by those in the printing industry including, but not limited to, airbrush color photos, color keys, dies, engravings, light-sensitive film, light-sensitive paper, masking materials, Mylar, plates, proofing materials, tape, transparencies, and veloxes, which are used by printers in the preparation of customer specific layouts or in plates used to fill customers' printing orders, which are eventually sold to a customer, either in their original purchase form or in an altered form, and for which a sales or use tax is demonstrably collected from the printer's customer, if applicable, either separately from the printed materials or as part of the inclusive price therefor. Materials sold to a printer which are used by the printer for the printer's own purposes, and are not sold, either directly or in an altered form, to a customer, are not included within this definition. 
    Preprinted newspaper supplements means inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: 
(1)  Are primarily devoted to advertising; and 
(2)  The distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
    Prescription drugs for animals means drugs dispensed in accordance with any order by a licensed veterinarian, not including drugs available over the counter, specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 USC 301 et seq., as amended, and to state, at a minimum, the symbol "Rx Only," and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner, not including drugs available over the counter, and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price means: 
(1)  The aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
a.  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
b.  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of the state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
(2)  The term "price" or "purchase price" includes: 
a.  The amount of money received or due in cash, credits and electronic currency. 
b.  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
c.  Any consideration whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
d.  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated is not part of the purchase price. 
e.  Installation and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
f.  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
g.  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
h.  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
(3)  The term "price" or "purchase price" shall not include: 
a.  Any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any political subdivision thereof. 
b.  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in the state. Out-of-state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
c.  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Private communications services means telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate intercommunications system for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic devices means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human or animal use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchase or sale means: 
(1)  The acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property or taxable services that are purchased, leased, or acquired by any other means. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
a.  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property or taxable services; 
b.  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property or taxable services; 
c.  Performance of taxable services; or 
d.  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property or services. 
(2)  The term "purchase" or "sale" does not include: 
a.  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
b.  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership, if no consideration, including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
c.  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
d.  A transfer of a partnership interest; 
e.  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership, if no consideration, including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
f.  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
g.  The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a subsidiary corporation of corporations which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary corporation; 
h.  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or corporations which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation to a parent corporation or to another subsidiary which is owned at least 80 percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
i.  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary corporations, or between subsidiary corporations closely held by the same parent corporation, or between corporations which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor corporation at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor corporation. 
j.  To such an extent any transfer referred to in this subsection (2) shall constitute a sale, for the purposes of this subsection (2) a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent corporation owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80 present of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Rail carrier means as defined in section 10102 of title 49 of the United States Code as of October 10, 2013, and as it may be amended hereafter. 
    Rail carrier part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of a locomotive or rail car used by a rail carrier. 
    Recreation services means all services relating to athletic or entertainment participation events and/or activities, including, but not limited to, pool, golf, billiards, skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships, coin-operated amusement devices, video games and video club memberships. 
    Renewable energy means any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a short time scale and derived directly from the sun (such as thermal, photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as wind, hydropower, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass), or from other natural movements and mechanisms of the environment (such as geothermal and tidal energy). The term "renewable energy" does not include energy resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or waste products from inorganic sources. 
    Resident means a person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the city, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the city. 
    Retail sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. The term "retailer" shall include, but is not limited to, any: 
(1)  Auctioneer; 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; 
(4)  Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a retailer. 
    Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for resale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials, jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the city administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sales tax means the tax that is or should be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
    School means an educational organization which maintains a faculty and curriculum and has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are routinely conducted. 
    Security system services means electronic alarm and/or monitoring services. The term "security system services" does not include non-electronic security services such as consulting or human or guard dog patrol services. 
    Soft drink means a non-alcoholic beverage that contains natural or artificial sweeteners. The term "soft drink" does not include beverages that contain milk or milk products, soy, rice, or similar milk substitutes, or greater than 50 percent of vegetable or fruit juice by volume. 
    Software as a service means software that is rented, leased or subscribed to from a provider and used at the consumer's location, including, but not limited to, applications, systems or programs. 
    Software license fee means a fee charged for the right to use, or maintain a copy of, software, regardless of the form of the software. 
    Software maintenance agreement means an agreement, typically with a software provider, that may include: 
(1)  Provisions to maintain the right to use the software; 
(2)  Provisions for software upgrades including code updates, version updates, code fix modifications, enhancements, and added or new functional capabilities loaded into existing software; or 
(3)  Technical support. 
    Software program means a sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g., computer, tablets, smart phones). The term "software program" includes: 
(1)  Custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; 
(2)  Pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf (COTS)," "mass-produced" or "standardized;" 
(3)  Modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and 
(4)  The generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
    Solar thermal system means a system whose primary purpose is to use energy from the sun to produce heat or cold for: 
(1)  Heating or cooling a residential or commercial building; 
(2)  Heating or cooling water; or 
(3)  Any industrial, commercial, or manufacturing process. 
    Sound system services means the provision of broadcast or pre-recorded audio programming to a building or portion thereof. The term "sound system service" does not include installation of sound systems where the entire system becomes the property of the building owner or the sound system service is for presentation of live performances. 
    Special fuel means kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term "special fuel" does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Special sales event means any sales event which includes more than three vendors taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed seven consecutive days. 
    Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise or dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a standstill basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, stored, transported, or exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax deficiency or deficiency means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Code. 
    Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
    Taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
    Telecommunications service means the transmission of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications, including, but not limited to, voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), internet access, remote access to computers and electronic storage equipment, or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. 
    Television and entertainment services means audio or visual content that can be transmitted electronically by any means, for which a charge is imposed. 
    Therapeutic device means devices, appliances, or related accessories that correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically-created abnormality. 
    Toll-free telecommunications service means a telecommunications service that allows a caller to dial a number without incurring a charge for the call. 
    Total tax liability means the total of all tax, penalties and/or interest owed by a taxpayer and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax computed on total sales. 
    Transient/temporary sale means a sale by any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods within the city for a period of no more than seven consecutive days. 
    Transient/temporary vendor means any person who engages in the business of transient/temporary sales. 
    Use means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the city of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the city whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer, or withdrawn from inventory for consumption. 
    Use tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the city. 
    Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; the latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Sales by wholesalers to non-licensed retailers are not wholesale sales. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to licensed retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
(b)  Should any part of this chapter be adjudicated as being invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining parts shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1222, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 24-4. - Licenses; fee; revocation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in business in the city, without first having obtained a license therefor, as provided in chapter 8. All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, not in lieu of, other fees and charges. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-20; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-5. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any taxpayer, retailer or vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made under this article, to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return, to fail and refuse to make payment to the city clerk of any taxes collected or due to the city, or in any manner to evade the collection and payment of any tax provided by this chapter, or any part thereof; or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of the Code as defined in chapter 1. 
(b)  In addition, no person shall knowingly and willfully sign, swear to or verify any false statement or certificate. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-280; Ord. No. 577, § 28, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 24-6-24-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-29. - Administration. 
    The administration of this article is hereby vested in the city clerk, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for claiming exemption, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-300; Ord. No. 577, § 30, 1968) 
Sec. 24-30. - Tax cannot be absorbed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any consumer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-70; Ord. No. 577, § 7, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-31. - Reports of vendor. 
    If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of his or her business, or other conditions, are such that reports of sales made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the city clerk, upon written request of the vendor, may accept reports at such intervals as will, in his or her opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided, however, that the city clerk may, by rule, permit taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than $10.00 to make returns and pay taxes at intervals no greater than every three months. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-80; Ord. No. 577, § 8, 1968) 
Sec. 24-32. - Retailers with multiple locations. 
    A retailer doing business in two or more places or locations, taxable hereunder, may file one return covering all such business activities engaged in within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-90; Ord. No. 577, § 9, 1968) 
Sec. 24-33. - Remittance of excess tax. 
    If any vendor during the reporting period shall collect as a tax an amount in excess of the tax imposed by section 24-132 upon his or her taxable sales, he or she shall remit to the city clerk the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and show such excess. No retailer or vendor shall retain any excess of tax collections over the tax imposed by this article on the total taxable sales of such retailer or vendor, nor shall any retailer or vendor intentionally fail to remit punctually to the city clerk in full the amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-110; Ord. No. 577, § 11, 1968; Ord. No. 664, § 4, 1974; Ord. No. 754, § 4, 1990; Ord. No. 1049, § 6, 2002) 
Sec. 24-34. - Records of sales; other books. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in the city, for the transaction of which a license is required under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him or her, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection of which he or she is liable. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale, and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the city clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-210; Ord. No. 577, § 21, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-35. - Confidential nature of returns; use. 
(a)  Except in accordance with a judicial order or as otherwise herein provided, the city clerk or any of his or her agents, clerks and employees shall not divulge any information gained from any return filed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The officials charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them, or evidence of anything contained in them, in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the city clerk in an action under the provisions of this article to which the city clerk is a party or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or to punish a violator thereof when the report of facts shown by such report is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit into evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown therein, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his or her duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his or her tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof, nor to prohibit the inspection by the city attorney or any other legal representative of the city, of the report or return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under this article. 
(d)  Reports and returns shall be preserved for three years and thereafter until the city clerk, with approval of the city council, orders them destroyed. 
(e)  No city officer or employee shall divulge any information classified hereunder as confidential in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order, or otherwise as provided by law. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-140; Ord. No. 577, § 14, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-36. - Tax lien. 
(a)  The use tax imposed by this article shall be a lien on the tangible personal property stored, used or consumed, subject only to valid mortgage or other liens of record on and prior to the recording of notice, as required in section 24-37. The sales tax imposed by this article shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. Any retailer who sells out his or her business or stock of goods or quits business shall be required to make out the return as provided in this article, within ten days after the date he or she sold his or her business or stock of goods or quit business, and his or her successor in business shall be required to withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of said taxes due and unpaid, until such time as the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to withhold the purchase money as above provided and the taxes are due and unpaid after the ten-day period allowed, he or she, as well as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title-retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, takes the same subject to the lien for any delinquent sales tax owed by such merchant and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or so acquired. 
(b)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article is placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this article, and for which said retailer is in any way liable under the terms of this article, shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the property of said taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice, as provided in section 24-37 on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer, and no sheriff, lessor, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this article under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the city clerk the amount of any taxes due and payable under this article. If there are any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the proceedings and other preexisting claims or liens as above provided. For the purpose of this article, the term "taxpayer" shall include retailer. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-220; Ord. No. 577, § 22, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-37. - Recovery of taxes, penalties and interest. 
(a)  All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the vendor or retailer as taxes imposed by this article shall be and remain public money, the property of the city, in the hands of such vendor or retailer, and he or she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the city clerk as herein provided; and for failure to pay the same to the city clerk, such retailer shall be punished for a violation thereof. 
(b)  If any person neglects or refuses to make return and payment of the tax as required by this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate, based on such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent; and, upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto a penalty equal to ten percent thereof, together with interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of one percent per month from the date when due. Promptly thereafter, the city clerk shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, which notice must be served personally or by certified mail. Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the city clerk ten days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; provided, however, that within said ten-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may petition the city clerk for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish the city clerk with the facts and correct figures, showing the correct amount of such taxes. Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted shall be either in writing or orally and shall be given under the oath of said taxpayer. Thereupon, the city clerk shall modify such assessment in accordance with the facts submitted, which facts he or she deems correct. Such assessments shall be considered the final order of the city clerk and may be reviewed under rule 106(a) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, as provided in this article. 
(c)  If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this article and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or as shown by assessments duly made as provided herein, are not paid within five days after the same are due, the city clerk shall issue a notice setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the city claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as herein provided, on property of the taxpayer, other than goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. Said notice shall be on forms prepared by the city clerk and shall be verified by him or her or any duly qualified deputy or agent of the city clerk, whose duties are the collection of such tax, and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the state in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property. The filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. After said notice has been filed, or concurrently therewith or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether such notice is filed or not, the city clerk may issue a warrant directed to any duly authorized revenue collector or to the sheriff of any county in the state, commanding him or her to levy upon, seize and sell sufficient of the real and personal property of the tax debtor found within his or her county for the payment of the amount due, together with interest, penalties and costs as now or hereafter provided by ordinance, subject to valid preexisting claims or liens, as above provided. 
(d)  Such revenue collector or sheriff shall forthwith levy upon sufficient property of the taxpayer or any property used by such taxpayer in conducting his or her retail business, and said property so levied upon shall be sold in all respects, with like effect and in the same manner as is prescribed by law in respect to execution against property upon judgment of a court of record, and the remedies of garnishments shall apply. The sheriff shall be entitled to such fees in executing such warrant as are allowed by law for similar services. 
(e)  Any liens for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder, as herein provided, shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, be released by the city clerk in the same manner as mortgages or judgments are released. 
(f)  The city clerk may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the city from the vendor. In case of failure to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the city clerk may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any justice, county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has his or her principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amount sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessments made by the city clerk as herein provided shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. Such actions may be actions in attachments, and writs of attachment may be issued to the appropriate law enforcement officer. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the city clerk nor shall any law enforcement officer require of the city clerk an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings; and the city clerk may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. It shall be the duty of the city attorney, when requested by the city clerk, to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this article, and the remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies or remedies provided in this article. 
(g)  In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the city may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(h)  The city clerk is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as provided in this article, and interest imposed in excess of six percent per annum shall be deemed a penalty. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-230; Ord. No. 577, § 23, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 7, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1084, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 24-38. - Intentional deficiency. 
    If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added 50 percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten days after written notice and demand by the city clerk, and an additional one percent per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-160; Ord. No. 577, § 16, 1968) 
Sec. 24-39. - Violations. 
    In addition, no person shall knowingly and willfully sign, swear to or verify any false statement or certificate. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-280; Ord. No. 577, § 28, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 24-40-24-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 24-65. - Disputes and refunds. 
(a)  A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption as provided in this article. Such refund shall be made by the city clerk after compliance with the following conditions precedent: applications for refund must be made within 60 days after the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed; must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller; and must be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and formulated by the city clerk which forms shall contain such information as the city clerk shall prescribe. Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall examine the same with all speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his or her decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within 30 days after such decision is mailed to them, may seek review on the claim in the manner provided. The right of any person to a refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon, as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof. No applicant for refund under the provisions of this article, or any other person shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes. 
(b)  Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, the seller shall nevertheless collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax, and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the city clerk, showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the city clerk for a refund of such taxes, and it shall then be the duty of the city clerk to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts as hereinafter provided. Each seller shall collect, and each purchaser shall pay, the tax levied by this article when exemption is disputed. 
(c)  If any person is convicted under the provisions of this article, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully, and the city clerk is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refunds. A brief statement of the above-mentioned penalties shall be printed on each application form for refund. 
(d)  The burden of proving that sales, services and commodities, on which tax refunds are claimed, are exempt from taxation under this article, or were not exempt at retail, shall be on the person making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the city clerk may prescribe. Should the applicant for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the city clerk, he or she may proceed to have the decision reviewed by the courts in the manner provided for in section 24-68. Duties of the city clerk herein provided may be performed by a duly qualified deputy. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-130; Ord. No. 577, § 13, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-66. - Investigation and hearing. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the city clerk may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person, any officer or employee of such person, or any person having knowledge of such sales, and may take testimony and require proof for his or her information. The city clerk shall have power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-170; Ord. No. 577, § 17, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-67. - Hearing on petition of taxpayer. 
    If any person having made a return and paid the tax provided in this article feels aggrieved by the assessment made upon him or her by the city clerk, he or she may apply to the city clerk by petition, in writing, within 20 days after notice is mailed to him or her, for a hearing and a correction of the amount of the tax so assessed, in which petition he or she shall set forth the reasons why such hearing should be granted and the amount by which such tax should be reduced. The city clerk shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place fixed by the city clerk for such hearing. After such hearing, the city clerk shall make such order in the matter as is just and lawful, and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-240; Ord. No. 577, § 24, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 8, 1993) 
Sec. 24-68. - Decisions of city clerk; appeals. 
(a)  Every decision of the city clerk shall be in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the vendor within ten days. All such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of 30 days after notice of such decision shall have been mailed to the vendor, unless proceedings are taken within said time for review thereof, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Should the applicant for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the city clerk, he or she may proceed to have the same reviewed by the courts in the manner provided for review of other decisions of the city clerk hereunder. Such review shall be in the district court of the Fifteenth Judicial District. 
(c)  The district court shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the city clerk in administering the provisions of this article by writ under rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(d)  The procedure thereunder shall be in conformity with Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(e)  The decision of the district court may be reviewed in the Supreme Court upon writ of error by any party. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-250; Ord. No. 577, § 25, 1968; Ord. No. 917, §§ 9, 14, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-69. - Subpoenas for witnesses. 
    All subpoenas issued under the terms of this article may be served by any person 18 years of age or older. The fees of witnesses for attendance and trial shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the district court, and shall be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the city clerk, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses of the city clerk under the terms of this article, and when a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any party to such proceeding, the city clerk may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the city clerk, in his or her discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fee. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-180; Ord. No. 577, § 18, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-70. - Compelling attendance of witnesses and production of evidence. 
    The district court of the Fifteenth Judicial District, or any judge thereof, either in term time or vacation, upon the application of the city clerk, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda, and the giving of testimony before the city clerk or any member of his or her duly authorized deputies by an attachment for contempt or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before said court. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-190; Ord. No. 577, § 19, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-71. - Depositions. 
    The city clerk or any party in an investigation or hearing before the city clerk may insist the depositions of witnesses residing within or outside the state to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this state, and to that end, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-200; Ord. No. 577, § 20, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-72. - Manner of giving notices; place of hearings. 
(a)  All notices required to be given to the retailer or vendor under the provisions of this article shall be given in writing and, if mailed, postpaid by certified mail, return receipt requested, to him or her at his or her last-known address, shall be sufficient for the purposes of this article. 
(b)  Every hearing before the city clerk shall be held in the city. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-260; Ord. No. 577, § 26, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-73. - Limitations. 
    The taxes for any period, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this article shall not be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant issued, suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only for one year after the filing of notice thereon. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the city clerk may agree, in writing, to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(Code 2000, § 4-2-100; Ord. No. 577, § 40, 1968) 
Secs. 24-74-24-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COORDINATION WITH STATE AND OTHER TAXING AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 24-105. - Coordinated audit. 
(a)  Any taxpayer licensed in the city pursuant to section 24-4, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(b)  Within 14 days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the city clerk, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license, and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon the city's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, any taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of the limitation set forth in section 24-73 may be audited by the city during the 12 months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(d)  If the city desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the city clerk shall so notify the city clerk of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The city clerk shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(e)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the city, the city clerk shall facilitate arrangements between the city and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The city clerk shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors who will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(f)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the city, the city clerk shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the city and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayers of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The city clerk shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(g)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section shall not apply: 
(1)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
(2)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(3)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of the limitation contained in section 24-73; or 
(4)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 4-3-10; Ord. No. 917, § 42, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-106. - Inter-city claims for recovery. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the city. 
(b)  As used herein, the term "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(c)  When it is determined by the city clerk that sales and use tax owed to the city has been reported and paid to another municipality, the city shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice, the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(d)  The city may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the city or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for recovery lies in the sole discretion of the city. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within 90 days of its receipt. The municipality to which the city submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(e)  The city may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(f)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the 36-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Code 2000, § 4-3-20; Ord. No. 917, § 43, 1993) 
Sec. 24-107. - Notice of sales and use tax ordinance amendment. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the city clerk shall maintain on file with the Colorado Municipal League a copy of the city sales and use tax ordinances reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date. 
(b)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the city clerk shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the city. 
(c)  Failure of the city to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to this section shall not invalidate any provisions of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(Code 2000, § 4-3-30; Ord. No. 917, § 44, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-108. - Participation in simplification meetings. 
    The city clerk shall cooperate with and participate on an as-needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League, which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolutions to sales and use tax problems which may arise. 
(Code 2000, § 4-3-40; Ord. No. 917, § 45, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 24-109-24-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALES TAX 

Sec. 24-130. - Property and services taxed. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax in the amounts stated in section 24-132, as follows: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail. 
(2)  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property, provided that such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(3)  Upon telecommunications services for all local calls originating in the city on telecommunications instruments located in the city. 
(4)  For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial consumption, and not for resale. 
(5)  Upon the amount paid for all meals and cover charges, if any, furnished in any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drugstore, club, resort or other such place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public. 
(6)  On the amount paid for lodging service. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-30; Ord. No. 577, § 3, 1968; Ord. No. 917, §§ 3, 4, 1993) 
Sec. 24-131. - Vendor liable for tax. 
    Every retailer (also herein called vendor) shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to three percent of all sales made by him or her of commodities or services as specified in section 24-130, and shall, before the 20th day of each month make a return to the city clerk for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to said three percent of such sales to the city clerk, less 3 1/3 percent of such tax to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax. Such returns of the taxpayer, or his or her duly authorized agent, shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the city clerk may prescribe. The city clerk may extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as he or she may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided for in section 24-31. The burden of proving that any retailer is exempt from collecting the tax on any goods sold and paying the same to the city clerk, or from making such returns, shall be on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-40; Ord. No. 577, § 4, 1968; Ord. No. 664, § 2, 1974; Ord. No. 754, § 2, 1980) 
Sec. 24-132. - Sales tax levy. 
    There is hereby imposed a tax upon all sales of commodities and services specified in section 24-130 in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The rate of the tax hereby imposed shall be equal to three percent. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, retailers shall add the tax imposed hereby, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item and, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the manner as other debts. The retailer shall be entitled as collecting agent of the city to apply and credit the amount of this collection against the three-percent rate to be paid by him or her under the provisions of section 24-131, remitting any excess collections over said three percent less the 3 1/3 percent collection expense allowance, to the city clerk in the retailer's next monthly sales tax return. 
(3)  Any retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink may include in his or her sales price the tax levied under this article. 
(4)  No person other than the city shall enrich himself or herself or gain any benefit from the collection or payment of such tax, nor shall the use of the above brackets relieve the retailer from liability for payment of the full amount of the tax levied by this article. 
(5)  No retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax levied by this article is not considered as an element in the sales price to the consumer. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-50; Ord. No. 577, § 5, 1968; Ord. No. 664, § 3, 1974; Ord. No. 754, § 3, 1990; Ord. No. 881, § 2, 1990; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1049, § 5, 2002) 
Sec. 24-133. - Special funds created. 
    There is hereby established the following special fund within the meaning of section 11-13 of the city Charter: 
Library improvements fund. The original rate of imposition of the sales and use tax having been reduced by 0.25 percent pursuant to certain obligations having been met, the balance of monies in the library improvements fund shall be expended solely for capital improvement purposes for the Lamar Public Library. Finally, as determined necessary, the city council is authorized to transfer legally available monies of the city into the library improvements fund for any purpose and thereafter may treat such payments as inter-fund loans to the library improvements fund to be repaid, without interest, to the extent monies are available at a later date. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-55; Ord. No. 1049, § 4, 2002) 
Sec. 24-134. - Exemptions from tax. 
    There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article the following: 
(1)  All sales to the federal government, the state, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof (including the city) in their governmental capacities only. 
(2)  All sales made to religious, charitable and eleemosynary functions and activities. 
(3)  All sales which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the state, or the Charter or ordinances of the city. 
(4)  All sales of cigarettes; provided, however, that this exemption in no way or manner affects any future tax on cigarettes. 
(5)  All sales of prescription drugs disbursed in accordance with a prescription and purchased from a licensed pharmacist, and all sales of prosthetic devices, but not including marijuana dispensed following a doctor's written order or recommendation. 
(6)  All sales of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed by the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax of 1933 and amendments thereto. 
(7)  Sale of farm implements for tilling the soil and harvesting the crops, which are to be used as such. 
(8)  Sale of parts and accessories for farm implements and any other items sold for exclusive use in the operation of farms and ranches. 
(9)  All sales and purchases of meat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats; all sales and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding purposes; all farm auction close out sales; and the storage, use or consumption of such property. 
(10)  All sales and purchases of feed for livestock or poultry; all sales and purchases of seeds; all sales and purchases of orchard trees; and the storage, use or consumption of such property. 
(11)  All articles purchased by nonresidents for delivery by a common carrier, by the conveyance of the vendor or by mail outside the city. 
(12)  Sales of tangible personal property to a contractor or construction company to be used outside the city where such property or materials are used in the purchaser's construction business outside of the city, even though such materials are delivered to the purchaser within the city; provided that the contractor making such purchase or the vendor selling such materials shall execute and file with the city clerk, at least monthly, a certificate provided by the city clerk, showing the total of sales made for use outside the city for such period and such further information as the city clerk may reasonably require; and, provided further, that every such contractor or vendor signing such certificate shall so maintain his or her records as to show the location and address of such out-of-city jobs. 
(13)  Sales of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers to nonresidents of the city, where such vehicles are registered outside the city, even though the delivery of the vehicles is made to the purchaser within the city. 
(14)  Any subsequent sales of a movable structure, after such movable structure has been once subject to the payment of sales tax by virtue of section 24-130(1) and (2). 
(15)  Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product which is manufactured, compounded or furnished. 
(16)  Exempt commercial packaging materials. 
(17)  Sales and purchases of electricity, gas, fuel oil, coke, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services and industrial uses. 
(18)  Sales and purchases of newsprint and printers ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-120; Ord. No. 577, § 12, 1968; Ord. No. 664, § 8, 1974; Ord. No. 917, § 5, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1152, § 3, 2010) 
Sec. 24-135. - Credit sales. 
    Whenever an article is sold under a conditional sales contract whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on the article to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total selling price shall become immediately due and payable. This tax shall be charged and collected by the seller. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(Code 2000, § 4-1-100; Ord. No. 577, § 10, 1968) 
Secs. 24-136-24-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE TAX 

Sec. 24-154. - Use tax levied. 
    There is hereby imposed, and there shall be collected from every person in the city, a tax or excise for the privilege of storing, using or consuming within the city any article of tangible personal property purchased at retail. The rate of such tax or excise hereby imposed shall be equal to three percent. 
(Code 2000, § 4-2-10; Ord. No. 577, § 31, 1968; Ord. No. 664, § 5, 1974; Ord. No. 754, § 5, 1990; Ord. No. 881, § 2, 1990; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1049, § 7, 2002) 
Sec. 24-155. - Exemptions from use tax. 
    The use tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to the sales tax imposed, and which retail sales tax was paid. 
(2)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product in the regular course of business. 
(3)  The storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed under the motor fuel tax under state law. 
(4)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the city by a person not residing in the city for his or her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the city. 
(5)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property, the sale or use of which is subject to an excise tax under federal or state laws, where such excise tax amounts to more than 121/2 percent of the sale price under said laws; or the storage, use or consumption of such property by the United States Government, by the state, its institutions or political subdivisions; or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(6)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the production or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished, and the exempt commercial packaging material thereof. 
(7)  The storage, use or consumption of electricity, coal, coke, fuel oil or gas, for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation service and all industrial use. 
(8)  The storage, use or consumption of printer ink and newsprint. 
(9)  The storage, use or consumption of cigarettes, fermented malt beverages and malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(10)  Purchases of machinery or machine tools, or parts thereof, in excess of $500.00 to be used in the city, directly or predominantly in manufacturing tangible personal property, for sale or profit. 
(Code 2000, § 4-2-20; Ord. No. 577, § 32, 1968; Ord. No. 917, § 10, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2001) 
Sec. 24-156. - Use tax on motor vehicles and trailers. 
    Any person residing in the city who shall lease or purchase any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, whether new or used, outside the corporate limits of the city for use within the city, shall immediately and prior to registering and obtaining a license therefor, make a return, showing such transaction to the city clerk, and thereupon pay to the city clerk the full amount of use tax applicable thereto, as provided in this article. All such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers purchased or leased outside the corporate limits of the city for use in the city shall be registered with the county clerk and recorder, and no person person shall register any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in any other county in the state or elsewhere. Any such registration shall constitute prima facie evidence of an attempt to evade payment of such tax. 
(Code 2000, § 4-2-80; Ord. No. 577, § 38, 1968; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 24-157. - Use tax; construction materials. 
(a)  The building official and the city clerk shall coordinate their efforts and cooperate each with the other to ensure proper collection of sales tax upon all construction materials utilized within the city. 
(b)  The building official, upon the issuance of each building permit issued by the building official, shall cause the receipt for said building permit to be endorsed with the following notice: 
NOTICE 
The owner of the project which constitutes the subject of the within building permit shall be responsible, upon the completion of construction of said project, for the payment of use tax at the current rate of three percent upon all materials utilized in the construction of said project which have not already been subject to sales tax collection by the city or any other municipal taxing entity. 
(c)  The city clerk shall, upon the projected completion date of any such construction project, mail to the owner thereof a use tax form. Whereupon the owner of said construction project, in respect of which said property owner has not theretofore paid sales tax to the city or any other municipal taxing authority, shall pay use tax at the current rate. 
(d)  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 29-2-109(7), the storage of construction materials is exempt from the tax established by this article. 
(Code 2000, § 4-2-90; Ord. No. 577, § 39, 1968; Ord. No. 905, § 4, 1992; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
State Law reference- Remittance of sales and use tax on construction and building materials, C.R.S. § 29-2-105(2). 
Chapter 26 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of codes by reference, C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq.; adoption of penalty provisions must include penalty provision, C.R.S. § 31-16-204. 

Sec. 26-1. - Adoption of Model Traffic Code. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-16-201 et seq., there is hereby adopted by reference articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code promulgated and published as such by the state department of transportation, safety and traffic engineering branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the city clerk at 102 East Parmenter Street, Lamar, Colorado, and may be examined during regular business hours. The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-10; Ord. No. 958, §§ 1, 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1174, 2012) 
Sec. 26-2. - Amendments to Model Traffic Code. 
    The adopted code is subject to the following amendment: section 614 is added to read as follows: 
    "614. Designation of highway maintenance; repair; construction zones; signs; increase in penalties for speeding violations. (1) If maintenance, repair or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a state highway or municipal street, the department of transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdictions, may designate such portion of the highway as a highway maintenance, repair or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to increased penalties and surcharges. 
a.  The department of transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdiction, shall designate by appropriate signs, a maintenance, repair or construction activity is taking place or will be taking place within four hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
b.  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, construction or repair zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or local authority may display such signs on any fixed, variable or moveable stand. The department of transportation or local authority may place such a sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway painting work." 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-20; Ord. No. 958, § 3, 1996; Ord. No. 984, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 2003) 
Sec. 26-3. - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public place or public way or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402 and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving and eluding a police officer, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the city. 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-30; Ord. No. 958, § 5, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1174, 2012) 
Sec. 26-4. - Interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this article and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-40; Ord. No. 958, § 8, 1996; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1174, 2012) 
Sec. 26-5. - Penalties. 
    In accordance with C.R.S. § 13-10-113(1.5) and the city Charter, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may suffer the penalties provided by this Code; in addition, pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-4-1710, certain penalties shall result due to failure to pay a penalty for traffic offenses, and/or failure of a parent or guardian to sign a penalty assessment notice, as follows: 
(1)  a.  Unless a person who has been cited for a traffic infraction pays the penalty assessment as provided in this Code and surcharge thereon pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-4.2-104(1), the person shall appear at a hearing on the date and time specified in the citation and answer the complaint against such person. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1)a of this section, a minor under the age of 18 years shall be required to appear at a hearing on the date and time specified in the citation and answer the complaint if the penalty assessment was timely paid but not signed and notarized in the manner required by C.R.S. § 42-4-1709(1.5). 
(2)  If a minor under the age of 18 years is required to appear at a hearing pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the minor shall so inform his or her parent or legal guardian, and the parent or legal guardian shall also be required to appear at the hearing. 
(3)  If the violator answers that he or she is guilty or if the violator fails to appear for the hearing, judgment shall be entered against the violator. 
(4)  If the violator denies the allegations in the complaint, a final hearing on the complaint shall be held subject to the provisions regarding a speedy trial which are contained in C.R.S. § 18-1-405. If the violator is found guilty or liable at such final hearing or if the violator fails to appear for a final hearing, judgment shall be entered against the violator. 
(5)  If judgment is entered against a violator, the violator shall be assessed an appropriate penalty and surcharge thereon, a docket fee, and other applicable costs authorized by ordinance or the court. If the violator had been cited by a penalty assessment notice, the penalty shall be assessed pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-50; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1174, 2012) 
Sec. 26-6. - Certification. 
    The city clerk shall certify to the passage of this article and make no less than three copies of the adopted code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 2000, § 8-1-60; Ord. No. 1174, 2012) 
Sec. 26-7. - Parking prohibited at certain times and places; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or operator of any motor-propelled vehicle, or other vehicle used to transport or carry persons or property, to park on any street or alley in the city for a period of time longer than that shown on the official signs so stating the maximum period of parking, provided that it shall not be unlawful for any such vehicles to park beyond such maximum time in such designated places as shown by such official signs between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and on Sundays and legal holidays. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any vehicle weighing more than 20,000 pounds to be parked, stored, or left unattended on any residential street or alley which is maintained by the city. Residential streets shall be defined as those city-maintained streets located within the zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map designated as R-1 Residence District, R-2 Residence District, R-3 Residence District, M-H Mobile Home District, PUD Planned Unit Development District, and O-E Open Estates. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be parked beyond the maximum time limit designated in subsection (a) of this section. Parking a vehicle for one or more subsequent periods of time in excess of the time designated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16-4; Code 2000, § 8-2-10; Ord. No. 525, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1174, 2012; Ord. No. 1197, pt. 1, 2015) 
Sec. 26-8. - Designation and use of unmetered parking zones. 
(a)  The city council or the traffic engineer may from time to time designate unmetered parking spaces within such areas as the city council or the traffic engineer may determine, and such hourly times for parking in such spaces may be designated by the city council by resolution or by the traffic engineer. 
(b)  During such designated hourly times or any which may be from time to time adopted by the city council, no person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name to be parked or standing under and within any such unmetered parking space when such vehicle has been parked within such space longer than the designated hours. 
(Prior Code, § 16-5; Code 2000, § 8-2-20; Ord. No. 448, § 4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 26-9. - Parking and speed regulations. 
(a)  Parking is prohibited at those points along the portions of U.S. Highways 50 and 287 which are within 20 feet of any intersection. Parking is also prohibited at all times along the portion of such street which is between the northerly ATSF Railroad track and Beech Street. Parking when and where permitted shall be parallel, as provided by law for parallel parking. Upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations by the state department of transportation and by the city, it has been determined that reasonable and true prima facie speed limits on such portions of such street, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be 35 miles per hour in the business district and 35 miles per hour on the remaining portions, provided that standard signs are erected giving notice of the authorized speed as provided by state statutes. 
(b)  Upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations and determinations pursuant to state statutes, such investigations and determinations having been made by the state department of transportation in behalf of the city, it is hereby declared that when standard signs are erected giving notice thereof, a reasonable and true prima facie speed limit on the portions of streets named below shall be as specified in the following schedule: 
MPH Speed Limit Direction of travel From To East Olive Street (U.S. 50) 30 EB Log 57.04 (east intersection of Main and Olive streets) Log 57.36 (intersection of 1st and East Olive streets 30 WB Log point 57.33 Log point 57.04 (intersection of East Olive and Main streets) Main Street (U.S. 287) 60 NB Lamar SCL* 0.19 mile North of Lamar SCL* 60 SB Lamar SCL* 0.10 mile South of Savage Avenue 50 NB 0.19 mile North of Lamar SCL* 0.10 mile South of Savage Avenue 35 SB 0.19 mile South of Savage Avenue Olive Street (U.S. 50) 35 NB 0.01 mile South of Savage Avenue Olive Street (U.S. 50)  
* South city limit. 
Southbound Traffic Location Speed Limit (Miles Per Hour) North City Limits to Washington Street 35 Washington Street to Chestnut Street 30 Chestnut Street to Savage Avenue 35 Savage Avenue to South City Limits 45 Northbound Traffic Location Speed Limit (Miles Per Hour) South City Limits to Main entrance of Lamar Community College 45 Main entrance of Lamar Community College to Walnut Street 35 Walnut Street to Avenida Colonia Drive 30 Avenida Colonia Drive to North City Limits 35  
(c)  Except as herein amended and modified, the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the city shall continue in full force and effect. 
(d)  There shall be no parking whatsoever on any roadway or contiguous shoulder of any state highway or connection link within the city during the times and at the places where snow removal operations are in progress. 
(Prior Code, § 16-11; Code 2000, § 8-2-30; Ord. No. 443, §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 488, §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 558, § 1; Ord. No. 574, § 1; Ord. No. 823, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 26-10. - State approval of parking and traffic regulations. 
    All traffic and parking regulations hereafter adopted which pertain to the streets and roadways which form a part of the state highway system or being a connecting link thereof shall be submitted to the state department of transportation for approval in accordance with the provisions of state law before they shall become effective. 
(Prior Code, § 16-12; Code 2000, § 8-2-40; Ord. No. 443, § 9; Ord. No. 488, § 10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 26-11. - Enforcement. 
    Any city police officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 16-13; Code 2000, § 8-2-50; Ord. No. 443, § 9; Ord. No. 488, § 10; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 26-12. - Refusal to observe barricades and traffic cones. 
    It is unlawful to remove, alter or change any traffic control device, sign, barricade or traffic cone. It is also unlawful to drive around barricades or traffic cones in the roadway, or enter parking lots that are closed by the city. 
(Code 2000, § 8-3-10; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 2007) 
Chapter 28 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-19. - Water conservation. 
(a)  The public works department is hereby directed to, at all times, closely and diligently monitor the water supply available to the municipal water system, to inform the city council and the water advisory board on a timely basis as to the condition and circumstances of the then-available water supply, and to take such measures as the department may deem necessary to educate and inform the public as to the need for conservation of the city water supply and methods whereby said water supply might be conserved, and to investigate all measures aimed toward preserving the integrity of the municipal water system. 
(b)  In the discretion of the city council, in consultation with the public works department and the water advisory board, and as water availability and quality circumstances might dictate, the city council is hereby authorized and directed to implement voluntary water conservation restrictions on the use of water for some or all purposes by some or all users of the municipal water system. Said voluntary conservation restrictions shall be as set forth by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 13-2-60; Ord. No. 877, §§ 1, 2, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1059, 2003) 
Sec. 28-20. - Water use restrictions. 
(a)  Mandatory water use restrictions shall be considered for implementation at any time the following criteria are met: 
(1)  An emergency occurs, as determined by the public works director in consultation with the city administrator, which disrupts the city's ability to distribute water through its water distribution system; or 
(2)  Water availability and quality conditions, as determined by the public works director in consultation with the city administrator and the water advisory board, dictate the need for mandatory water use restrictions. 
(b)  In the event that the criteria for mandatory water use restrictions described in subsection (a) of this section shall be disclosed to the city council by the public works director and city administrator, the city council, as water availability and quality circumstances might dictate, is hereby authorized to implement mandatory water use restrictions on the use of water for some or all purposes by some or all users of the municipal water system. Said mandatory water use restrictions shall be as set forth by resolution adopted by the city council by a phone poll or an in-person majority vote. 
(Code 2000, § 13-2-70; Ord. No. 877, § 3, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1059, 2003) 
Sec. 28-21. - Emergency restrictions. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed or interpreted as limiting or prohibiting the imposition of water use restrictions more stringent than as described above, provided that such further restrictions shall be implemented, if at all, by the city council in emergency circumstances. 
(Code 2000, § 13-2-80; Ord. No. 877, § 7, 1989) 
Sec. 28-22. - Unauthorized tapping and usage prohibited. 
    No person, without first having obtained permission therefor, shall tap any water main, pump or hydrant of the city water system, nor in any manner take or use any water therefrom or interfere with, injure or destroy the same. 
(Prior Code, § 24-14; Code 2000, § 13-2-90; Ord. No. 46, § 1) 
Secs. 28-23-28-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 28-50. - Water and sewer taps. 
(a)  This article shall provide standards, rules and regulations, and shall govern the provisions of all water and sewer services furnished by the city, whether inside or outside the city limits. 
(b)  Any applicant or developer seeking to obtain city water and sewer services, or any other city services exclusive of electrical service, to premises outside of the city shall be required, as a condition precedent to the furnishing of such services, to execute and deliver agreements governing the usage of said extraterritorial premises, including, but not limited to, agreements requiring annexation, agreements concerning water restrictions and agreements in respect of the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances, including, but not limited to, street lighting plans, traffic regulatory sign plans, street names, sign plans, stormwater system plans and street system layouts and plans for the purpose of street extension, alignment, orderly growth and traffic flow; and finally, all applicable building and construction codes of the city, such as, but not limited to, building code, building code standards, fire code, fire code standards, mechanical code, housing code, plumbing code and the code for abatement of dangerous buildings. No water, sewer or other city services, excepting electrical service, shall be extended to serve any building, development or subdivision outside of the city's corporate limits without such agreements as may be required, and without satisfactory guaranty to the city of the ability to comply with the requirements of said agreements. Said agreements shall be binding upon the applicant or developer, his or her heirs, successors, administrators and assigns, and shall be considered as covenants running with the land thus developed. 
(c)  Applicants or developers shall be required to grant and convey to the city all necessary rights-of-way and easements for installation and maintenance of city utility lines. All lines and equipment necessary for the furnishing of extraterritorial water and sewer services, with the exception of service lines, shall be conveyed to the city. 
(d)  All installations of extraterritorial water and sewer service shall be performed at the cost of the applicant or developer, with all fees, including tap fees, to be paid in advance of the issuance of connection. All connections shall be inspected by the building official or by appropriate city personnel, with the applicant or developer to pay any costs incurred. All such water and wastewater taps shall be restricted exclusively to the site designated in the application. Fees and costs incurred by the applicant or developer are not refundable, and the applicant or owner shall be required to furnish appropriate performance, construction or other types of bonding as may be required by the city to protect its interest. At the city's discretion, appropriate escrow arrangements may be substituted in lieu of required bonding. 
(e)  The minimum size of any water main shall be six inches. The city reserves the right to establish type, size, location and all other specifications regarding water mains, sewer trunk lines, valves and other necessary equipment. All water mains shall be looped, in accordance with state health department regulations and city requirements. Water mains shall be sufficient to provide for fire protection, with fire hydrants to be installed by city personnel at the expense of the applicant or developer. 
(f)  The city shall determine, in its sole discretion, the number of taps to be provided, along with location and size, depending upon capacity and water availability. Use restrictions may be implemented by the city council, at its discretion, and by the public works department in the event of emergencies. Nothing in this article or rising out of the city's provisions of extraterritorial water and sewer services shall operate to transform the city into a public utility, it being fully understood that the city is not a public utility but is a municipally-operated water and sewer system, with citizens of the city having first and prior privilege to draw upon the city's water and sewer installations. 
(g)  In appropriate circumstances and at the sole discretion of the city council, water districts may be formed, in which cases, master meters shall be installed by city personnel with the cost incurred being borne by the applicant or developer. Said master meters shall be owned and maintained by the city, and such districts shall be governed by such agreements as may be entered into between such districts and the city council. Mergers and dissolutions of existing city districts shall be reviewed and adopted by agreement between the applicant or owner and the city council. 
(h)  Any agreement for the provision of extraterritorial water and sewer services by the city shall include penalty provisions for noncompliance by the applicant or owner of any part of any agreement entered into pursuant to this section, or for any violation of this section. Any such agreement shall further provide provisions regarding main extension or reimbursement, whereby the owner or developer shall be enabled to recover a reasonable portion of the expenses incurred in the process of installing water or sewer services, but the city retains the right to refuse permission for any extension or expansion of extraterritorial water or sewer services. 
(i)  Upon proper application, the water advisory board may consider application for waiver of any of the provisions hereinabove set forth, and may forward to the city council a recommendation for such waiver to be granted in respect of any of the provisions of this section wherein waiver might be deemed appropriate. Such recommendation by the water advisory board is recommendatory only, and shall not be binding upon the city council. The city reserves the right to require recordation of all or any portion of any agreement entered into in respect of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-20; Ord. No. 872, 1989; Ord. No. 963, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-51. - Connection to sewage system required. 
    No person shall construct or maintain a privy vault or toilet unconnected with the sewage system of the city or a cesspool on any lot or parcel of land where such lot or parcel of land is so situated that it can be connected with the city sewage system, except when the city shall find that such connection cannot be made. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1; Code 2000, § 13-1-30; Ord. No. 286, § 1) 
Sec. 28-52. - Sewer connections. 
    The city shall make the tap for connection into the main with materials furnished by the property owner or person making the connection, and no connection shall be made by any person other than in this manner. The lines from the main to the property line shall be vitrified clay or its equal and shall be joined together by GK material or equal. Each connection shall be four inches or larger in size. All connections shall be made to the satisfaction of the city, including refilling and replacing of dirt removed to make such connection. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2; Code 2000, § 13-1-40; Ord. No. 449, § 2; Ord. No. 459, § 1; Ord. No. 869, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-53. - Water meters. 
(a)  All persons obtaining water from the city shall have such water supplied only through a water meter. Separate meters shall be required for each consumer. 
(b)  No water meter in excess of one inch shall be furnished, installed or connected to any water main of the city to furnish water to any property used for residential purposes, provided that hotels and motels shall not be considered residential purposes. Consumers other than residential shall be entitled to meters in excess of one inch, provided that all the provisions of this article applicable to such meters are followed. 
(c)  When any water meter in excess of one inch used to measure water to property used for residential purposes shall be disconnected for seasonal purposes or otherwise, the same shall be replaced only by a one-inch meter or less. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any water consumer may apply for and have any noncomplying water meter exchanged for any smaller size meter which complies with this article, without any charge for connection, disconnection or differential in meter sizes. 
(e)  Any water consumer entitled to the installation of a meter in excess of three-quarters of an inch shall pay to the city prior to the installation and connection of such meter a sum equal to the difference in cost to the city between a three-quarter-inch meter and the size meter desired. Such cost shall be the cost at the time of application of the installation of such meter. 
(f)  There shall be assessed and collected by the city a reconnection charge as established by the city council to reconnect any meter which has been disconnected for seasonal purposes or otherwise. 
(g)  If any water meter shall fail to register during any given month, the consumer chargeable for such meter shall be charged for use of water for such month a sum equal to the average charge for consumption as shown by such meter, when in order, for a period of 12 months prior to such month. 
(Prior Code, §§ 24-2-24-8; Code 2000, § 13-2-20; Ord. No. 419, §§ 3-5; Ord. No. 471, § 2; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 28-54-28-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES AND BILLING 

Sec. 28-80. - Plant investment fees. 
(a)  Plant investment fees are as established by the city council. 
(b)  In addition to the plant investment fees, customers shall pay to the city the actual cost of labor, equipment usage and materials furnished for installation of such taps. 
(c)  All plant investment fees charged to users located outside the city shall be double the specified plant investment fees. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-50; Ord. No. 869, § 2, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-81. - Water fees. 
    Rates and charges for use of water from the city water system shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-60; Ord. No. 869, § 3, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-82. - Sewer system fees. 
(a)  Rates and charges for the use of the city sewer system for each user shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  For commercial users of the city sewer system, the volume charge fee levied for sewer usage in excess of the monthly minimum of 900 cubic feet shall be based upon the average metered water consumption of such consumer for the months of December, January and February of each preceding year; provided, however, that all businesses engaged in the washing of motor vehicles shall be liable for a sewer rate charge based upon actual monthly usage of metered water supply. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-70; Ord. No. 869, § 4, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-83. - Miscellaneous fees. 
    Additional charges as established by the city council are hereby levied for services performed and for usage of the city's water and sewer utilities. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-80; Ord. No. 869, § 5, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-84. - Amendment. 
    All rates, charges and fees established for water and sewer connection and usage may hereafter be established, amended and modified by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-90; Ord. No. 869, §§ 6, 7, 1989; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-85. - Connection charges. 
(a)  Connection charges for connecting water lines to the city water distribution system shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  There is hereby established by the city council a charge for the disconnection of any existing water meter, and a charge for the reconnection of any existing water meter so disconnected under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 24-1; Code 2000, § 13-2-10; Ord. No. 457, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 791, §§ 1-4; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-86. - Rates and charges generally. 
    The rates and charges per meter, per month, for the use of water from the city water system for each consumer shall be as established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 24-9; Code 2000, § 13-2-30; Ord. No. 419, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 471, § 1; Ord. No. 511, § 2; Ord. No. 556, § 1; Ord. No. 617, § 1; Ord. No. 679, § 1; Ord. No. 728, § 1; Ord. No. 775, § 1; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-87. - Billing procedure. 
    All city water used shall be billed to each consumer each month and shall be paid for by the consumer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(Prior Code, § 24-10; Code 2000, § 13-2-40; Ord. No. 419, § 4) 
Sec. 28-88. - Delinquent accounts. 
(a)  All rates and charges for the use of water shall be charged against and constitute a lien upon the real estate to which the water is furnished, and shall constitute a charge against the owner thereof. If for any cause any such charges shall become delinquent, the water supply for such real estate shall be cut off by the city, and in no case shall it be turned on to the same real estate until all such delinquencies have been paid in full, together with interest at the rate of five percent per annum, plus a charge as established by the city council. No change of ownership or occupation of such real estate shall bar the application of this section. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies for delinquent water bills set out in this article, the city clerk, when ordered by the city council, shall cause any delinquent charges for the use of water to be certified to the county clerk to be collected and paid to the county treasurer, in the same manner as taxes are collected and paid under state law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 24-11, 24-12; Code 2000, § 13-2-50; Ord. No. 419, §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 28-89-28-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER ENTERPRISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Water activities enterprises, C.R.S. § 37-45.1-101 et seq. 

Sec. 28-120. - Water enterprise. 
(a)  There is hereby established, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Water Activity Law, C.R.S. § 37-45.1-101, the City of Lamar Water Activity Enterprise (the enterprise). The enterprise shall consist of the business represented by all of the city's water and sewer facilities and properties, now owned or hereafter acquired, whether situated within or outside the city boundaries, including all present or future improvements, extensions, enlargements, betterments, replacements or additions thereof or thereto (the system). The enterprise shall have all of the authority, powers, rights, obligations and duties as may be provided or permitted by the Water Activity Law and the state constitution, and as may be further prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(b)  The governing body of the enterprise shall be the city council, and shall be subject to all of the applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the city council. Whenever the city council is in session, the governing body shall also be deemed to be in session. It shall not be necessary for the governing body to meet separately from the regular and special meetings of the city council, nor shall it be necessary for the governing body to specifically announce or acknowledge that actions taken thereby are taken by the governing body of the enterprise. The governing body may conduct its affairs in the same manner and subject to the same laws which apply to the city council, for the same or similar matters, provided, that in accordance with C.R.S. § 37-45.1-104(2), the governing body may authorize the issuance of bonds by adoption of a resolution provided that all provisions of the Home Rule Charter shall be complied with. 
(c)  The enterprise shall at all times and in all ways conduct its affairs so as to continue to qualify as a water activity enterprise within the meaning of C.R.S. § 37-45.1-102, and as an enterprise within the meaning of article X, section 20 of the state constitution. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the enterprise is not authorized to, and shall not, receive ten percent or more of its annual revenue in grants from all state and local governments combined. 
(d)  The enterprise is authorized to issue bonds, notes or other obligations payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from the system, in accordance with the Water Activity Law. The city council may also authorize the issuance of such bonds, notes or other obligations in accordance with applicable state laws and the city's Home Rule Charter, and in so doing, shall be deemed to be acting as the governing body. 
(Code 2000, § 13-1-10; Ord. No. 992, §§ 1-4, 1998; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 28-121-28-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-139. - Renewal of franchises. 
    All members of the city staff are hereby directed and authorized to become informed and knowledgeable regarding the terms, conditions and pertinent facts in relation to the public utility franchises granted by the city, and to do and perform all things necessary to cause renewal or replacement franchises in respect of said public utilities, to be accomplished so as to avoid any cessation of the services provided by such public utilities. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-10; Ord. No. 946, § 1, 1995) 
Sec. 28-140. - Continuation of franchise. 
    In the event that any such public utility franchise expires without previous and timely renewal or replacement thereof being accomplished, such public utility provider whose franchise has thus expired and which shall continue to function and provide public utility service to the inhabitants of the city, shall be, and hereby is, deemed to be providing such services and continuing to function and conduct its business pursuant to a revocable business permit, as described in section 12-10 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-20; Ord. No. 946, § 2, 1995) 
Sec. 28-141. - Conditions for continuation. 
    All conditions, agreements, limitations, rights, privileges and duties of any such continuing public utility service provider, except the term and duration of such arrangement, shall continue on the identical basis and arrangement for which the original franchise of such public utility provided, and particularly being the fee or compensation originally agreed upon in the franchise of such public utility service provider, as mandated to be paid to the city pursuant to section 12-6 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-30; Ord. No. 946, § 3, 1995) 
Sec. 28-142. - Duration of continuation. 
    The term and duration of the continuing business permit afforded to such public utility service provider herein shall be for such time as is reasonably necessary in order to negotiate for a renewal of such franchise and obtain voter approval thereof, to allow such public utility service provider to close out its business, or to allow such public utility service provider to dispose of or remove its property from the city. During any such continuation of public utilities pursuant to the business permit arrangements hereinabove set forth, neither the city nor the public utility service provider shall have the right to terminate such permit sooner than 180 days after giving written notice to the opposite party of its intentions so to terminate. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-40; Ord. No. 946, § 4, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-143. - Access to city property. 
(a)  The continuation of any public utility service by a provider pursuant to the business permit arrangement hereinabove set forth shall not be deemed to be a trespass by the public utility service provider upon city property. 
(b)  No such continuation of public utility service pursuant to the business permit arrangement shall be deemed to be a renewal of any such franchise, nor shall the same be deemed to be a grant of such franchise, the same being, instead, an implied consent to use of municipal property, upon previously agreed upon conditions, for an indefinite but limited period of time, in the best interest of all citizens of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-50; Ord. No. 946, §§ 5, 6, 1995) 
Sec. 28-144. - Approval of voters. 
    Nothing herein contained shall obviate the need for voter approval of public utility franchises, as required by section 12-5 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Code 2000, § 5-1-60; Ord. No. 946, § 7, 1995) 
Secs. 28-145-28-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NATURAL GAS 

Sec. 28-172. - Grant. 
    Greeley Gas Company, a division of Atmos Energy Corporation, hereinafter called the company, is hereby granted the right, privilege and franchise to construct, install, maintain and operate in, through and along the present and future streets and alleys of the city its mains, pipes, boxes, reducing and regulating stations, laterals, conduits and service extensions, together with all of the necessary appurtenances, for the purpose of supplying natural gas for light, heat, power and other purposes to the city and the inhabitants thereof and users therein (including domestic, commercial, public authority and industrial consumers) for the term of this franchise, subject, however, to the limitations herein set forth and provided. Provisions applicable to the furnishing of natural gas to the city light plant by the company shall be set forth in a separate contract. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-10; Ord. No. 950, § 1, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-173. - Term. 
(a)  The rights, privileges and franchise herein granted to and conferred upon the company shall extend for a term of ten years from November 8, 1995, until the Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2005, and for an extended period of ten years, which may thereafter be granted as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  After January 1, 2005, and before March 1, 2005, the company shall file with the city a report that documents the efforts and progress that the company has made in meeting the city's objectives of ensuring safe, reliable and best-cost natural gas service for and to natural gas consumers within the city. Upon receipt of the report, the city shall conduct an inquiry into the facts presented and will determine, through the city council, whether the company should be granted the hereinabove referenced ten-year extension of the franchise, which grant shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-20; Ord. No. 950, § 2, 1995) 
Sec. 28-174. - Effective date. 
    The effective date for the grant of franchise shall be November 8, 1995. Pursuant to section 12-5 of the city Home Rule Charter, the company shall be liable for its proportionate cost and expense of said election. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-30; Ord. No. 950, § 3, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-175. - Compensation. 
(a)  For this grant, and as consideration for use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public grounds, the company shall pay monthly on the volumes consumed, commencing November 8, 1995, five percent of the gross revenue realized from the sales of gas for domestic, commercial and industrial use in the city, provided that the franchise fee provided for in this article shall not be charged or collected for gas used by any governmental unit or tax-exempt organization which has provided the company with written notification of its status. 
(b)  For the purpose of ascertaining or auditing the correct amount to be paid under the provisions of this article, the city shall have reasonable access to the appropriate books of the company for the purpose of checking the gross income received from operations within the city. The company shall not be required to generate books and records which it does not maintain in its regular course of business. 
(c)  It is understood that payment of such franchise charge does not excuse the company from payment of either sales and use taxes or property taxes, as such taxes are levied from time to time. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-40; Ord. No. 950, § 4, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-176. - Laying pipe. 
(a)  The company shall use its best efforts to lay all new construction pipeline at least 24 inches below the surface of the streets, alleys and avenues, at least such depth below the bottom of all drain ditches, and in a manner which does not interfere with any present public or private drains, sewers, water mains, sidewalks, paving or other public improvements. The city reserves the right to construct, change or repair any public improvements and to change the grades of any street, avenue or alley. Should the same be changed, constructed or repaired, the company is required, at its own expense, to lower, change or alter the pipelines to harmonize the regulations herein and not to interfere with the conduits, water lines, sewers, sidewalks, paving, drains or other public improvements of the city or the public utilities of the city. The company agrees to perform routine maintenance and surveillance in accordance with industry standards to ensure that pipeline depth complies with applicable state codes and regulations. 
(b)  If practicable, no pipeline shall be laid closer than two feet from any water main or other pipe or conduit of other utilities. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-50; Ord. No. 950, § 5, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-177. - Repairs and replacements. 
    All earth, materials, sidewalks, pavings, crossings or improvements of any kind required or removed by the company shall be fully repaired and replaced promptly by the company, and the company shall protect and save the city and the citizens thereof harmless from any loss or damage and from any and all claims or suits to persons or property on account of the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of said distribution system, unless such loss or damage occurs as a result of the negligence of the city or its citizens. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-60; Ord. No. 950, § 6, 1995) 
Sec. 28-178. - Excavations supervised. 
    An excavation by the company in any of the streets, alleys, avenues, roads or public grounds within the limits of the city shall be done in accordance with such reasonable rules, resolutions and ordinances now enacted or to be enacted by the city council relating to the excavations in streets, alleys and public grounds of the city. City officials who, from time to time, may be charged with enforcing ordinances relating to excavation may be present to ensure compliance with such ordinances. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-70; Ord. No. 950, § 7, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-179. - Extensions; service devices. 
(a)  The company shall, at all times during the term of this franchise, install and maintain, at its own expense, service devices and street services, and all measuring, regulating or limiting devices which are necessary for the supplying of service to the consumer (including services to the curbline along the line of the main where the main is in the street, and to the abutting property line where the main is in the alley) and shall make all extensions for the supplying of its services to the consumers and inhabitants of the city. The same shall be made, supplied and furnished under rules and regulations of the company as may be, from time to time, filed by the company with, and approved by, the public utilities commission of the state (PUC), or as may be prescribed by such commission or any other regulatory body with duly established jurisdiction over such matters. 
(b)  Each consumer of gas shall install and maintain, at his or her own expense, within his or her property line, suitable service lines, appliances and fixtures, except meters as may be necessary for the use of such gas supply, such service lines, appliances and fixtures to be subject to the inspection of the authorized representative of the city and the company at all reasonable times. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-80; Ord. No. 950, § 8, 1995) 
Sec. 28-180. - Meters. 
    All natural gas sold and distributed by the company hereunder shall be measured by company-owned and installed meters located on the premises of the consumer served, or upon easements of rights-of-way adjacent thereto. Company employees or agents shall have the right to enter upon such consumer's premises and read or inspect its meters at reasonable times during daylight hours. The company shall furnish reliable gas meters, as described in section 28-181. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-90; Ord. No. 950, § 9, 1995) 
Sec. 28-181. - Standards for natural gas supply. 
    The company shall maintain and operate its plants and system and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations of the PUC, and the terms and conditions of this article, including specifically, but without limitation, the following requirements: 
(1)  Heating value. Natural gas sold, supplied and delivered under this franchise shall be maintained at a monthly average of not less than 950 British Thermal Units of heat value per cubic foot. A cubic foot of gas means that amount of gas which, when saturated with water vapor at a temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit and subject to an absolute pressure equal to 30 inches of mercury, at 32 degrees Fahrenheit (14.73 pounds per square inch) occupies a volume of one cubic foot. Gas sold under this franchise shall be accurately measured utilizing equipment of a type approved or allowed by the PUC. Upon the city's request, the company will provide the city with copies of any calorimeter and pressure reports that it maintains. 
(2)  Natural gas. Natural gas may be furnished to the city from wells, pipelines or gas processing plants, and the company shall remove any objectionable constituents or noxious gases therefrom and add such odorizing agent as may be required by law or regulations of any applicable regulatory authority. 
(3)  Pressure of service. Until and unless lawfully changed, the standard of pressure of service shall be the same as now or hereafter approved by or acceptable to the PUC. 
(4)  Maintenance of system. The company shall maintain its gas plant equipment and distribution system in good condition and repair at all times. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-100; Ord. No. 950, § 10, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-182. - Rates and conditions of service. 
    The rates to be charged and exacted from the city and its inhabitants, and the rules and regulations with reference to the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by the company, shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the PUC or such regulatory body as may, from time to time during this grant, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction of the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by the company; provided, however, that nothing contained within this section shall be construed or interpreted as obviating the necessity for the company to receive, and the city's voters to grant, the franchise as a requirement of the company doing business within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-110; Ord. No. 950, § 11, 1995) 
Sec. 28-183. - Maps. 
    The company shall prepare and submit to the city a map showing the location of its distribution system, showing the approximate locations and sizes of lines, locations of shutoff valves and gates, and all appurtenances incident to the distribution system, so far as such facilities can reasonably be projected. The map shall be kept reasonably current by addition of the information hereby required as the system is extended or revised. Prior to the performance of any excavation work, the city shall notify the company and provide the company with an opportunity to mark the location of its lines and facilities in accordance with applicable state statutes. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-120; Ord. No. 950, § 12, 1995) 
Sec. 28-184. - Rules and regulations. 
    The company shall have the right to make such reasonable rules and regulations for the protection of its property for the prevention of loss and waste in the conduct or management of its business and for the sale and distribution or curtailment of gas under the terms hereof as may, from time to time, be deemed necessary and approved by the PUC. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-130; Ord. No. 950, § 13, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-185. - Indemnification. 
    The company shall indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from and against all claims, demands, liens and liability for damage of whatever kind on account of or arising from the grant of the franchise, the exercise by the company of the related rights or the operations of the company within the city, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorney and expert witness fees. However, the company shall not indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from claims, demands, liens, liability and damage to the extent that they arise from the negligence of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-140; Ord. No. 950, § 14, 1995) 
Sec. 28-186. - Insurance. 
(a)  The company shall be insured or shall maintain adequate self-insurance to cover and protect itself from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of loss, injury or damage to the city, its property or employees, or to other persons or their property. The company shall maintain insurance against such liabilities in the minimum amount of $5,000,000.00. 
(b)  The company shall file all certificates of insurance with the city, showing the specific limits of insurance, coverage required and deductibles required. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-150; Ord. No. 950, § 15, 1995) 
Sec. 28-187. - Discrimination or preference prohibited. 
(a)  The company shall not, as to rates or service, make or grant any unreasonable preference or advantage to any consumer or subject any consumer to any unreasonable prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this franchise shall be taken to prohibit the establishment from time to time of graduated scales of charges and classified rate schedules to which any consumer coming within an established classification would be entitled. 
(b)  The rates to be charged by the company for industrial gas used in the city may be lower and different from those charged for gas used for other purposes, provided that contracts or tariffs for industrial gas contain a curtailment clause which recognizes the preferred right of the other users over industrial users. 
(c)  The company is encouraged to promulgate and utilize rate structures which would be most advantageous to low income and low income elderly consumers, whenever permitted by applicable regulatory provisions. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-160; Ord. No. 950, § 16, 1995) 
Sec. 28-188. - Right of inspection. 
    Upon five days' notice, the city may, at its sole expense, at any reasonable time during normal business hours, inspect the company's books and records pertaining to and directly affecting the rights of the city arising under or by virtue of this franchise. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-170; Ord. No. 950, § 17, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-189. - Financial information. 
(a)  The company shall provide the city with the following information on a monthly basis: 
(1)  The city's monthly sales revenue derived from sales of natural gas within the city limits; 
(2)  Franchise fee exemptions, if any, by type; 
(3)  Net revenues for the city subject to franchise fees; and 
(4)  Total amount of franchise fees billed to customers. 
(b)  Upon request by the city, but not more frequently than annually, the company shall provide the city with two complete copies of: 
(1)  All annual natural gas operating and financial reports filed by the company or its parent, Atmos Energy Corporation, related to the operations of the company, with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and state regulatory bodies; and 
(2)  Copies of all documents which are distributed to the stockholders and bondholders of the company or its parent, Atmos Energy Corporation. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-180; Ord. No. 950, § 18, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-190. - Gas supply cost; information. 
    The company shall implement and maintain gas purchasing practices and policies designated to provide the lowest reasonable cost of purchased gas to the city's residents consistent with the company's standards of quality and reliability. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-190; Ord. No. 950, § 19, 1995) 
Sec. 28-191. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  This franchise and the rights granted to the company under this franchise shall not be sold, leased, assigned, disposed of or transferred, either in whole or in part, through the sale, merger, consolidation, reorganization or transfer to any other person, entity or corporation without the consent and approval of the city. The city's consent and approval shall be withheld, if at all, only upon the grounds that: 
(1)  The proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee refuses to be bound by and comply with all provisions of this franchise; or 
(2)  The proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee does not have the financial or physical capability to perform the company's duties and obligations under this franchise. 
In any event, the city shall not have the right to withhold such consent and approval if such transfer of ownership or control is approved by the PUC, or such other state agency as shall then have jurisdiction over such transfer of ownership or control. 
(b)  Should the company sell, lease, assign, dispose of or transfer rights gained under this franchise without first requesting the city's consent and approval, this franchise shall be deemed to have no value in any subsequent city condemnation proceeding, as set forth in C.R.S. § 31-15-707. 
(c)  At such time as the company shall make formal application with the PUC, or with any other state regulatory body having jurisdiction over such a proposed sale, transfer or assignment, the company shall notify the city of such proposed transfer of rights granted under this franchise, and shall also provide the city with copies of all nonconfidential documents related to the sale or transfer as are filed with such state regulatory body having jurisdiction of the sale. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-200; Ord. No. 950, § 20, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 28-192. - Forfeiture. 
    The city reserves the right to declare a forfeiture and termination of this franchise for the breach of a substantial and material provision thereof. No forfeiture or termination shall be declared until the company shall have had a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to correct the alleged breach. Upon failure of the company to exercise reasonable diligence to correct such condition, the city may declare this franchise forfeited and terminated, in which event, the company shall, as provided in division 1 of this article, continue to render service as theretofore for a period of 180 days to enable the city to determine its course of action. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-210; Ord. No. 950, § 21, 1995) 
Sec. 28-193. - Acquisition of system. 
(a)  In express recognition of the fact that the company, or its predecessors in interest, have heretofore been grantee of a franchise from the city for the furnishing of natural gas for a period in excess of 20 years, and in further express recognition of the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-15-707(1)(a)(II), and the Home Rule Charter, the franchise renewal is granted upon the express condition that the city has the right and power to purchase or condemn the company's works or system at their fair market value at the time of purchasing or condemning such works or systems, excluding all value of the franchise or right-of-way through the streets and also excluding any value by virtue of any contract for hydrants or private rental or otherwise entered into with the city in excess of the fair market value of said works or systems. 
(b)  Any such acquisition shall be in accordance with all applicable laws at the time of such purchase or condemnation. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-220; Ord. No. 950, § 22, 1995) 
Sec. 28-194. - Continuation of performance after expiration of franchise. 
    In the event that the company continues to provide gas service to consumers within the city after the expiration of the franchise, the company shall be bound by all provisions of division 1 of this article, providing for continuation of services by public utilities upon expiration of franchises granted. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-230; Ord. No. 950, § 23, 1995) 
Sec. 28-195. - Failure of gas supply. 
    During the term of the franchise, should there occur a failure or partial failure of the supply of natural gas available to the company because of depletion of such supply, the company shall take all reasonable steps to obtain an additional natural gas supply from other sources to be delivered to the company and, if unable to procure the same, it is hereby authorized to supply artificial or mixed gas for the unexpired term of this franchise. If the company, within a reasonable period after failure of the supply of natural gas, shall fail to supply to its customers artificial and/or mixed gas, the franchise rights granted herein shall terminate. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-240; Ord. No. 950, § 24, 1995) 
Sec. 28-196. - Changing conditions. 
    The city and the company recognize that the gas industry is currently the subject of discussion, examination and inquiry by different segments of the industry and by state and federal regulators, and that these activities may ultimately result in fundamental changes in the way the company conducts its business and meets its service obligations. Therefore, at the request of either party, the city and the company agree to meet with each other and discuss in good faith amendments to the franchise to reflect a proper accommodation of such developments. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-250; Ord. No. 950, § 25, 1995) 
Sec. 28-197. - Local office maintained. 
    The company shall, during the life of the franchise, maintain an adequately staffed service and management office within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 5-2-260; Ord. No. 950, § 26, 1995) 
Chapter 30 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or portion of the main building, the use of which customarily is incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the premises. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "accessory building" shall include dish antennas and similar structures. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate purpose for which the land or structures thereon are designed or intended. 
    Alley means a public thoroughfare which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which is 20 feet or less in width. 
    Alter means any structural change in the supporting or load-bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists. 
    Animal hospital or clinic means an establishment where animals are admitted principally for examination, treatment, board or care by a doctor of veterinary medicine. This does not include open kennels or runs. 
    Apartment. See Dwelling, multiple family. 
    Aquaculture means the science and endeavor of producing and raising, on a commercial basis, fish or shellfish in confined tanks or beds of water. 
    Basement means a story having part, but not less than one-half, of its height below grade. 
    Board of adjustment and appeals means the legally-appointed municipal board empowered to hear and decide appeals from, and to provide interpretations of the terms of, the zoning regulations and official zoning map, as defined within this article, and in accordance with state laws. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
    Building means any structure designed or intended for the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property. When a structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building. 
    Building height means the vertical dimension measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof to the deck line of a mansard roof and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Building official means the person designated by the city council to administer these zoning regulations, whether such person is entitled building official, building inspector, administrative official, public works director, enforcing officer or zoning official. 
    Car wash means an establishment having facilities designed or used exclusively for washing or cleaning motor vehicles. 
    Cellar means a story having more than one-half of its height below grade. 
    Child care. See Day nursery. 
    Clinic. See Medical, dental or health clinic. 
    Club or lodge means a nonprofit association or organization formed for fraternal, social, educational, philanthropic or other similar purposes, including unions and professional organizations. 
    Comprehensive plan means the duly adopted comprehensive plan for the development of the community which includes maps, charts, illustrations and texts for the following: 
(1)  Land use studies; 
(2)  Goals and objectives; 
(3)  Population study and forecasts; 
(4)  Economic study; 
(5)  Housing survey; 
(6)  Transportation plan; 
(7)  Central business district plan; 
(8)  Community facilities and public utilities plan; and 
(9)  General development plan. 
    Condominium means an individually-owned, single-family dwelling unit located in a multifamily structure where the surrounding lot area is held in common and maintained through a special ownership agreement. 
    Day care center. See Day nursery. 
    Day care home. See Day nursery. 
    Day nursery includes the following: 
(1)  Child care. See Day care home, Large day care home and Day care center. 
(2)  Day care center means a facility which is not the caregiver's residence, and which provides day care for 13 or more unrelated children. 
(3)  Day care home means a facility in which the primary caregiver provides day care out of his or her home for two to six unrelated children. 
(4)  Large day care home means a facility in which the primary caregiver provides day care out of his or her home for seven to 12 unrelated children. 
(5)  Preschool means an establishment which provides educational services for unrelated children aged five years and under and/or below the age required for entrance into the public school system. 
    Dwelling, multiple family or multifamily means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a detached residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling unit means one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying the premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, fraternity or sorority house, lodginghouse, hotel or motel. 
    Floodplain means land area subject to inundation from surplus stormwater, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) flood insurance study, and as depicted on the flood insurance rate map for the community. 
    Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street. Where a street is dead-ended, the frontage shall be considered as all that property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, public means a building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, repairing, hiring, servicing, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Home occupation. 
(1)  The term "home occupation" means an occupation or activity carried out on the premises which meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  Only one person other than residents of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.  The occupation is customarily incidental to the use of the premises as a dwelling place; 
c.  Not more than one non-illuminated nameplate is used; 
d.  The nameplate shall be attached to the building and shall not exceed one square foot in area; 
e.  The occupation does not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area of one floor of the principal building, when such use is carried on in the principal building; 
f.  No display will indicate from the exterior of the building that the premises are being used in part for any purpose other than a dwelling; 
g.  There is no commodity displayed or stored on the premises except that which is prepared on the premises; 
h.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses of a person off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the individual dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; and 
i.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
(2)  The term "home occupation" does not include the growth or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, and a medical marijuana center may not be operated as a home occupation. 
    Hospital means an establishment used primarily for inpatient care and provision of health, medical, mental and surgical care of the sick or injured. 
    Junkyard or salvage yard means a lot, parcel or tract of land, including buildings, used primarily for the collection, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other discarded material or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
    Kennel means any house, building, structure, premises or land where more than three dogs over the age of four months are kept. 
    Large day care center. See Day nursery. 
    Loading space, off-street means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
    Lot. 
(1)  The term "lot" means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on any improved public street or on an approved private street and may consist of: 
a.  A single lot of record; 
b.  A portion of a lot of record; 
c.  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or of portions of lots of record; or 
d.  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
Provided that, in no case of divisions or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
    Lot frontage means the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of the term "yard" in this section. 
    Lot measurements are defined as follows: 
(1)  Depth of a lot is considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in the front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(2)  Width of a lot is considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the 80-percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Lot type. See the diagram below which illustrates terminology with reference to types of lots. 
    Manufacture means any method of processing, developing, fabricating or assembling raw materials, semi-finished materials or parts into a semi-finished or finished product. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling which meets all of the following standards: 
(1)  Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; 
(2)  Is not less than 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length; 
(3)  Is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; 
(4)  Has brick, wood or a cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; all homes with bow, or arch, trusses being expressly prohibited; 
(5)  Is susceptible of, and intended for, permanent connection to public utilities; and 
(6)  Which meets or exceeds, on an equivalent performance engineering basis, standards which include, but are not limited to, standards established by the city building code, the housing and urban development standards or the uniform building code standards. The term "equivalent performance engineering basis" means that by using engineering calculations or testing, following commonly accepted engineering practices, all components and subsystems will perform to meet health, safety and functional requirements to the same extent as required for other single-family housing units. 
Any manufactured home sited within any zoning district of the city, where allowed, shall be placed in its permanent location in such manner that any open space, or gap, between the bottom of said manufactured home and the ground shall be enclosed by poured concrete wall, concrete block wall or other solid masonry construction wall, said wall being plumb to the exterior walls of said manufactured home, and without regard to whether or not the exterior walls of said manufactured home are bearing walls or not. It is the intent of this requirement that no manufactured home shall be sited within any zoning district where allowed with skirting made of wood, metal, plastic, vinyl, fiberglass or any other perimeter enclosure of a temporary nature. 
    Medical clinic, dental clinic or health clinic means any building designed for use by one or more persons lawfully engaged in the diagnosis, care and treatment of physical or mental diseases or ailments of human beings, including, but not limited to, doctors of medicine, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, psychiatrists and podiatrists; and in which no patients are lodged overnight. The definition of the term "medical clinic," "dental clinic" or "health clinic" shall not include a medical marijuana center. 
    Medical marijuana center means the use of property for profit or otherwise which is operated by any person, including, but not limited to, a patient or caregiver, and which is used to cultivate, distribute, transmit, give, dispense or otherwise provide marijuana in any manner to any other person, other patient or other caregivers in accordance with section 14 of article IV of the state constitution and the implementing state statutes and administrative policies. As used in this section, the terms "patient" and "caregiver" shall have the meanings provided in section 14 of article IV of the state constitution and the implementing state statutes and administrative policies. 
    Medical marijuana dispensary means the use of property for profit or otherwise which is operated by any person, including, but not limited to, a patient or caregiver, and which is used to cultivate, distribute, transmit, give, dispense or otherwise provide marijuana in any manner to any other person, other patient or other caregivers in accordance with section 14 of article IV of the state constitution and the implementing state statutes and administrative policies. As used in this section "patient" and "caregiver" shall have the same meanings provided in section 14 of article IV of the state constitution and the implementing state statutes and administrative policies. 
    Mobile home means any complete structure, transportable in one piece. The body of the home shall be no less than ten feet in width and 40 feet or more in length. The home shall have 320 or more square feet of living space, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a residential dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and which is built to HUD or UBC standards and accompanied by the appropriate permanently attached documentations for the state's wind load, live load and thermal requirements. The term "mobile home" shall not include campers, motor homes or other recreational vehicles. This definition shall not apply to those units defined as manufactured homes. 
    Mobile home park means any park, court, camp, lot, area, piece, parcel, tract or plot of ground upon which mobile homes are used, whether for compensation or not, including all accessory uses thereof. 
    Nameplate means a small announcement sign bearing the name only of the occupant or activity within the building. Nameplates shall not contain commercial advertisement. 
    Nonconforming building means the use of a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of the effective date of the initial ordinance and amendments thereto which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means any land lawfully occupied by a use, at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nursing home means an establishment or agency licensed by the state for the reception, board, care or treatment of three or more unrelated, elderly individuals. 
    Parking space, off-street means a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. 
    Planning and zoning commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Platting or subdividing means the process established by the duly adopted subdivision regulations by the planning and zoning commission. 
    Preschool. See Day nursery. 
    Professional office means any building or part thereof used by one or more persons engaged in the practice of law, medicine, accounting, architecture, engineering or other occupation customarily considered as a profession. 
    Public utility means any business which furnishes the general public telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas or water, and any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to supervision or regulation by an agency of the state. 
    Retail means to sell by small quantities in broken lots or parcels, not in bulk, directly to consumers. 
    School means a public elementary or secondary educational facility, which is under direction and control of the state board of education and the state superintendent of public instruction and/or a parochial elementary or secondary educational facility which offers the same general curriculum as that provided by a comparable public educational facility. 
    Setback means the distance between the lot line and building line. 
    Sign means any sign or other device which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement or announcement which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, but does not include any display of official notice or official flag. 
    Sign, advertising means a sign which directs the attention of the public to any goods, merchandise, property, business service, entertainment or amusement conducted or produced which is bought or sold, furnished, offered or dealt in elsewhere than on the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
    Sign, business means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. A for sale sign or a for rent sign relating to the property on which it is displayed is deemed a business sign. 
    Sign, flashing means any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not constant in intensity and color at all times. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign. 
    Sign, illuminated means a sign designed to give forth artificial light or designed to reflect light derived from any source. 
    Sign, off-site means a sign other than an on-site sign. 
    Sign, on-site means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
    Sign, sandwich means an advertising or business ground sign which is constructed in such a manner to form an "A" or tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top, with each angular face held at an appropriate distance by a supporting member. 
    Skilled foot care means the administering of skilled nursing foot care to an individual's feet by or under the supervision of a registered nurse licensed by the state. 
    Skilled nursing foot care includes soaking of feet as needed, thoroughly drying feet, assessment of the condition of feet, cleaning debris from feet and nails, removing dead skin tissue from feet, trimming nails, thinning, pushing back the cuticles and educating the individual as to foot care needs. 
    Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning division or district as special exceptions if specific provision for such special exceptions is made in this chapter. All applications for special exceptions under this chapter shall be referred, in the first instance, for consideration to the planning and zoning commission. 
    Street line means the right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structural alterations means any change or rearrangement of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered structural alterations: 
(1)  Attachment of a new front where structural supports are not changed; 
(2)  Addition of a fire escape where structural supports are not changed; 
(3)  New windows where lintels and support walls are not materially changed; or 
(4)  Minor repair or replacement of nonstructural members. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and poster panels. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract of land into one or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term "subdivision" includes the term "resubdivision" and the term "resubdivision," as used herein, shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously subdivided, for sale, use or other purposes, which varies from the latest, approved subdivision of the same. 
    Therapeutic massage means manipulation by a state-certified massage therapist of soft and muscle tissue of the human body for the purpose of maintaining good health, improving physical condition, improving the well-being of the individual, enhancing muscle relaxation, relieving muscular pain and reducing stress. 
    Townhouse means an individually-owned, single-family dwelling unit located in a multifamily structure, where portions of the surrounding lots are sold with the dwelling units to create privately-owned and maintained yards. 
    Transportation unit means any container of any type previously used in whole or in part on the public highways, roadways, roads, railways, waterways or other travelways to transport goods or products. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or structures thereon are designed or intended. 
    Use by right means an automatic use which is authorized by the zoning classification. 
    Used or occupied includes the term "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district, or uses in an adjoining zoning district. However, instances of alleged violation of section 30-607 dealing with obstruction of visibility at street intersections by flora only shall be appealable to the board of adjustment and appeals, the consideration of such matters not being deemed either an establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited within this subsection. 
    Vocational school means an educational institution which provides specific training in a craft or skill to be pursued as a career. 
    Warehouse means a place adapted to the reception and storage of goods. For purposes of this chapter, the term "warehouse" may include any structure used to hold goods, stores or wares temporarily, or for a length of time. 
    Wholesale means selling to retailers or jobbers, rather than to consumers. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means any device, such as a wind generator or wind turbine, which is designed to utilize the force of wind to power machinery and/or produce another form of usable energy. 
    Yard means a required open space other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public street. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations, with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line, to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after full and half-depth front yards have been established shall be considered side yards. Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations, with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. For the purposes of these regulations, a two-family dwelling, or a multifamily dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
    Yard, special means a yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side yard" nor the term "rear yard" clearly applies. In such cases, the building official shall require a yard with minimum dimensions, as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of structures and buildable areas thereon. 
    Zone or district means a portion, area or section of the city, for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use of buildings, land and open spaces about buildings, are established. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-10; Ord. No. 839, § 1800, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 907, 1992; Ord. No. 915, §§ 2, 3, 1993; Ord. No. 921, 1993; Ord. No. 947, 1995; Ord. No. 972, §§ 3-5, 1996; Ord. No. 1004, § 4, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1050, 2002; Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2006; Ord. No. 1053, §§ 1-3, 2010; Ord. No. 1165, §§ 2-4, 2010) 
Sec. 30-2. - Establishment of districts; official zoning map. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk and bear the seal of the city under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in section 30-2 of the Lamar, Colorado Municipal Code." 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and C.R.S. § 31-23-301 et seq., changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map within 30 days after the amendment has been approved by the city council, with an entry on the official zoning map as follows: 
"On _____, by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made on the Official Zoning Map: _____." 
Said entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. 
(d)  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided under section 30-738. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may, from time to time, be made or published, the official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the city clerk, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city. 
(f)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted _____ as part of Ordinance No. _____ of the City of Lamar, Colorado." 
Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-20; Ord. No. 839, § 200, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-3. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits; 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map; 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the board of adjustment and appeals shall interpret the district boundaries; 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the board of adjustment and appeals may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-30; Ord. No. 839, § 300, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-4. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located; 
(2)  No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building; 
(3)  No yard or lot existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter; 
(4)  All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be annexed as O-E Open Estates, until or unless changed by ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-40; Ord. No. 839, § 400, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-5. - Nonconforming lots, structures and uses. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist: 
(1)  Lots; 
(2)  Structures; 
(3)  Uses of land and structures; and 
(4)  Characteristics of use which were lawful before the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(b)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and upon which actual building construction has been carried on within a 90-day limit. The term "actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation, demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on within a 90-day limit. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-50; Ord. No. 839, § 510, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-6. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership, and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to the area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(b)  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with area or width below the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-60; Ord. No. 839, § 520, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-7. - Nonconforming uses of land or land with minor structures. 
    Where, at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment codified herein; 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment codified herein; 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located; 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-70; Ord. No. 839, § 530, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-8. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment codified herein, that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reasons of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-80; Ord. No. 839, § 540, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-9. - Nonconforming uses of structures or structures and premises in combination. 
    If lawful use involving an individual structure with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of a structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment thereto, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, said use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter, in the district in which it is located, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the board of adjustment and appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment and appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, except when government action impedes access to the premises in combination, the structure and/or structure and premises, shall not thereafter be used, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. The term "destruction," for the purpose of this subsection, means damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-90; Ord. No. 839, § 550, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-10. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure, as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(b)  If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-100; Ord. No. 839, § 560, 1986) 
Sec. 30-11. - Uses under special exception provisions not nonconforming uses. 
    Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter, other than a change through board of adjustment and appeals action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district, shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall, without further action, be considered a conforming use. 
(Code 2000, § 16-1-110; Ord. No. 839, § 570, 1986) 
Secs. 30-12-30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-41-30-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - F-P FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-69. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The F-P Floodplain District is intended for application in those areas of the community which are subject to inundation from surplus stormwater as defined by the flood insurance study and accompanying floodway map, and any subsequent additions or amendments thereto, prepared for the city by the Federal Insurance Administration. This zone is intended for application throughout the zoning jurisdiction in locations where official floodplain delineation has been established. The regulations are intended to minimize the extent of floods and reduce the height and violence thereof, to minimize the hazard of loss of lives and property caused by floods, and to secure safety from floods through the confinement of floods within reasonable limits by regulating and restricting areas of development along or in natural watercourses and drainageways. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-10; Ord. No. 839, § 605.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-70. - District regulations. 
    In the F-P District no building or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the permitted uses in the parent district to which this district is made a part, provided that such uses and structures meet the minimum requirements of section 30-71. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-20; Ord. No. 839, § 605.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-71. - Special use regulations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the requirements of the parent district, the other requirements of this chapter and the detailed regulations present in chapter 12 concerning minimizing flood damage, the following regulations shall supplement the regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a part. These regulations shall supersede those of the parent district where there is a conflict among regulations. Where, by reason of flooding potential, and where the special flood studies and map indicate the possibility of detrimental or limiting conditions for development, no person shall initiate any development or substantial improvement, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for development for each such building or structure in accordance with the detailed requirements of chapter 12. The application for a development permit shall be prepared in writing upon forms furnished for that purpose and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The application shall be accompanied by explanatory background information defined in chapter 12, which shall include as a minimum: 
(1)  Identification and description of the work to be covered by the permit; 
(2)  Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
(3)  Indication of the use of occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(4)  Provision of plans and specifications for proposed construction; 
(5)  Signature of the permittee or his or her authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; and 
(6)  Provision of other information as reasonably may be required by the building official. 
(b)  In areas within the municipal zoning jurisdiction which are designated as F-P Floodplain, all developed uses of land and buildings shall meet the minimum standards and requirements for development within flood hazard areas as outlined and defined in article XXIII of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-30; Ord. No. 839, § 605.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-72. - Intensity of use regulations. 
    The lot coverage and intensity of use of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum allowable. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-40; Ord. No. 839, § 605.04, 1986) 
Sec. 30-73. - Height regulations. 
    The height requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum height requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-50; Ord. No. 839, § 605.05, 1986) 
Sec. 30-74. - Yard regulations. 
    The yard requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum yard requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-60; Ord. No. 839, § 605.06, 1986) 
Sec. 30-75. - Sign regulations. 
    The sign regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for sign regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-70; Ord. No. 839, § 605.07, 1986) 
Sec. 30-76. - Parking regulations. 
    The parking regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for parking subject to additional requirements as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-80; Ord. No. 839, § 605.08, 1986) 
Sec. 30-77. - Transportation units used for storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-2-90; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2001) 
Secs. 30-78-30-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - A-L AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-98. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The A-L Agricultural District is established for the purpose of protecting agricultural uses by restricting and regulating density, land coverage and land use. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-10; Ord. No. 839, § 610.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-99. - District regulations. 
    In the A-L District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-100. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-20; Ord. No. 839, § 610.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-100. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the A-L District: 
(1)  General farm operations; 
(2)  Single-family dwelling units on two or more acres; 
(3)  Mobile homes incidental to general farm operations on the same tract or parcel with the principal dwelling, provided that the mobile home is used exclusively by the farm family or employees; 
(4)  Churches and similar places of worship and parish houses; 
(5)  Golf courses and other open land recreational uses, except miniature golf courses, driving tees or other intensive commercial uses, such as automobile race tracks or amusement parks; 
(6)  Greenhouses, nurseries and garden centers; 
(7)  Institutions of higher learning, including dormitory accommodations, when located on the same tract as the educational buildings; 
(8)  Public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, campgrounds, fishing preserves or other recreational areas and community buildings owned and operated by a public agency or nonprofit organization; 
(9)  Public or parochial elementary, junior high and high schools, and private schools with equivalent curriculum; 
(10)  Stands for the sale of agricultural products or commodities; 
(11)  Customary accessory uses and structures located on the same tract with the principal use, including barns, sheds, tennis courts, swimming pools, private garages, garden houses, barbecue ovens, fireplaces and similar uses; 
(12)  Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for the period of such work. Basements and cellars may not be occupied for residential purposes until the building is completed; 
(13)  The renting of not to exceed two sleeping rooms with a total occupancy of not to exceed three persons for whom board may be furnished, but with the prohibition of separate culinary accommodations for such tenants; 
(14)  Utility lines and facilities necessary for public service, and including refuse disposal area conducted under a landfill or sanitary fill method, public and semipublic storage and repair facilities, sewage disposal, water supply and treatment facilities, dams and power plants; 
(15)  Water sheds, wildlife habitats, wildlife production areas, and game management areas or other conservation uses; 
(16)  Correctional facilities, not including community corrections facilities for such programs as are defined in section 14-2 of the Home Rule Charter for the City of Lamar and C.R.S. § 17-27-104 et seq., provided they comply with the following additional requirements: 
a.  In order to accommodate potential expansion of the facilities, the site size shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size. 
b.  The facility shall be established at least 1,000 feet (measured from property line to property line) from the nearest property which is residentially zoned or used. 
c.  The facility shall not be established within 1,000 feet (measured from property line to property line) from any church or place of worship, day care facility, park educational institution, library, museum, community center, residential district or children's amusement park. 
d.  Site development shall be in conformance with the landscaping requirements of the zoning district. 
e.  The constitution and operation of the correctional facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulatory requirements. 
f.  The city council may deny the locating of a correctional facility in an Agricultural (A-L) District when the use would be detrimental to nearby properties, or in the alternative, the city council may add conditions or safeguards to the approval of a correctional facility location in order to protect the health and welfare of citizens. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-30; Ord. No. 839, § 610.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1205, § 1, 2016) 
Sec. 30-101. - Special exceptions. 
    The following uses may be allowed in the A-L District by special use permit when submitted, reviewed and approved by the board of adjustment and appeals and subject to conditions as the board may impose: 
(1)  Any public building erected or land used by any department of the city, county, state or federal government; 
(2)  Airports or heliports; 
(3)  Cemeteries or crematories; 
(4)  Day care centers; 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes and homes for the aged, on a tract of land three acres or larger; 
(6)  Radio, television, navigation or military control stations, transmitters or towers; 
(7)  Animal hospitals or kennels; 
(8)  Wrecking yards, salvage yards or junkyards, provided that the storage yard is completely enclosed with a six-foot solid fence or wall and located not less than 300 feet from a residential district zone and subject to the following: 
a.  The operation shall be conducted completely within the enclosed area. The fence or wall shall be of uniform texture and color and shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to ensure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the area. The fence or wall shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk or other material within the yard; 
b.  No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosing fence or wall or within the public right-of-way; and 
c.  Burning of paper, trash, junk or other waste materials shall be permitted only after approval of the fire department, and in accordance with state requirements. Said burning, when permitted, shall be done during daylight hours only. 
(9)  Exploration and extraction of oil and natural gas. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-40; Ord. No. 839, § 610.03.16, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-102. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-50; Ord. No. 839, § 610.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-103. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    Tracts in the A-L District shall be two acres or larger. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-60; Ord. No. 839, § 610.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-104. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    The minimum setback requirements in the A-L District shall be as follows: 
(1)  From the back property line: 25 feet for dwellings; 50 feet for all other uses; 15 feet for residential accessory uses; 
(2)  From the front property line: 50 feet for all uses; 
(3)  From the side property lines: 15 feet for dwellings and accessory uses; 30 feet for all other uses. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-70; Ord. No. 839, § 610.05.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-105. - Maximum building height. 
(a)  When a building is within 150 feet of a dwelling district zone, said building shall not exceed 45 feet in height, or as required for fire protection. 
(b)  When a building or structure is more than 150 feet from a dwelling district zone, said building or structure shall not exceed 75 feet in height. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-80; Ord. No. 839, § 610.06, 1986) 
Sec. 30-106. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements in the A-L District shall be as follows: 
(1)  One space per dwelling unit; 
(2)  Schools: 
a.  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
c.  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom. 
(3)  Churches: one space per each four seats; 
(4)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-90; Ord. No. 839, § 610.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-107. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-100; Ord. No. 839, § 610.08, 1986) 
Sec. 30-108. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-110; Ord. No. 839, § 610.09, 1986) 
Sec. 30-109. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-3-120; Ord. No. 839, § 610.10, 1986) 
Secs. 30-110-30-131. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - E-A EDUCATION AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-132. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The E-A Education Agricultural District is intended for certain institutional, recreational and educational purposes to allow limited agriculture, including livestock for display and educational purposes. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-10; Ord. No. 839, § 615.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-133. - District regulations. 
    In the E-A District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-134. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-20; Ord. No. 839, § 615.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-134. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the E-A District: 
(1)  Any recreational or educational use, including those sponsored by civic groups approved by the city and the county, and noncommercial entities; 
(2)  County fairs, rodeos, parks, circuses, carnivals, sports arena events and other like entertainments sponsored by nonprofit organizations; 
(3)  Farming, forestry, agriculture, poultry and livestock; buildings and uses for educational and recreational purposes, but excluding feed lots; 
(4)  Any public building erected or any land used by any department of government; and 
(5)  Buildings, structures or uses required in addition to, and in conjunction with, any use permitted in the district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-30; Ord. No. 839, § 615.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-135. - Special exceptions. 
    Day care centers shall be allowed as special exceptions in the E-A District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-40; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-136. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district, is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-50; Ord. No. 839, § 615.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-137. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    There are no minimum lot requirements in the E-A District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-60; Ord. No. 839, § 615.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-138. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    The minimum setback requirements in the E-A District shall be as follows: 
(1)  From the back property line: 25 feet for all uses; 
(2)  From the front property line: 50 feet for all uses; and 
(3)  From the side property lines: 20 feet for all uses. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-70; Ord. No. 839, § 615.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-139. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures in the E-A District shall be as follows for all uses: four stories, 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-80; Ord. No. 839, § 615.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-140. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements in the E-A District are as follows: 
(1)  One space per dwelling unit; 
(2)  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
(3)  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(4)  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(5)  Churches: one space per each four seats; and 
(6)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-90; Ord. No. 839, § 615.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-141. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-100; Ord. No. 839, § 615.09, 1986) 
Sec. 30-142. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-110; Ord. No. 839, § 615.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-143. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-4-120; Ord. No. 839, § 615.11, 1986) 
Secs. 30-144-30-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - O-E OPEN ESTATES DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-170. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The O-E Open Estates District is intended for certain rural areas where subdivisions of year-round dwellings are desired, but where limited agriculture may still be practiced. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-10; Ord. No. 839, § 620.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-171. - District regulations. 
    In the O-E District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-172. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-20; Ord. No. 839, § 620.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-172. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the O-E District: 
(1)  Single-family residences; 
(2)  Parks and golf courses, except miniature golf and other similar commercial operations; 
(3)  Temporary structures incidental to construction, but only for the period of work; 
(4)  Schools: high schools, junior high schools and elementary schools; 
(5)  Churches and mortuaries; 
(6)  Farming, forestry, agricultural buildings and uses, but excluding feed lots; 
(7)  Two farm-type animals, or such greater number as may be approved by the issuance of a special permit under section 30-694 upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the planning and zoning commission; 
(8)  Hospitals, medical clinics and professional offices for doctors, lawyers, accountants, engineers and other business offices not merchandising or manufacturing on the premises, and other accessory or auxiliary uses normally or customarily incidental to the uses by right in this district, and all parking shall be provided off-street and not in the required setbacks. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; and 
(9)  Home occupations, provided that: 
a.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a residence or outside the dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; and 
b.  Vehicle repair shall be conducted only in completely enclosed structures. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-30; Ord. No. 839, § 620.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 2009; Ord. No. 1203, 2016) 
Sec. 30-173. - Special exceptions. 
    After public notice and hearing and appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of adjustment and appeals may permit in the O-E District, as special exceptions: 
(1)  Any public building or land used by any department of government; 
(2)  Garages for the storage of automobiles and/or one commercial vehicle; 
(3)  Structures and buildings incidental to the provision of public utilities; 
(4)  Buildings, structures or uses required in addition to, and in conjunction with, any use by right in the district; 
(5)  Nursing homes and homes for the aged on a tract of land one acre or larger; and 
(6)  Day care centers. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-40; Ord. No. 839, § 620.03, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-174. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district, and not specifically permitted in this district, is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-50; Ord. No. 839, § 620.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-175. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot requirements in the O-E District are as follows: 
(1)  Area: 21,780 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum setback requirements from the following property lines shall be: 
a.  From the back property line: ten feet for dwellings; ten feet for residential accessory uses; 30 feet for all other uses. 
b.  From the front property line: 50 feet, when the lot faces state- or federally-designated highways; 30 feet on all other uses. 
c.  From the side property lines: ten feet for dwellings and accessory uses; 30 feet for all other uses. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-60; Ord. No. 839, § 620.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-176. - Minimum floor area. 
    The minimum floor area for single-family residences in the O-E District is 1,200 square feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-70; Ord. No. 839, § 620.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-177. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures of 21/2 stories in the O-E District is 35 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-80; Ord. No. 839, § 620.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-178. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements in the O-E District are as follows: 
(1)  Two spaces per dwelling unit; 
(2)  Schools: 
a.  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
c.  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(3)  Churches: one space per each four seats; 
(4)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-90; Ord. No. 839, § 620.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-179. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-100; Ord. No. 839, § 620.09, 1986) 
Sec. 30-180. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-110; Ord. No. 839, § 620.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-181. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-5-120; Ord. No. 839, § 620.11, 1986) 
Secs. 30-182-30-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-201. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The R-1 Residence District is intended to be primarily a single-family residential district with uses customarily incidental thereto permitted. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-10; Ord. No. 839, § 625.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-202. - District regulations. 
    In the R-1 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-203. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-20; Ord. No. 839, § 625.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-203. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the R-1 District: 
(1)  Single-family residences; 
(2)  Day care homes; 
(3)  Parks and golf courses except miniature golf and similar commercial operations; 
(4)  Temporary structures incidental to construction, but only for the period of work; 
(5)  High schools, junior high schools and elementary schools; 
(6)  Churches; and 
(7)  Major vehicle repair shall be conducted only in a completely enclosed building or structure. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-30; Ord. No. 839, § 625.03, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-204. - Special exceptions. 
    After public notice and hearing and appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of adjustment and appeals may permit in the R-1 District, as special exceptions: 
(1)  Buildings, structures or uses required in addition to, and in conjunction with, any use by right in this district; 
(2)  Large day care homes; 
(3)  Structures and buildings incidental to the provision of public utilities; 
(4)  Nursing homes and homes for the aged; 
(5)  Any public building or land used by any department of government; 
(6)  Home occupations, provided that: 
a.  Only one person other than residents of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
d.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; 
e.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; 
(7)  Hospitals, provided that: 
a.  No equipment or process shall be used in such hospital which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; 
b.  All parking shall be provided off-street and not in the required setbacks. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-40; Ord. No. 839, § 625.03.07, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-205. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
(a)  Any use or structure permitted in any other district, and not specifically permitted in this district, is prohibited in this district. 
(b)  For aesthetic purposes, manufactured homes of all types are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-50; Ord. No. 839, § 625.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-206. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot requirements in the R-1 District are as follows: 
(1)  Area: 
a.  For all residences: 8,000 square feet; 
b.  Hospitals: one acre; and 
c.  Schools, churches and nursing homes: one-half acre; 
(2)  Width: 
a.  All residences: 70 feet; 
b.  Schools, churches and hospitals: 140 feet; and 
c.  Nursing homes: 140 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-60; Ord. No. 839, § 625.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-207. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the R-1 District, the minimum setback from the following property lines shall be: 
(1)  From the back property line: 
a.  All residences: ten feet; and 
b.  Schools, churches and hospitals: 40 feet; 
(2)  From the front property line: 
a.  All residences and nursing homes: 15 feet and not less than 30 feet back from the curb, unless 25 percent of that portion of the block fronting upon the same street is improved with existing structures which have observed a greater amount of setback, in which case no building shall be placed any nearer to the front line than that existing dwelling nearest the front line; and 
b.  Schools, churches and hospitals: 40 feet; 
(3)  From the side property lines: 
a.  Single-family residences: seven feet; 
b.  Nursing homes: 15 feet; and 
c.  Schools, churches and hospitals: 30 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-70; Ord. No. 839, § 625.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-208. - Minimum floor area. 
    The minimum floor area requirements for the R-1 District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residences: 1,000 square feet; and 
(2)  Nursing homes: building to lot ratio of one square foot per 5.4 square feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-80; Ord. No. 839, § 625.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-209. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures for the R-1 District is: 21/2 stories, 35 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-90; Ord. No. 839, § 625.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-210. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for the R-1 District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residences: one space per dwelling unit; 
(2)  Schools: 
a.  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
c.  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(3)  Churches: one space per each four seats; 
(4)  Hospitals: three spaces per each bed; and 
(5)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-100; Ord. No. 839, § 625.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-211. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-110; Ord. No. 839, § 625.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-212. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-120; Ord. No. 839, § 625.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-213. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-130; Ord. No. 839, § 625.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-214. - Transportation units used for storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-6-140; Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 2001) 
Secs. 30-215-30-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-237. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The R-2 Residence District is intended to be for single-unit, two-unit, three-unit and four-unit residential structures with uses customarily incidental thereto permitted. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-10; Ord. No. 839, § 630.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-238. - District regulations. 
    In the R-2 District, no building or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-239. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-20; Ord. No. 839, § 630.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-239. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the R-2 District: 
(1)  Single-unit, two-unit, three-unit and four-unit residential buildings or structures, and specifically including UBC-approved and HUD-approved manufactured homes; 
(2)  Parks and golf courses, except miniature golf and similar commercial operations; 
(3)  High schools, junior high schools, middle schools and elementary schools; 
(4)  Day care centers; 
(5)  Large day care homes; 
(6)  Day nurseries or preschool nurseries; 
(7)  Nursing homes for the aged; 
(8)  Churches and mortuaries; 
(9)  Boardinghouses; 
(10)  Temporary structures incidental to construction, but only for the period of work; 
(11)  Major vehicle repair conducted only in a completely enclosed building or structure; and 
(12)  Home occupations, provided that: 
a.  Only one person, other than residents of the premises, shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
d.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; and 
e.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-30; Ord. No. 839, § 630.03, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 972, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1004, § 2, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-240. - Mobile homes. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall only be allowed in an R-2 District north of Parmenter Street. 
(b)  Such mobile homes are to be affixed to the lot by being permanently connected to city utilities after removal of all wheels and/or other undercarriage necessary for transport of such mobile home. 
(c)  No mobile home without at least HUD certification shall be allowed in an R-2 District without first obtaining a permit and inspection from the building official. 
(d)  All crawl space beneath any such mobile home on any lot in this district shall be enclosed in accordance with plans approved by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-40; Ord. No. 839, § 630.03.11, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-241. - Special exceptions. 
    After public notice and hearing and appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of adjustment and appeals may permit in the R-1 District, as special exceptions: 
(1)  Buildings, structures or uses required in addition to and in conjunction with any use by right in this district; 
(2)  Structures and buildings associated with the provision of public utilities; 
(3)  Any public building or land used by any department of government; 
(4)  Grocery stores, provided that the maximum ground floor square footage shall be 2,000 square feet; and 
(5)  Hospitals, provided that: 
a.  No equipment or process shall be used in such hospital which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; and 
b.  All parking shall be provided off-street and not in the required setbacks; 
(6)  Skilled foot care operations in existing buildings; 
(7)  Therapeutic massage operations in existing buildings; 
(8)  Medical, dental or health clinics. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-50; Ord. No. 839, § 630.03.12, 1986; Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 2006; Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 2009) 
Sec. 30-242. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-60; Ord. No. 839, § 630.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-243. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot requirements for the R-2 District shall be as follows: 
RESIDENTIAL
(1)  Area: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: 7,000 square feet; 
b.  Three-family or four-family residences and boardinghouses: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit for three-family units; and 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit for four-family residences and boardinghouses; 

(2)  Width: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: 50 feet; 
b.  Three-family and four-family residences and boardinghouses: 75 feet; 

(Code 2000, § 16-7-70; Ord. No. 839, § 630.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
NON-RESIDENTIAL 
(1)  Area: 
c.  Hospitals and mortuaries: one acre; 
d.  Schools and churches: one-half acre; and 
e.  Grocery stores: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Width: 
c.  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 140 feet; and 
d.  Grocery stores: 100 feet. 

Sec. 30-244. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the R-2 District, the minimum setback from the following property lines shall be: 
(1)  From the back property line: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: ten feet; 
b.  Three-family and four-family residences and boardinghouses: ten feet; 
c.  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: five feet; and 
d.  Grocery stores: 35 feet. 
(2)  From the front property line: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: not less than 30 feet from the curb, and at least 15 feet from the front property line, unless 25 percent of that portion of the block fronting upon the same street is improved with existing structures which have observed a greater amount of setback, in which case no building shall be placed any nearer the front line than the existing dwelling nearest the front line; 
b.  Three-family and four-family unit residences and boardinghouses: 30 feet; 
c.  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 30 feet; and 
d.  Grocery stores: 30 feet. 
(3)  From the side property lines: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: five feet; 
b.  Three-family and four-family residences and boardinghouses: five feet; 
c.  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 30 feet; and 
d.  Grocery stores: ten feet. 
Side property line setback requirements do not apply to individual interior units of two-family, three-family and four-family structures. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-80; Ord. No. 839, § 630.06.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-245. - Minimum floor area. 
    The minimum floor area in the R-2 District for the following residences shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family unit residences: 800 square feet per family unit; and 
(2)  Three-family and four-family unit residences and boardinghouses: 450 square feet per unit. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-90; Ord. No. 839, § 630.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-246. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures in the R-2 District shall be, for all uses: four stories, 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-100; Ord. No. 839, § 630.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-247. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for the R-2 District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family, two-family, three-family and four-family unit residences and boardinghouses: two spaces per dwelling unit; 
(2)  Churches: one space per each four seats; 
(3)  Schools: 
a.  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; and 
c.  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(4)  Grocery stores: two spaces per 500 square feet of floor space; and 
(5)  Loading requirements: All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-110; Ord. No. 839, § 630.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-248. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-120; Ord. No. 839, § 630.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-249. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-130; Ord. No. 839, § 630.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-250. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-7-140; Ord. No. 839, § 630.12, 1986) 
Secs. 30-251-30-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - R-3 RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-279. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The R-3 Residence District is intended to be for single-family, two-family, three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residential structures with uses customarily incidental thereto permitted. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-10; Ord. No. 839, § 635.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-280. - District regulations. 
    In the R-3 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-281. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-20; Ord. No. 839, § 635.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-281. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the R-3 District: 
(1)  Single-family, two-family, three-family, four-family and multifamily residences, and specifically including UBC-approved and HUD-approved manufactured homes; 
(2)  Parks and golf courses except miniature golf and similar commercial operations; 
(3)  High schools, junior high schools, middle schools and elementary schools; 
(4)  Day care centers; 
(5)  Day care homes; 
(6)  Large day care homes; 
(7)  Day nurseries or preschool nurseries; 
(8)  Nursing homes for the aged; 
(9)  Churches and mortuaries; 
(10)  Boardinghouses; 
(11)  Temporary structures incidental to construction, but only for the period of work; 
(12)  Major vehicle repair conducted only in a completely enclosed structure; and 
(13)  Home occupations, provided that: 
a.  Only one person other than residents of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
d.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; and 
e.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-30; Ord. No. 839, § 635.03, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 972, § 2, 1996; Ord. No. 1004, § 3, 1999; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-282. - Mobile homes. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall only be allowed in an R-3 District north of Parmenter Street. 
(b)  Such mobile homes shall be affixed to the lot by being permanently connected to city utilities after removal of all wheels and/or other undercarriage necessary for transport of such mobile homes. 
(c)  No mobile home without at least HUD certification shall be allowed in an R-3 District without first obtaining a permit and inspection from the building official. 
(d)  All crawl spaces beneath any such mobile home on any lot in this district shall be enclosed in accordance with plans approved by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-40; Ord. No. 839, § 635.03.11, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-283. - Special exceptions. 
    After public notice and hearing and appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of adjustment and appeals may permit in the R-3 District, as special exceptions: 
(1)  Buildings, structures or uses required in addition to and in conjunction with any use by right in this district; 
(2)  Structures and buildings associated with the provision of public utilities; 
(3)  Any public building or land used by any department of government; 
(4)  Grocery stores, provided that the maximum ground floor square footage shall be 2,000 square feet; 
(5)  Hospitals, provided that: 
a.  No equipment or process shall be used in such hospital which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; 
b.  All parking shall be provided off-street and not in the required setbacks; 
(6)  Skilled foot care operations in existing buildings; 
(7)  Therapeutic massage operations in existing buildings; 
(8)  Medical, dental or health clinics. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-50; Ord. No. 839, § 635.03.12, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1088, § 2, 2006; Ord. No. 1128, § 2, 2009) 
Sec. 30-284. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-60; Ord. No. 839, § 635.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-285. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    The minimum lot requirements in the R-3 District shall be as follows: 
RESIDENTIAL 
(1)  Area: 
a.  Single-family and two-family unit residences: 7,000 square feet; 
b.  Multifamily residences and boardinghouses: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit for three-family units, and 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit for four-family or more unit residences and boardinghouses; 

(2)  Width: 
a.  Single-family and two-family residences: 50 feet; 
b.  Three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residences and boardinghouses: 75 feet; 

(Code 2000, § 16-8-70; Ord. No. 839, § 635.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 

(1) Area: 
c.  Hospitals and mortuaries: one acre; 
d.  Schools and churches: one-half acre; and 
e.  Grocery stores: 10,000 square feet. 

(2)  Width: 
c.  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 140 feet; and 
d.  Grocery stores: 100 feet. 
Sec. 30-286. - Minimum setback requirements. 
(a)  In the R-3 District, the minimum setback from the back property lines shall be: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family unit residences: ten feet; 
(2)  Three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residences and boardinghouses: ten feet; 
(3)  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: five feet; and 
(4)  Grocery stores: 35 feet. 
(b)  The minimum setback from the front property line shall be: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family residences: not less than 30 feet from the curb, and at least 15 feet from the front property line, unless 25 percent of that portion of the block fronting upon the same street is improved with existing structures which have observed a greater amount of setback, in which case no building shall be placed any nearer the front line than the existing dwelling nearest the front line; 
(2)  Three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residences and boardinghouses: 30 feet; 
(3)  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 30 feet; and 
(4)  Grocery stores: 30 feet. 
(c)  The minimum setback from the side property lines shall be: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family unit residences: five feet; 
(2)  Multifamily residences and boardinghouses: five feet; 
(3)  Schools, churches, hospitals and mortuaries: 30 feet; and 
(4)  Grocery stores: ten feet. 
(d)  Side property line setback requirements do not apply to individual interior units of multifamily structures. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-80; Ord. No. 839, § 635.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-287. - Minimum floor area. 
    The minimum floor area for the R-3 District residences shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family unit residences: 800 square feet per family unit; and 
(2)  Three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residences and boardinghouses: 450 square feet per unit. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-90; Ord. No. 839, § 635.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-288. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures in the R-3 District shall be, for all uses, four stories: 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-100; Ord. No. 839, § 635.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-289. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for the R-3 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family, two-family, three-family, four-family and multifamily unit residences and boardinghouses: two spaces per dwelling unit; 
(2)  Churches: one space per each four seats; 
(3)  Schools: 
a.  High schools, colleges or universities: ten spaces per classroom; 
b.  Junior high or middle schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; and 
c.  Elementary schools: 11/2 spaces per classroom; 
(4)  Grocery stores: two spaces per 500 square feet of floor space; 
(5)  Loading requirements: All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-110; Ord. No. 839, § 635.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-290. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-120; Ord. No. 839, § 635.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-291. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-130; Ord. No. 839, § 635.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-292. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-8-140; Ord. No. 839, § 635.12, 1986) 
Secs. 30-293-30-317. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - M-H MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-318. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The M-H Mobile Home District is intended specifically for areas where mobile homes and mobile home courts or parks are desired. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-10; Ord. No. 839, § 640.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-319. - Special requirements. 
    An M-H District must be located so that at least one of the following situations exists: 
(1)  The M-H District is contiguous to an I-1, I-2, C-1, or C-2 District on one side, and an A-L, O-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, or M-H District on the other side; and/or 
(2)  The M-H District is completely surrounded by an A-L, O-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, or M-H District or any combination of these districts. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-20; Ord. No. 839, § 640.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-320. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the M-H District: 
(1)  Single-family, two-family, three-family and four-family residences, provided that such residences meet all other requirements of the R-2 zone; 
(2)  Schools, churches, pre-school nurseries, parks; 
(3)  Day care centers; 
(4)  Day care homes; 
(5)  Large day care homes; 
(6)  Mobile homes and their accompanying pads and additions, provided that: 
a.  Such mobile homes shall be placed on individual lots of not less than 4,200 square feet in size; 
b.  Such mobile homes are to be affixed to the lot by being permanently connected to city utilities after removal of all wheels and/or other undercarriage necessary for transport of such mobile homes; 
c.  All crawl space beneath any such mobile home on any lot in this district shall be enclosed by use of skirting material manufactured for that purpose; and 
d.  All other R-2 District requirements for single-family, two-family, three-family or four-family dwelling units shall be met; 
(7)  Home occupations, provided that: 
a.  Only one person other than residents of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
d.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; and 
e.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(8)  Mobile home parks, provided that: 
a.  No such park shall be less than one acre in size; 
b.  There shall be no more than 15 mobile homes per acre in any such park; 
c.  Each mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be at least 25 feet wide, and shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such spaces shall be clearly defined, and mobile homes shall be parked in such spaces so that there will be a minimum of ten feet between mobile homes at all points. No mobile home will be less than five feet from the side boundary of the mobile home space. No mobile home shall be less than five feet from the exterior boundary of the mobile home park (see supplemental district regulations for corner lots, section 30-607); and 
d.  Any such mobile home park must comply with the provisions of any valid home park ordinance in addition to the provisions of this chapter. In case of conflict with any other ordinance or code of the city, those provisions which establish the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people shall prevail. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-30; Ord. No. 839, § 640.03, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-321. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-40; Ord. No. 839, § 640.04, 1986) 
Sec. 30-322. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-50; Ord. No. 839, § 640.05, 1986) 
Sec. 30-323. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-60; Ord. No. 839, § 640.06, 1986) 
Sec. 30-324. - Transportation units used for storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-9-70; Ord. No. 1035, § 3, 2001) 
Secs. 30-325-30-351. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-352. - Intent and purpose of district. 
(a)  The provisions of this article are intended for application in instances where tracts of land of considerable size are developed, redeveloped or renewed as integrated and harmonious units, and where the overall design of such units warrants modification of the standards contained elsewhere in this article. To be eligible under this article, the planned unit development must: 
(1)  Reflect compatibility with the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Be composed of such uses and in such proportions as are appropriate to the integrated function of the development within the context of established community growth patterns; 
(3)  Be so designed in its space allocation, orientation, texture, materials, landscaping and other features, as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character, complementing the design and values of adjacent areas of the community. 
(b)  The PUD District is intended to be appended to a residential, commercial or industrial district, to provide for the most advantageous techniques of land development consistent with the intent and purpose of this article, the subdivision regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-10; Ord. No. 839, § 645.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-353. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be permitted. 
(b)  Special exceptions: 
(1)  Conditional uses allowed as special exceptions in the parent district to which this district is made a part may be permitted; and 
(2)  Day care centers. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-20; Ord. No. 839, § 645.02, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991) 
Sec. 30-354. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure prohibited in the parent district to which this district is made a part is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-30; Ord. No. 839, § 645.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-355. - Minimum area requirements. 
    The minimum area of a tract of land to be zoned as an appended PUD district within a parent district shall be as follows: 
Parent Zoning District Minimum Area (Acres) R (Residential) 2 C (Commercial) 2 I (Industrial) 5  
(Code 2000, § 16-10-40; Ord. No. 839, § 645.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-356. - Procedures for review and approval. 
(a)  When a property owner or developer intends to develop a tract of land containing at least the minimum area for that parent district and involving more than one commercial or industrial establishment, or in the case of a residential area, more than one dwelling unit, application may be made for zoning the property to a PUD District. 
(b)  The zoning change, if approved, shall be an amendment to the zoning map as an appendage to the existing parent district. The zoning change may also incorporate a request to rezone the existing parent district to another parent district within the PUD District. 
(c)  An applicant for a change in zoning to a PUD District must satisfy the planning and zoning commission that he or she has the ability to carry out the proposed plan, and shall prepare and submit a schedule for construction. 
(d)  Such applicant also shall prepare and submit a preliminary development plan for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission, which shall include: 
(1)  A topographic map showing contours at intervals of two feet; 
(2)  A plot plan showing: 
a.  Building and sign structure locations on the tract; 
b.  Access for streets; 
c.  Parking arrangement and number of spaces; 
d.  Interior drives and service areas; and 
e.  Area set aside for public open space. 
(3)  Location map showing the development and zoning of the adjacent property within 200 feet, including the location and the type of buildings and structures thereon; 
(4)  The full legal description of the boundaries of the properties to be included in the area to be zoned a PUD District; 
(5)  A map showing the general arrangement of streets within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the area to be zoned a PUD District; 
(6)  A map showing the location of proposed sewer, water and other utility lines; and 
(7)  A description of general character of proposed buildings and any signs to be placed on the site. 
(e)  The applicant may further be asked to furnish other information, such as typical building floor plans, building elevations to show the general architectural character of the buildings, some indications as to size and type of landscape plant materials, pavements and other major site improvements. 
(f)  The applicant may be asked to submit the tentative financial plan and description of the intended means of financing any proposed common areas or common improvements, and statements covering ownership and maintenance of common easements or other common areas, such as open space or recreational facilities. 
(g)  Upon approval of the preliminary development plan by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final development plan, which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested. Alterations in the preliminary schedule of construction shall be submitted at this time. The final development plan and the planning and zoning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council for its review and final action. 
(h)  In the event that, within 18 months following approval by the city council, the applicant does not proceed with construction in accordance with the plan so approved, the planning and zoning commission shall initiate action to rezone the property to the original zoning district. A public hearing, as required by law, shall be advertised and held, at which time, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to show why construction has been delayed. Following the hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make findings of fact and shall make a recommendation to the city council. 
(i)  All plans and documents shall become a part of the amendment and shall form the basis for issuance of a zoning permit, in conformity therewith. 
(j)  Changes in the development plan, which increase the number of dwelling units or establishments, the arrangement of buildings, the number of parking stalls, the size or number of other improvements or the alignment of driveways or roadways shall require a resubmission for approval of the application for rezoning. Any minor changes, adjustments or decrease in the number of dwelling units, common facilities and recreation facilities may be approved by the zoning administrator without resubmission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-50; Ord. No. 839, § 645.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-357. - Minimum lot requirements. 
(a)  The lot requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part, shall be the minimum lot requirements, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  In the event that the tract of land to be developed as a PUD District lies in more than one parent district, the provisions of the more restrictive parent district shall be applicable. 
(c)  In an appended residential district, the number of dwelling units that may be permissible on the proposed tract to be developed as a PUD District shall be determined by using the lot area per dwelling unit requirements of the parent zoning district, unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission; provided, however, that the total lot area of the proposed tract shall be reduced by the areas covered or occupied by buildings, streets, roadways, drives, parking areas and unusable land areas, such as streams, drainageways, creeks or land with grade slopes exceeding a 25-percent grade. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-60; Ord. No. 839, § 645.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-358. - Minimum property line setback. 
    The property line setback requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum yard requirements unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-70; Ord. No. 839, § 645.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-359. - Minimum lot coverage. 
    The lot coverage requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum lot coverage requirements, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-80; Ord. No. 839, § 645.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-360. - Maximum floor area requirements. 
    The floor area requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-90; Ord. No. 839, § 645.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-361. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The height requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum height requirements, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-100; Ord. No. 839, § 645.10, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-362. - Minimum parking and loading requirements. 
    The parking and loading requirements of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-110; Ord. No. 839, § 640.11, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-363. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-120; Ord. No. 839, § 645.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-364. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-130; Ord. No. 839, § 645.13, 1986) 
Sec. 30-365. - Limitations on signs. 
    The sign regulations of the parent district of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for sign regulations, unless otherwise prescribed and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-140; Ord. No. 839, § 645.14, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-366. - Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-10-150; Ord. No. 1035, § 4, 2001) 
Secs. 30-367-30-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-391. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The C-1 Central Business District is intended to be a commercial district allowing those uses which are compatible with pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-10; Ord. No. 839, § 650.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-392. - District regulations. 
    In the C-1 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-393. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-20; Ord. No. 839, § 650.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-393. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the C-1 District: 
(1)  All retail and service commercial uses except those prohibited in this article; 
(2)  Government buildings and utilities; 
(3)  Parking lots and garages; 
(4)  Apartments on floors other than the ground floor; 
(5)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses by right in this zone; and 
(6)  Parks. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-30; Ord. No. 839, § 650.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-394. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions in the C-1 District may be permitted as follows: 
(1)  Light manufacturing activities subsidiary to retail, wholesale, and service commercial uses, as special exceptions upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission; 
(2)  Day care centers; and 
(3)  Churches. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-40; Ord. No. 839, § 650.03.07, 1986; Ord. No. 882, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 896, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 927, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-395. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any vehicle-related commercial use which includes lumberyards, drive-in restaurants, hotels, motels, tourist accommodations, supermarkets, grocery stores, motor vehicle dealers (new and used), auto accessory stores, vehicle repair services and service stations are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-50; Ord. No. 839, § 650.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-396. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    There are no restrictions in the C-1 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-60; Ord. No. 839, § 650.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-397. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    There are no restrictions in the C-1 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-70; Ord. No. 839, § 650.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-398. - Minimum floor area to lot area ratio. 
    There are no restrictions in the C-1 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-80; Ord. No. 839, § 650.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-399. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum height of structures for the residences in the C-1 District shall be: four stories, 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-90; Ord. No. 839, § 650.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-400. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
    All uses in the C-1 District shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-100; Ord. No. 839, § 650.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-401. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-110; Ord. No. 839, § 650.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-402. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-120; Ord. No. 839, § 650.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-403. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-130; Ord. No. 839, § 650.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-404. - Transportation units used for storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-11-140; Ord. No. 1035, § 5, 2001) 
Secs. 30-405-30-421. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-422. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The C-2 Commercial District is intended to be a vehicle-related commercial district permitting those uses which are compatible with automobile traffic. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-10; Ord. No. 839, § 655.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-423. - District regulations. 
    In the C-2 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-424. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-20; Ord. No. 839, § 655.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-424. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the C-2 District: 
(1)  All retail and service commercial uses; 
(2)  Any vehicle-related commercial use such as, but not limited to, lumberyards, drive-in restaurants, hotels, motels, tourist accommodations, supermarkets, grocery stores, motor vehicle dealers (new and used), auto accessory stores, vehicle repair services and service stations; 
(3)  Government buildings and utilities; 
(4)  Parking lots and garages; 
(5)  Apartments on floors other than the ground floor; 
(6)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses by right in this zone; 
(7)  Parks; and 
(8)  Mortuaries. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-30; Ord. No. 839, § 655.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-425. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions may be permitted in the C-2 District for the following: 
(1)  Light manufacturing activities subsidiary to retail, wholesale and service commercial uses, as special exceptions upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission; 
(2)  Day care centers; and 
(3)  Churches. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-40; Ord. No. 839, § 655.03.09, 1986; Ord. No. 882, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 896, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 927, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-426. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-50; Ord. No. 839, § 655.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-427. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    There are no restrictions in the C-2 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-60; Ord. No. 839, § 655.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-428. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the C-2 District, the minimum setback from the following property lines shall be: 
(1)  From the front property line: 15 feet. 
(2)  From the side property line: ten feet. 
(3)  From the rear property line: 15 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-70; Ord. No. 839, § 655.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-429. - Minimum floor area to lot area ratio. 
    There are no restrictions in the C-2 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-80; Ord. No. 839, § 655.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-430. - Height of structures. 
    The height of structures in the C-2 District shall be for four stories: 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-90; Ord. No. 839, § 655.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-431. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(b)  All uses shall provide one off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used per 700 square feet of floor space. 
(c)  All uses shall provide two off-street parking spaces per 500 square feet of ground floor space. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-100; Ord. No. 839, § 655.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-432. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-110; Ord. No. 839, § 655.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-433. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-120; Ord. No. 839, § 655.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-434. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-130; Ord. No. 839, § 655.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-435. - Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-12-140; Ord. No. 1035, § 6, 2001) 
Secs. 30-436-30-453. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - C-3 HIGHWAY SERVICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-454. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The C-3 Highway Service District is intended to provide limited highway service businesses. Floor area is restricted, and off-street parking is required in order to minimize potential adverse effects to adjacent property. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-10; Ord. No. 839, § 660.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-455. - District regulations. 
    In the C-3 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-456. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-20; Ord. No. 839, § 660.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-456. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the C-3 District: 
(1)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(2)  Electric and telephone substations and other utilities; 
(3)  Implement dealers; 
(4)  Motels, including accessory service uses, such as newsstands, messenger and telegraph stations, swimming pools (for motel guests only), flower and gift shops; 
(5)  Motor vehicle sales, service and rentals; 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds and buildings owned and operated by a public agency; 
(7)  Car washes; 
(8)  Parking lots (customer and private); 
(9)  Restaurants; 
(10)  Convenience stores; 
(11)  Service stations or filling stations (light service work only); 
(12)  Liquor stores; 
(13)  Mobile home sales and service; 
(14)  Drive-in banks; and 
(15)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses by right in this zone. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-30; Ord. No. 839, § 660.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-457. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions in the C-3 District may be permitted for the following: 
(1)  Day care centers; 
(2)  Churches; and 
(3)  Commercial recreational facilities, such as, but not limited to, batting cages, go-cart tracks, water slides, miniature golf courses and the like. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-40; Ord. No. 839, § 660.03.16, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 896, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 915, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-458. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. Prohibited uses include general retail merchandising and commercial service uses such as are allowable in the C-1 and C-2 Districts. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-50; Ord. No. 839, § 660.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-459. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    Tracts in the C-3 Highway Service District shall have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet and an average lot width of not less than 150 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-60; Ord. No. 839, § 660.05, 1986) 
Sec. 30-460. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the C-3 District, the minimum setback from the following property lines shall be: 
(1)  From the back property line: 30 feet; 
(2)  From the front property line: 30 feet; and 
(3)  From the side property lines: ten feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-70; Ord. No. 839, § 660.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-461. - Maximum lot coverage. 
    Total building coverage of the lot shall not exceed 40 percent. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-80; Ord. No. 839, § 660.07, 1986) 
Sec. 30-462. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum structure height in the C-3 District shall be: four stories, 45 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-90; Ord. No. 839, § 660.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-463. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  All uses shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
(b)  All uses shall provide one off-street loading space scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used per 700 square feet of floor space. 
(c)  All uses shall provide two off-street parking spaces per 500 square feet of ground floor space. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-100; Ord. No. 839, § 660.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-464. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-110; Ord. No. 839, § 660.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-465. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-120; Ord. No. 839, § 660.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-466. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-130; Ord. No. 839, § 660.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-467. - Transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures prohibited. 
    For aesthetic purposes, transportation units used as storage facilities or other structures are prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-13-140; Ord. No. 1035, § 6, 2001) 
Secs. 30-468-30-487. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-488. - Intent and purpose of district. 
(a)  The I-1 Industrial District is intended for the purpose of allowing certain industrial uses which do not: 
(1)  Require intensive land coverage; 
(2)  Generate large volumes of vehicular traffic; and 
(3)  Create obnoxious sounds, glare, dust or odor. Height and land coverage are controlled to ensure compatibility with adjoining uses. 
(b)  The volume of sound generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently exceed 80 decibels at any point of any boundary line of the zone lot on which the use is located. 
(c)  The vibration generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently be perceptible, without instruments, at any point of any boundary line of the zone lot on which the use is located. 
(d)  The emission of heat, glare, radiation and fumes by this use shall not emit any obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond any point of any boundary line of the zone lot on which the use is located. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-10; Ord. No. 839, § 665.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-489. - District regulations. 
    In the I-1 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-490. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-20; Ord. No. 839, § 665.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-490. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the I-1 District: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Any light fabricating or manufacturing industry; 
(3)  Warehouses; 
(4)  Governmental and quasi-governmental uses, including residential care facilities operated by governmental and quasi-governmental authorities and utilities and community corrections facilities for such programs as are defined in section 14-2 of the Home Rule Charter for the City of Lamar and C.R.S. § 17-27-104 et seq.; 
(5)  Parking lots and garages; 
(6)  All service and commercial uses; and 
(7)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses by right in this zone. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-30; Ord. No. 839, § 665.03, 1986; Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1996; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1205, § 2, 2016) 
Sec. 30-491. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions in the I-1 District may be permitted for the following: 
(1)  Day care centers; and 
(2)  Churches. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-40; Ord. No. 839, § 665.03.08, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1055, 2002) 
Sec. 30-492. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use permitted in any other district and not specifically permitted in this district is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-50; Ord. No. 839, § 665.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-493. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    There are no restrictions in the I-1 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-60; Ord. No. 839, § 665.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-494. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the I-1 District, all buildings shall be set back from the front property line 20 feet and from the side property lines five feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-70; Ord. No. 839, § 665.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-495. - Maximum floor area to lot area requirements. 
    In the I-1 District, the maximum ratio of floor area to lot area is one square foot of floor area per three square feet of lot area. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-80; Ord. No. 839, § 665.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-496. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum structure height in the I-1 District shall be established as required for fire protection. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-90; Ord. No. 839, § 665.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-497. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  All uses and structures in the I-1 District shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to vehicles expected to be used. 
(b)  All uses shall provide one space of off-street parking for each 500 square feet of building space. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-100; Ord. No. 839, § 665.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-498. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-110; Ord. No. 839, § 665.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-499. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-120; Ord. No. 839, § 665.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-500. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-14-130; Ord. No. 839, § 665.12, 1986) 
Secs. 30-501-30-523. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-524. - Intent and purpose of district. 
(a)  The I-2 Industrial District is intended for the purpose of allowing basic or primary industries, which are generally not compatible with residential and/or commercial activity. Certain extremely obnoxious or hazardous uses will require special permission to locate in this district. 
(b)  The volume of sound generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently exceed 100 decibels at any point of any boundary line of the zone lot on which the use is located. 
(c)  The vibration generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently be perceptible, without instruments, at any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(d)  The emission of heat, glare, radiation and fumes by this use shall not emit any obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-10; Ord. No. 839, § 670.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-525. - District regulations. 
    In the I-2 District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-526. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-20; Ord. No. 839, § 670.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-526. - Uses by right. 
    The following shall be uses by right in the I-2 District: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Any fabricating or manufacturing industry; 
(3)  Warehouses; 
(4)  Government buildings and utilities; 
(5)  Parking lots and garages; 
(6)  Grain warehouses; and 
(7)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses by right in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-30; Ord. No. 839, § 670.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-527. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions in the I-2 District may be allowed for the following: 
(1)  Day care centers; 
(2)  Limited low density service and commercial uses; 
(3)  Commercial outlet for products manufactured on the property, provided that the commercial is clearly subordinate to the principal use and does not take up more than 25 percent of the gross floor area; 
(4)  Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and scrap processing yards; when said yard is completely enclosed with a six-foot solid fence, wall or hedge, and no junk or scrap is stored outside the fence or wall; subject, however, to the restrictions in article V of this chapter; 
(5)  Petroleum and natural gas refining and processing; 
(6)  Stockyards, slaughterhouses and aquaculture; 
(7)  Ready-mix concrete and asphalt mix plants; 
(8)  Storage of bulk oil, gas and explosives; and 
(9)  Other uses which may be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-40; Ord. No. 839, § 670.03.08, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 947, § 1, 1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-528. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    All nonindustrial uses and structures, except those permitted as special exceptions, are prohibited in the I-2 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-50; Ord. No. 839, § 670.04, 1986) 
Sec. 30-529. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    There are no restrictions in the I-2 District. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-60; Ord. No. 839, § 670.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-530. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    In the I-2 District, all buildings shall be set back from the front property line 20 feet, and from the side property lines five feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-70; Ord. No. 839, § 670.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-531. - Maximum floor area to lot area requirements. 
    In the I-2 District, the maximum ratio of floor area to lot area is one square foot of floor area per four square feet of lot area. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-80; Ord. No. 839, § 670.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-532. - Maximum height of structures. 
    The maximum structure height in the I-2 District shall be as required for fire protection. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-90; Ord. No. 839, § 670.08, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-533. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  All uses and structures in the I-2 District shall provide adequate off-street loading space scaled to vehicles expected to be used. 
(b)  All uses shall provide one space of off-street parking for each 500 square feet of building space. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-100; Ord. No. 839, § 670.09, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-534. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-110; Ord. No. 839, § 670.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-535. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-120; Ord. No. 839, § 670.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-536. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-15-130; Ord. No. 839, § 670.12, 1986) 
Secs. 30-537-30-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - I-P INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-566. - Intent and purpose of district. 
    The intent of the I-P Industrial Park District is to allow certain industrial land uses in a park-like atmosphere, and to control the type of use, setback, parking, loading and unloading. It is also intended that this district be compatible with adjoining residential and commercial land uses. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-10; Ord. No. 839, § 675.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-567. - District regulations. 
    In the I-P District, no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged or designed for other than one of the uses listed in section 30-568. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-20; Ord. No. 839, § 675.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-568. - Uses by right. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted under the provisions of the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts shall be permitted in the I-P District. 
(b)  Applicable within the corporate limits of the city and to city-owned property outside the city's corporate limits, correctional facilities shall be a use by right, provided that they comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  In order to accommodate potential expansion of the facilities, the site size shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size. 
(2)  The facility shall be established at least 500 feet (measured from property line to property line) from the nearest property within the corporate limits of the city which is residentially zoned or used. 
(3)  The facility shall not be established within 500 feet (measured from property line to property line) from any church or place of worship, day care facility, park, educational institution, library, museum, community center, residential district or children's amusement park located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)  Site development shall be in conformance with the landscaping requirements of the zoning district. 
(5)  The construction and operation of the correctional facility shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulatory requirements. 
(6)  The city council may deny the locating of a correctional facility in an I-P District when the use would be detrimental to nearby properties or, in the alternative, the city council may add conditions or safeguards to the approval of a correctional facility location in order to protect the health and welfare of citizens. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-30; Ord. No. 839, § 675.03, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1069 § 1, 2004) 
Sec. 30-569. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Conditional uses allowed as special exceptions in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts may be permitted when environmentally compatible with the other uses proposed for the industrial park and adjacent areas of the community. 
(b)  Day care centers shall be allowed as a special exception. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-40; Ord. No. 839, § 675.03.01, 1986; Ord. No. 890, § 2, 1991) 
Sec. 30-570. - Prohibited uses and structures. 
    Any use or structure prohibited in the I-1 and I-2 Districts is prohibited in this district. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-50; Ord. No. 839, § 675.04, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-571. - Minimum area requirements. 
    The minimum area of a tract of land to be zoned as an industrial park shall be ten acres. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-60; Ord. No. 839, § 675.05, 1986) 
Sec. 30-572. - General requirements. 
(a)  An applicant for an I-P Industrial Park District shall prepare and submit a rezoning application and a preliminary development plan for review and approval by the planning and zoning commission, which shall include: 
(1)  A topographic map showing contours at intervals of two feet; 
(2)  A plot plan showing: 
a.  Building locations on the tract; 
b.  Access from streets; 
c.  Parking arrangement and number of spaces; 
d.  Interior drives and service areas; and 
e.  Landscaped buffer strips; 
(3)  A location map showing the development and zoning of the adjacent property within 200 feet, including the location and the type of buildings and structures thereon; 
(4)  The full legal description of the boundaries of the properties to be included in the area to be zoned I-P Industrial Park District; 
(5)  A map showing the general arrangement of streets within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the area to be zoned I-P Industrial Park District; 
(6)  A map showing location of proposed sewer, water and other utility lines; and 
(7)  A description of general character of the proposed buildings. 
(b)  The applicant may additionally be asked to provide supplemental information concerning intended means of financing common improvements, proposed protective covenants, methods and means to assure adequate maintenance of landscaped areas, and similar considerations as may be required for municipal review by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(c)  Upon approval of the preliminary development plan by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final development plan, which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested. The final development plan and the planning and zoning commission recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council for review and final action. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-70; Ord. No. 839, § 675.06, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-573. - Minimum setback requirements. 
    Setback regulations in an I-P District shall be as follows: 
(1)  From the front property line, a front setback of 30 feet shall be required for uses permitted in this district, except as may be required and/or approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  From the side and rear property lines, no side or rear setback shall be required for uses in this district, except where such use abuts a residential district zone, in which case, there shall be required 15 feet of side and/or rear setback on the side of the lot and/or on the rear of the lot which abuts the residential district. These 15 feet shall contain a fence or wall and shrub border to screen residential-zoned property from the proposed use. The wall and shrub border shall be adequately maintained by the property owner. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-80; Ord. No. 839, § 675.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-574. - Maximum lot coverage. 
(a)  A building, structure or use allowed in this district may occupy all that portion of a lot, except for the area required for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading and their access roads, and as otherwise required for yard or buffer areas. 
(b)  In the case where the required off-street loading and unloading will be provided within the building or structure, the building or structure may cover the entire lot, except for land required for off-street parking, and as otherwise required for yard and buffer areas. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-90; Ord. No. 839, § 675.08, 1986) 
Sec. 30-575. - Maximum height of buildings. 
    In an I-P District, height regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  When a building or structure is within 150 feet of a residential district zone, the building shall not exceed 45 feet in height, or as required for fire protection. 
(2)  When a building or structure is more than 150 feet from a residential district zone, the building shall not exceed 75 feet in height, or as required for fire protection. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-100; Ord. No. 839, § 675.09, 1986) 
Sec. 30-576. - Minimum parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  All uses and structures in the I-P District shall provide adequate off-street parking and loading space, to assure that daily activity will be accommodated entirely off-street without use of public streets for turning or maneuvering. Parking and loading space shall be scaled to the types and volumes of vehicles to be used. 
(b)  All uses shall provide one space of off-street parking for each 500 square feet of building space. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-110; Ord. No. 839, § 675.10, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-577. - Supplementary regulations. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-120; Ord. No. 839, § 675.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-578. - Limitations on fences. 
    See article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-130; Ord. No. 839, § 675.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-579. - Limitations on signs. 
    See article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-16-140; Ord. No. 839, § 675.13, 1986) 
Secs. 30-580-30-606. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-607. - Visibility at intersections. 
    In all districts except C-1 and C-2 Districts, on a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the property line of such corner lots and a line joining points along said property line 50 feet from the point of the corner. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-10; Ord. No. 839, § 700.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-608. - Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot. 
    In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-20; Ord. No. 839, § 700.02, 1986) 
Sec. 30-609. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
    The height limitations contained in this chapter do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. Where such structures do not conflict with airport approach zones, they may be erected to a height not to exceed 150 feet. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-30; Ord. No. 839, § 700.03, 1986) 
Sec. 30-610. - Structures to have access. 
    Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-40; Ord. No. 839, § 700.04, 1986) 
Sec. 30-611. - Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment. 
    For purposes of these regulations, the term "major recreational equipment" includes boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a building to a street; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-50; Ord. No. 839, § 700.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1040, 2002) 
Sec. 30-612. - Dust-free surface for off-street parking lots. 
    All off-street parking lots hereinafter established shall be provided with a dust-free surface of a type and consistency acceptable to the city, except that this requirement shall not apply to residential development. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-60; Ord. No. 839, § 700.06, 1986) 
Sec. 30-613. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Construction of accessory buildings shall be prohibited before commencement of construction of the main building. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes. 
(b)  Required setbacks. Accessory buildings may be built in a rear yard, but such accessory building shall not be nearer than the main building to any side yard, or ten feet from any rear lot line. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-70; Ord. No. 839, § 700.07, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-614. - Setback line. 
    The setback line shall be determined by measuring the horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest architectural projection of the building (porches and stoops included). 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-80; Ord. No. 839, § 700.08, 1986) 
Sec. 30-615. - Fire escapes, outside stairways and chimney and flue projections. 
    Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into the rear yard may be permitted by the building official for a distance of not more than 31/2 feet and where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-90; Ord. No. 839, § 700.09, 1986) 
Sec. 30-616. - Side yard regulations for two-family or multifamily dwelling. 
    For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-100; Ord. No. 839, § 700.10, 1986) 
Sec. 30-617. - Temporary buildings and signs during construction. 
    Temporary buildings and temporary construction signs that are used in conjunction with construction work may be permitted in any district during the period that the building is being constructed, but such temporary building and/or sign shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-110; Ord. No. 839, § 700.11, 1986) 
Sec. 30-618. - Conformance to yard and space requirements with multiple principal uses. 
    Where a lot or tract is used for a nonresidential purpose, more than one principal use may be located upon the lot or tract, but only when the building conforms to all yard and open space requirements for the district in which the lot or tract is located. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-120; Ord. No. 839, § 700.12, 1986) 
Sec. 30-619. - Dwelling units above commercial or industrial structures. 
    No side yards are required where dwelling units are erected above commercial and industrial structures. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-130; Ord. No. 839, § 700.13, 1986) 
Sec. 30-620. - Number of employees. 
    Whenever the number of employees is restricted in connection with any use in the neighborhood shopping or commercial districts, such maximum number applies only to employees principally engaged in processing, selling or treating materials or products on the premises and not to employees engaged in delivery or similar activities. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-140; Ord. No. 839, § 700.14, 1986) 
Sec. 30-621. - Radio and television towers. 
    Radio and television towers shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial district, provided that the height of the radio or television tower does not conflict with any airport approach or landing zone, or with any other provision of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-150; Ord. No. 839, § 700.15, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-622. - Fences. 
(a)  No fence, wall, hedge, or shrubbery intended as a fence or partition between properties shall exceed four feet in height from the front building line toward an avenue, except that on corner lots, the four-foot limitation shall extend to the back building line. For the purposes of measuring the height of front yard fences, the measurement shall be the vertical height from the top of the curb on the avenue abutting the property. All other fences may not exceed six feet in height. 
(b)  No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals. 
(c)  No person shall erect or maintain any fence which will materially damage the adjacent property by obstructing the view, shutting out the sunlight or hindering ventilation or any fence which shall adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  No fence, except fences erected upon public or parochial school grounds, in public parks, and in public playgrounds, shall be constructed of a height greater than six feet; provided, however, that the board of adjustment and appeals may, by special permit, authorize the construction of a fence higher than six feet, if the board finds that the public welfare is preserved. 
(e)  All fences shall conform to the construction standards of the building code and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(f)  All gates or other openings to fences or enclosures shall be so constructed that they shall open onto the premises of which they form a part of the enclosure, and not open or swing out or onto the streets or alleys within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-160; Ord. No. 839, § 700.16, 1986; Ord. No. 845, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-623. - Lots of record. 
    A lot or group of lots which were platted and recorded in the office of the county clerk, and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, may be used for any purpose permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that no residential building permit shall be issued for construction of a residential structure on a lot or group of lots that do not conform with the minimum yard and height requirements, unless specifically authorized by the board of adjustment and appeals. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-170; Ord. No. 839, § 700.17, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-624. - Canopy and marquee. 
    A canopy or marquee may be permitted to overhang a public way in a C-1 or C-2 District, provided that: 
(1)  The canopy or marquee is constructed and maintained in accordance with the city building code and this Code; 
(2)  No portion of the canopy or marquee shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public way; and 
(3)  The canopy or marquee shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline of a public street. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-180; Ord. No. 839, § 700.18, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-625. - Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). 
    Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) may be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum distance from any lot line to any tower, pole or other support structure of the wind energy conversion system shall be established by the following minimum standards: 
Rotor Diameter 
(Feet) Setback Distance (Feet) 5 100 10 165 15 220 20 270 25 310 30 340 35 365 40 385  
Intermediate rotor size distances shall be interpolated from the above values. 
(2)  The WECS shall not be located in any required yard. 
(3)  The WECS shall not cause interference to microwave communications or radio and television reception in the area. Noise levels measured at the lot line shall not exceed 60 dBA in a residential zone. 
(4)  To limit climbing access to a WECS tower or other support structure, a six-foot-high fence with locking portal shall be placed around the WECS support, or if a tower is utilized, the tower climbing apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12 feet from the ground, or the WECS support may be mounted on a rooftop. 
(5)  All blades of a WECS shall be constructed of nonmetallic substances. If the applicant can prove, in writing, that no electromagnetic interference will result, a metal content of up to 25 percent will be acceptable. 
(6)  The WECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of the federal aviation regulations with regard to airport approach and clearance around very high frequency (VHF) omnidirectional range (VOR) and Doppler VHF omnidirectional range (DVOR) stations. 
(7)  Height of the WECS shall not exceed the maximum height restriction in the zone where it is located by more than 20 feet. The height of the WECS shall be measured at the center of the blade diameter. 
(8)  Data pertaining to the WECS safety and structural integrity shall be certified by a licensed engineer and filed with the building permit application. The tower or support and top adaptor shall meet the restrictions specified in the building code. 
(9)  The WECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth in the electric utility's current service regulations applicable to WECS. 
(10)  A plot plan shall be submitted with the application for the building permit showing the proposed location and height of the WECS, fencing and all existing buildings within 200 feet of the exterior lot lines. 
(11)  The owner/operator shall provide covenants, easements or similar documentation to ensure sufficient wind to operate the WECS unless adequate accessibility to the wind is provided by the site. 
(12)  The owner/operator shall certify that the WECS does not violate any covenants of record. 
(13)  The applicant shall provide a certificate of liability insurance. Annually, the owner/operator shall present evidence to the zoning administrator that the liability insurance is still in effect. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-190; Ord. No. 839, § 700.19, 1986; Ord. No. 845, § 1, 1986) 
Sec. 30-626. - Medical marijuana dispensaries. 
    Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited within the city. A medical marijuana dispensary may not be operated as a primary land use, as an incidental activity to another lawful land use or as a home occupation. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-200; Ord. No. 1153, § 4, 2010) 
Sec. 30-627. - Medical marijuana centers. 
    Medical marijuana centers are prohibited within the city. A medical marijuana center may not be operated as a primary land use, as an incidental activity to another lawful land use or as a home occupation. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-210; Ord. No. 1165, § 5, 2010) 
Sec. 30-628. - Medical marijuana cultivation by patient or caregiver. 
    Medical marijuana cultivation is permitted as a home occupation within the city by a patient or primary caregiver; provided, however, that: 
(1)  There shall not be more than one primary caregiver per dwelling unit growing, storing or providing medical marijuana in any form to his or her patients; 
(2)  Such growing, storing or providing of medical marijuana is conducted in accordance with article XVIII, section 14 of the state constitution and C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106; 
(3)  The primary caregiver shall have not more than six plants per patient, with a maximum of 30 plants for five patients, being grown on the premises of the dwelling unit at any given time; and 
(4)  Accessory buildings, such as a detached garage, shed, greenhouse or other structure used for growing, storing or providing medical marijuana, must comply with all zoning bulk standards and building code and fire code provisions applicable thereto. 
(Code 2000, § 16-17-220; Ord. No. 1165, § 6, 2010) 
Secs. 30-629-30-659. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-660. - General requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move, alter, change, repair, place, suspend or cause or permit to be erected, moved, altered, changed, repaired, placed, suspended or attached any sign in violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, paste, place, post, paint or attach in any way any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether political or otherwise, or to cause the same to be done, in or upon any curbstone, lamp post, telephone, telegraph or electric light pole, tree or bridge. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to paste, place, paint or attach any sign on any building, street or property of the city; provided, however, that any property owner or the occupant of any property abutting on any public street in the city or the planning area may paint or stamp the address of such property upon the curbing directly in front of the building or to have the same painted thereon. 
(Code 2000, § 16-18-10; Ord. No. 839, § 800.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-661. - District regulations. 
    Signs shall be permitted in the various districts as follows: 
(1)  Sign regulations for A-L, E-A, O-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 and M-H Districts. 
a.  Unilluminated nameplates are subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  The nameplate shall not exceed one square foot in area; 
2.  The nameplate shall show only the name and/or address of the occupant; 
3.  There shall be no more than one nameplate for each dwelling unit; and 
4.  The nameplate shall be affixed to the principal building and flat against the wall. 
b.  Unilluminated "For Sale" and "For Rent" single-faced or double-faced business signs are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Only one sign shall be permitted per lot; 
2.  No sign shall exceed five square feet in area; 
3.  Signs shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic approaching a street intersection; 
4.  When said sign is affixed to a building, it shall not project higher than ten feet above the ground level; and 
5.  Ground signs shall not project higher than four feet above ground grade. 
c.  Bulletin boards and signs for churches and other public institutions are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  One sign or bulletin board shall be permitted on each street side if located on the same site as the principal building; 
2.  If the sign or bulletin board is illuminated, the lights shall be directed away from adjoining residential uses; 
3.  No sign or bulletin board shall exceed 24 square feet in area; 
4.  No sign shall be located closer than eight feet from any side or rear property line; 
5.  A sign or bulletin board located in the front yard shall be no closer to the street line than one-half the required front yard; 
6.  A sign or bulletin board affixed to a building shall not project higher than ten feet above the ground level; 
7.  Ground signs shall be permanently anchored to the ground and shall not exceed a height of six feet above normal grade; 
8.  Buildings constructed on the property line prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be allowed one identification sign, providing said sign is a flat wall sign and permanently attached to the building; and 
9.  On corner lots, no sign shall be constructed or located that will obstruct the view of traffic approaching the street intersection. 
(2)  Sign regulations for the C-1 District. Where buildings or structures are established or are hereafter established on the property line, in the C-1 District, advertising and business signs shall conform with the following requirements, provided that they are constructed and maintained in accordance with the building code: 
a.  The advertising or business sign shall be allowed to be affixed flat against the face of the building, be affixed to the front edge of a marquee parallel to a road, street or highway right-of-way or be affixed so as to extend over a road, street or highway right-of-way. An advertising or business sign that extends over a road, street or highway right-of-way must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Before erecting the sign, the owner of the sign obtains written permission and approval from the city administrator or his or her designee. 
2.  The sign does not restrict pedestrian traffic and is not a safety hazard to pedestrians of the motoring public. 
3.  No portion of the sign shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk, road, street or highway right-of-way. 
4.  The sign shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline of the road, street or highway right-of-way. 
5.  The sign shall not extend any farther away than four feet from the building, pole or structure. 
b.  Where a sign is illuminated by light directed upon it, the direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any existing residential district; 
c.  Lighted signs in direct vision of traffic shall not be in red, green or amber illumination; 
d.  Flashing signs shall be allowed only upon approval of the building official, provided that it is first determined that the sign will in no way create a traffic hazard or confusion with traffic lights or with lights on emergency vehicles; 
e.  The gross surface area, in square feet, on one side of an advertising or business sign shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of separate frontage of the lot occupied by the building. Each side of the lot which abuts upon a street shall be considered as a separate frontage, and the gross surface area of all signs located on each side of a building shall not exceed three times the lineal feet in the separate frontage. The total surface area shall not exceed 400 square feet for each face of the sign. Individual letters, with no background, shall be measured by the minimum rectangular area necessary to encompass such letter or by a combination of rectangles as are necessary to encompass letters of irregular dimensions; and 
f.  Any sign located within three feet of a driveway or parking area, or within 50 feet of the intersection of two or more streets, shall have the lowest elevation at least ten feet above the curb level. 
(3)  Sign regulations for the C-2 and C-3 Districts. Business signs (single-faced or double-faced) shall be allowed in the C-2 or C-3 Districts subject to sign regulations set forth in the building code. 
a.  Flashing signs are not permitted in C-2 Districts within 500 feet of a residential district zone. 
b.  Non-flashing signs shall be permitted, provided that said sign is illuminated only during business hours or until 11:00 p.m., whichever is later, when said sign is located adjacent to a residential district; further provided that where the sign is illuminated by a light reflected upon it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any residential building, into any residential district or into any street. Clocks and/or thermometers installed for public convenience and information are exempt from the time limitation. 
c.  Lighted signs in direct vision of a traffic signal shall not be in red, green or amber illumination. 
d.  The gross surface area, in square feet, on one side of any business sign on a lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of the building; each side of a lot which abuts upon a street shall be considered as a separate frontage, and the gross surface area of all signs located on each side of a structure shall not exceed three times the lineal feet in the separate frontage. The total surface area shall not exceed 400 square feet for each face of the sign. Individual letters with no background shall be measured by the minimum rectangular area necessary to encompass such letter, or by a combination of rectangles as are necessary to encompass letters of irregular dimensions. 
e.  Any sign located within three feet of a driveway or parking area, or within 50 feet of the intersection of two or more streets, shall have its lowest elevation at least ten feet above curb level. 
f.  Signs within 50 feet of a residential district shall be affixed to or be a part of the building. 
g.  A maximum of two signs shall be allowed for a business or profession conducted on the premises (only one shall be allowed on a facade). 
h.  The advertising or business sign shall be allowed to be affixed flat against the face of the building, be affixed to the front edge of a marquee parallel to a road, street or highway right-of-way or be affixed so as to extend over a road, street or highway right-of-way. An advertising or business sign that extends over a road, street or highway right-of-way must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Before erecting the sign, the owner of the sign obtains written permission and approval from the city administrator or his or her designee. 
2.  The sign does not restrict pedestrian traffic and is not a safety hazard to pedestrians or the motoring public. 
3.  No portion of the sign shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk, road, street or highway right-of-way. 
4.  The sign shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline of the road, street or highway right-of-way. 
5.  The sign shall not extend any farther away than four feet from the building, pole or structure. 
i.  Sandwich board signs may be allowed, provided that said sign is permanently affixed to the surface on which it rests. 
(4)  Sign regulations for the I-1, I-2 and I-P Districts. 
a.  Advertising and business signs (single-faced or double-faced) shall be allowed in I-1, I-2 and I-P Districts, subject to the following regulations, and subject to construction standards set forth in the building code or other city regulations: 
1.  Flashing signs shall be permitted only upon approval of the building official, provided that it is first determined that the location and colors will in no way create a traffic hazard, or confusion with traffic lights and with lights on emergency vehicles, and that the direct rays of the sign will not be directed into any residential district. 
2.  Non-flashing signs shall be permitted, provided that where the sign is illuminated by a light reflected upon it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any residential building, into any residential district or into any street. 
3.  Lighted signs in direct vision of a traffic signal shall not be in red, green or amber illumination. 
4.  The gross surface area in square feet on one side of any business sign on a lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of the lots; each side of a lot which abuts upon a street shall be considered as a separate frontage, and the gross surface area of all signs located on each side of a lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet in the separate frontage. Individual letters, with no background, shall be measured by the minimum rectangular area necessary to encompass such letter, or by a combination of rectangles as are necessary to encompass letters of irregular dimensions. 
5.  Any sign located within three feet of a driveway or parking area, or within 50 feet of the intersection of two or more streets, shall have its lowest elevation at least ten feet above curb level. 
6.  Signs within 50 feet of a residential district shall be affixed to or be a part of the building. 
7.  A maximum of two signs shall be allowed for a business or profession conducted on the premises (only one shall be allowed on a facade). 
8.  The advertising or business sign shall be allowed to be affixed flat against the face of the building, be affixed to the front edge of a marquee parallel to a road, street or highway right-of-way or be affixed so as to extend over a road, street or highway right-of-way. An advertising or business sign that extends over a road, street or highway right-of-way must meet all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Before erecting the sign, the owner of the sign obtains written permission and approval from the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(ii)  The sign does not restrict pedestrian traffic and is not a safety hazard to pedestrians or the motoring public. 
(iii)  No portion of the sign shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk, road, street or highway right-of-way. 
(iv)  The sign shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline of the road, street or highway right-of-way. 
(v)  The sign shall not extend any farther away than four feet from the building, pole or structure. 
9.  Sandwich board signs may be allowed, provided that said sign is permanently affixed to the surface on which it rests. 
b.  Billboards will be permitted in I-1, I-2 and I-P Districts if they conform to the following provisions: 
1.  The owner shall agree, at the time of issuance of the permit, to place and maintain on such billboard the name of the person owning, in charge of or in control of said billboard. 
2.  No billboard shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed or moved until an application and plans shall have been filed with the building official, and shall have been approved by the building official as to size, location and construction. 
3.  Billboards shall not exceed 20 feet in height above ground. 
4.  The owner, lessee and manager of such billboard, and the owner of the sign, shall maintain and keep the ground area around the sign clean, sanitary, inoffensive and free and clean of weeds and noxious substances. 
5.  Plans for billboards in the fire limits shall be referred to the fire department for review and recommendation. 
6.  No billboard shall project beyond the front, side or rear building line established for the district as set forth in this chapter. 
7.  No billboard shall exceed 500 square feet in area (on a single face). 
8.  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed or maintained, any billboard in such a manner as to: 
(i)  Obstruct the view of street crossings or railroad crossings; 
(ii)  Be unable to stand a pressure of at least 40 pounds per square foot of advertising surface; 
(iii)  Be dangerous to the public by falling or blowing down; 
(iv)  Increase the danger of loss by fire or to increase fire insurance rates; and/or 
(v)  Approach nearer than five feet from any building, unless attached to the building. 
9.  Billboards hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved in the city and the planning area shall be constructed in such a manner and of such material that they shall be safe and substantial; 
10.  Billboards supported by the ground shall have all posts set in concrete. 
(5)  Unilluminated subdivision or development signs. Unilluminated subdivision or development signs will be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Only one sign shall be permitted per development. 
b.  No sign shall exceed 40 square feet in surface area, or six feet in height above normal grade. 
c.  No sign shall be located closer than eight feet from any side or rear lot line. 
d.  No sign shall be located closer to the front lot line than one-half the required front yard. 
e.  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed or maintained, any sign in such a manner as to: 
1.  Obstruct the view of street crossings or railroad crossings; 
2.  Be unable to stand a pressure of at least 40 pounds per square foot of surface; 
3.  Be dangerous to the public for any reason; and/or 
4.  Approach nearer than ten feet from any building. 
f.  All signs shall be designed and maintained in such a manner as to ensure visual compatibility with surrounding development. 
g.  Plans for all subdivision or development signs shall be submitted for review and comment by the planning and zoning commission prior to issuance of a permit for construction. 
(6)  Unilluminated temporary construction company signs. Unilluminated temporary construction company signs will be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Only one sign shall be permitted per construction location. 
b.  Sign display shall be permitted only for the actual construction period. 
c.  Signs shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic approaching a street intersection or create other hazards of any kind. 
d.  Signs shall not project higher than six feet above the surrounding ground level. 
e.  Signs shall not exceed eight square feet in surface area. 
(Code 2000, § 16-18-20; Ord. No. 839, § 800.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1093, §§ 1-3, 2006) 
Sec. 30-662. - Protruding awnings. 
(a)  All cloth awnings built, constructed or placed upon, in conjunction with or appurtenant to any building, which shall project over any sidewalk, shall be built, constructed or placed so that the same shall be, when lowered, seven feet above the surface of such sidewalk, and the outer edge of the same shall be, when lowered, nine feet from the lot line of the building to which such awning is appurtenant, provided that the requirements of this section shall not apply to awnings built, constructed or placed for the protection of windows on any but the first or ground floor of buildings. 
(b)  All other awnings which require supports from the sidewalk upon which built, constructed or placed in conjunction with or appurtenant to any building which shall project over any sidewalk, shall have metal roofs. The supports thereof shall be of brick, concrete, stone or iron. No such awning shall be built without the plans and specifications being first exhibited to the city council and an order obtained permitting the awning to be erected. Such order shall be duly entered upon the records of the city council after having been adopted by the city council. 
(c)  If any person shall construct or cause to be constructed any awning projecting over any sidewalk in the city in violation of the provisions of this article, the public works department shall be authorized to cause any such awning to be removed at the expense of the person owning the same. 
(Prior Code, § 22-5; Code 2000, § 11-1-50; Ord. No. 166, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-663. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for the erection, construction or alteration of any sign in the city and the planning jurisdiction. 
(b)  Application for permits by persons other than the property owner shall be accompanied, in each instance, by either a letter authorizing the placement of a sign on the land or building, signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or by a lease showing the right of the applicant. Such application shall conform to the regulations herein provided. No signboard shall be erected or painted on any area until the application is acted upon and granted. 
(c)  A charge shall be made for each permit granted. 
(d)  If a sign for which a permit is granted is not erected within 60 days from the date of the permit, the permit shall, unless renewed, become void. 
(e)  Advertising painted or placed on a structure shall be deemed subject to these regulations if permanent and over 12 square feet in area. 
(f)  All signs shall be constructed, located and placed in accordance with local ordinances and state laws. 
(g)  Permits are issued for the life of the sign so long as it is kept in good condition and changing conditions do not make it a hazard or undesirable to adjoining property owners. In such case, the city or county, whose jurisdiction shall apply, may direct its removal. 
(Code 2000, § 16-18-30; Ord. No. 839, § 800.03, 1986) 
Sec. 30-664. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All advertising and business signs in zoning districts C-l, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-P established and constructed after the effective date of the initial ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall conform to applicable city, state and federal regulations for said signs. 
(b)  All advertising and business signs established and constructed after the effective date of the initial ordinance from which this chapter is derived in zoning districts other than those enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall conform to all sign regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
(Code 2000, § 16-18-40; Ord. No. 893, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000; Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 2006; Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 2006) 
Sec. 30-665. - Removal of signs from vacant buildings. 
    Signs located on vacant buildings shall be removed by the property owner or his or her authorized agent within 15 days after said sign has been determined to be a threat to the safety of the public by the building official or his or her designated appointee. 
(Code 2000, § 16-18-50; Ord. No. 839, § 800.05, 1986; Ord. No. 1048, 2002) 
Secs. 30-666-30-688. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPEAL PROCEDURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Requirement to establish a board of adjustments and appeals, certain procedures required, C.R.S. § 31-23-304. 

Sec. 30-689. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment and appeals only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this article that the duties of the city council in connection with this article shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this article and this chapter. Under this chapter, the city council shall have only the duties of: 
(1)  Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, or the repeal of this chapter, as provided by law; and 
(2)  Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in section 30-731. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-10; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-690. - Powers and jurisdictions. 
(a)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall administer the details of appeals or other matters referred to it regarding the application of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall have the following specific powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide on appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  To interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of the adopted comprehensive city plan, and as shown upon the zoning district map fixing the several districts accompanying and made a part of this chapter, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning district map; 
(3)  To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot or topographical or other conditions, provided that such variation will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare, or where variations may be permitted which allow unusual arrangement on the lot and still clearly and unmistakably accomplish the intent of this chapter; the board must find that the granting of such variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable or unusual hardship or difficulty; and 
(4)  To hear and grant variances to district zoning regulations in accordance with the detailed requirements of the individual zone. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-20; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.02, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 4, 1993) 
Sec. 30-691. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the board of adjustment and appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment and appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment and appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment and appeals or by a court of record, on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. The board of adjustment and appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-30; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.03, 1986) 
Sec. 30-692. - Variances. 
(a)  No variances shall be authorized by the board of adjustment and appeals unless it finds that: 
(1)  The strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardship; 
(2)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; 
(3)  The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and 
(4)  The granting of such variance is based upon reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice. 
(b)  No variance shall be authorized unless the board of adjustment and appeals finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned, or the intended use of the property, is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter. 
(c)  The board of adjustment and appeals shall also find that the variance, if granted, is in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter, and does not constitute a direct and obvious amendment to the district regulations or district boundaries. 
(d)  Every variance granted or denied by the board of adjustment and appeals shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based on testimony and evidence and specifying the reason for granting or denying the variance, a copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, to be available for public inspection. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-40; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.04, 1986) 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment grant variances in harmony with their general purpose and intent and general or specific rules of the Code, C.R.S. § 31-23-301. 
Sec. 30-693. - Special exceptions. 
    Special exceptions to the provisions of this chapter shall be as defined herein. All applications and requests for special exceptions shall be referred to, and considered by, in the first instance, the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-50; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 5, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-694. - Special use permit. 
    Exceptions to this chapter shall be made by special use permit after the request has been duly advertised and a public hearing held as required by law. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-60; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05.01, 1986) 
Sec. 30-695. - Filing procedure. 
    Prior to review of the request of an exception by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall: 
(1)  File an application on forms provided by the city; 
(2)  File with the application a statement certifying that the applicant is the lawful owner of the real estate upon which the excepted use is proposed or that he or she has the lawful right to receive a conveyance thereof if the application is granted; and 
(3)  File a form of declaration of restrictions, indicating use which is to be made by the legal owner if the application is granted. Said restrictions must show that use of the land will be solely that which was applied for as an excepted use. The restriction must provide that, if such use is abandoned or is proposed to be changed, the subsequent use shall be in conformity with the zoning restrictions in effect as to the land prior to authorization of the exception, unless a new application for an excepted use is made and granted. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-70; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05.02, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-696. - Plot plan. 
    A plot plan shall be filed with the application showing the following: 
(1)  The legal dimension of the tract to be used; 
(2)  The location of all proposed improvements, including curb cut access, off-street parking and other such facilities as the applicant proposes to install; 
(3)  Grade elevations; 
(4)  Building setbacks from all property lines; 
(5)  Front, side and rear elevations of all improvements to be erected; 
(6)  Such perspective drawings of the proposed improvements, in such detail as the planning and zoning commission may require, as will clearly show the finished appearance of the proposed improvements; 
(7)  Location and type of planting, screening or walls; and 
(8)  Such other items as the planning and zoning commission shall deem reasonably necessary to process the application properly. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-80; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05.03, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-697. - Factors for consideration. 
    In considering any application for an exception under this chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall give consideration to the comprehensive plan of the city, and the health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, including, but not limited to, the following factors: 
(1)  The stability and integrity of the various zoning districts; 
(2)  Conservation of property values; 
(3)  Protection against fire and casualties; 
(4)  Observation of general police regulations; 
(5)  Prevention of traffic congestion; 
(6)  Promotion of traffic safety and the orderly parking of motor vehicles; 
(7)  Promotion of the safety of individuals and property; 
(8)  Provision for adequate light and air; 
(9)  Prevention of overcrowding and excessive intensity of land uses; 
(10)  Provision for public utilities and schools; 
(11)  Invasion by inappropriate uses; 
(12)  Value, type and character of existing or authorized improvements and land uses; 
(13)  Encouragement of improvements and land uses in keeping with overall planning; and 
(14)  Provision for orderly and proper urban renewal, development and growth. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-90; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05.04, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-698. - Authorization for exceptions and special use permits. 
(a)  Exceptions may be authorized and special use permits granted by the planning and zoning commission only in those zones and for those activities which are specifically authorized by the individual zone regulations. 
(b)  Exceptions and special use permits for automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and scrap processing yards shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  They shall be located on a tract of land at least 300 feet from a residential district zone. 
(2)  The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence, wall or hedge. The fence, wall or hedge shall be of uniform height, at least six feet high, and uniform texture and color, and shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to ensure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. Fencing materials shall be limited to those which have been specifically manufactured for fencing use and shall be subject to review and approval by the city prior to installation. The fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk or other material within the yard. 
(3)  No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosed building, hedge, fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Burning of paper, trash, junk or other waste materials shall be permitted only after approval of the fire department. Said burning, when permitted, shall be done during daylight hours only. 
(5)  Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary by the planning and zoning commission for the protection of the general health and welfare. 
(6)  Special use permits granted under this article shall be subject to annual review and renewal by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-100; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.05.05, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-699. - Performance. 
(a)  In making any decision varying or modifying any provisions of this chapter, the board of adjustment and appeals shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots and other appropriate safeguards as required to protect adjoining property. 
(b)  In making any decision recommending the grant of a special exception to the district regulations, the planning and zoning commission shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots and other appropriate safeguards as required to protect adjoining property. 
(c)  In lieu of actual construction of any required improvements imposed in respect of variances or special exceptions, the board of adjustment and appeals and the planning and zoning commission may accept, in the name of the city, a corporate surety bond, cashier's check, escrow account or other like security in an amount to be fixed by the city, and conditioned upon actual completion of such improvement, within a specified time, and the city council may enforce such bond by all equitable means. Bonds or other security shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-110; Ord. No. 839, § 1100.06, 1986; Ord. No. 915, § 7, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-700. - Binding effect of recommendation. 
    After consideration of any application or request for allowance of a special exception pursuant to this chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall forward its recommendation upon such application for approval, approval with modifications and requirements, or denial, to the board of adjustment and appeals for final action upon such requests. The final recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be binding upon the board of adjustment and appeals, and such recommendation shall not be modified, changed, amended or otherwise rejected by the board of adjustment and appeals, without further recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-120; Ord. No. 915, § 8, 1993; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-701. - Appeals from board of adjustment and appeals. 
    Any person, or an officer, department, board or bureau of the city, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment and appeals, may seek review by a court of record of such decision in the manner provided by state law. 
(Code 2000, § 16-20-130; Ord. No. 839, § 1000, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Secs. 30-702-30-730. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-731. - Fees, charges and expenses. 
(a)  The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the administrative official, and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
(b)  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-10; Ord. No. 839, § 1200, 1986) 
Sec. 30-732. - Amendment of chapter. 
(a)  The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or regulations contained in this chapter. 
(b)  A proposal for an amendment or a change in zoning may be initiated by the city council or by the planning and zoning commission or upon application of the owner of the property affected. 
(c)  All such proposed changes shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation and report. 
(d)  Upon the development of tentative recommendations by staff, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall cause an accurate, written summary to be made of the proceedings. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-20; Ord. No. 839, § 1300.01, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-733. - Applications. 
(a)  Any party making an application for any changes to this chapter, or any application for variance or rezoning or other relief provided by this chapter shall file with the chief building official an application upon forms provided by the city, and such application shall be accompanied by such data and information as may be prescribed by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application with the city clerk, the applicant shall provide the city clerk with the names and addresses of all owners of any land located within 200 feet of the outer limits of the area to which the applicant desires a change of zoning. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-30; Ord. No. 839, § 1300.02, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-734. - Public hearing and notice. 
(a)  Before the planning and zoning commission shall, by proper action, formulate its recommendation to the city council on any such proposed or requested change of zoning district boundary or regulation, whether initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or others, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on such proposal. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning and zoning commission shall cause a notice of public hearing to be published once in the official city newspaper, and at least 15 days shall elapse between the date of such publication and the date set for hearing. Additionally, the property involved shall be publicly posted with large and conspicuous signs. 
(c)  The printed notice shall fix the time and place for such hearing and shall contain a statement regarding the proposed changes in the regulations or restrictions, or in the boundary of any district. If such proposed amendment will affect specific property, the legal description and general street address shall be given, provided that, in addition to such publication notice, written notice of such proposed change shall be mailed to all the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed and those properties immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-40; Ord. No. 839, § 1300.3, 1986; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 30-735. - Protest. 
    If a protest against such amendment is filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing, pursuant to the publication notice, the protest being duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-quarters of all the voting members of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-50; Ord. No. 839, § 1300.04, 1986) 
Sec. 30-736. - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-60; Ord. No. 839, § 1400, 1986) 
Sec. 30-737. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrative official. He or she shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon, as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-70; Ord. No. 839, § 1500, 1986) 
Sec. 30-738. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions), shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter, or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the fines and penalties provided in chapter 1 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation, may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2000, § 16-21-80; Ord. No. 839, § 1600, 1986) 
Secs. 30-739-30-759. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Right and procedures to establish vested property rights in a site specific development plan, C.R.S. § 24-68-101 et seq. 

Sec. 30-760. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of C.R.S. § 24-68-101 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-10; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-761. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed in C.R.S. § 24-68-102. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-20; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-762. - Application process. 
    A landowner wishing a vested property right in a site specific development plan must apply to the city on a city-approved application form for such vested right. Upon receipt of the application for a vested right in a site specific development plan, the city and landowner shall undertake to create a development agreement. The completed development agreement shall then be submitted for notice, hearing and approval as a site specific development plan as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-30; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-763. - Notice and hearing. 
    No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with the notice required by C.R.S. § 31-23-304 for zoning regulations or with any other required notice. At such hearing, interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-40; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-764. - Approval; effective date; amendments. 
    A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the city council approval action relating thereto. In the event amendments to a site specific development plan are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the city council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-50; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-765. - Notice of approval. 
    Each development agreement constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-68-101 et seq., as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcel of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than 14 days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-60; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-766. - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the city as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. At the option of the city, these costs may be imposed as a flat fee or a fee per square foot. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-70; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-767. - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property which provisions were in effect at the time the site specific development plan, including any amendments, were approved. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-80; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Sec. 30-768. - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of C.R.S. § 24-68-101 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 16-22-90; Ord. No. 1013, 1999) 
Secs. 30-769-30-833. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - C-X ADULT ENTERTAINMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-834. - Intent and purpose of overlay district. 
    The purpose of the C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District is to identify and prescribe specific requirements and conditions for the location of certain defined adult businesses and identify areas within the city where such activities can occur. The district is designed as an overlay district in certain zoning districts based on the regional character of the activities. Adult business uses do not occur on a frequent basis and require separate and specifically designed regulations for their development. Such adult businesses are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly if several of such uses are concentrated, thereby having a harmful effect upon adjacent areas. The location of such uses has an additional harmful effect upon adjacent areas and could contribute to the blighting and downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The special regulation of adult businesses is necessary to ensure that the adverse effect of such uses will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding neighborhoods, whether residential or nonresidential, by location or concentration, and to ensure the stability of such neighborhoods. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-10; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Sec. 30-835. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult business. 
(1)  The term "adult business" means any business enterprise: 
a.  That has as a regular and substantial business purpose the sale, display or rental of goods that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities or that emphasize matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  That has one of the following as a regular and substantial business purpose: 
1.  The providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or 
2.  The providing of services that provide specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits or allow participation in specified sexual activities ancillary to other pursuits. 
(2)  The term "adult business" also includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following, as defined herein: 
a.  Businesses that offer the following described goods for sale or rent: 
1.  Adult bookstore means an establishment which as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, slides, films or videotapes, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  Adult news rack means any coin- or card-operated device that offers for sale, by dispensing, printed material, which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
3.  Adult newsstand means any freestanding structure, vehicle or booth which as a regular and substantial business purpose offers for sale books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas . 
4.  Adult retail establishments means an establishment which, as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers for sale or rent any one or more of the following: instruments, devices, gifts, sexual aids, sexual novelties or paraphernalia which depict or are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities or graphically depict specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or rented in an adult bookstore as defined herein. 
b.  Businesses that provide the following entertainment: 
1.  Adult encounter parlor means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the provision of premises where customers congregate, associate or consort with employees and/or performers or private contractors who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers with the intent of providing sexual gratification or stimulation to such customers. 
2.  Adult entertainment business means any enterprise to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted, and where providing adult entertainment, as defined herein, is a regular and substantial portion of its business. 
3.  Adult entertainment cabaret means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing adult entertainment which features strippers, male or female impersonators, go-go dancers or live performances, or material which is primarily characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
4.  Adult entertainment studio (includes the terms "rap studio," "exotic dance studio," "sensitivity studio" or "encounter studio") means an establishment whose premises are physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises, and where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing entertainment which features materials or live performances characterized by an emphasis on or features materials relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
5.  Adult motion picture theater means an establishment containing a room with seats facing a screen or projection area, where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the exhibition to customers or members of films, videotapes or motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customers and which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
6.  Adult theater means an establishment located in an enclosed building where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing the live performance of activities relating to specified sexual activities or exhibition of specified anatomical areas of live performers, for observation by customer, members or patrons. 
7.  Body painting studio means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the maintaining, operating or offering for compensation the applying of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body is displaying for the customers' view specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Businesses that provide the following described services: 
1.  Adult motel means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public accommodations for consideration for the purpose of viewing closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and rents room accommodations for less than 24 hours at a time. 
2.  Bath house means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment means any live activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance, including, but not limited to, talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling for purposes of photography, painting, sketching, drawing, sculpting or otherwise, removal of clothing or any service offered for amusement on premises where such activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the employee, other employees or patrons or, if the activity, exhibition, performance, display, dance or touching of another with any part of the body or any apparatus or appliance involves a person who is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human genitals, pubic region, vulva, pubic hair, buttocks, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple or the human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Adult entertainment business means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member. 
    Contagious and communicable diseases means those diseases which are set out in the Colorado Code of Regulations. 
    Day care facility means an establishment or business which provides supervision of facilities for preschool children or provides before-school, after-school or summer care for school-age children. 
    Employee, as used in this article, means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, servers, independent contractors and personnel of any description, who work in or at or render any service directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment business. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within the adult entertainment premises, as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises. 
    Museum means any government or nonprofit institution devoted to the procurement, care and display of objects of lasting interest or value which is open to the general public. 
    Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business or adult entertainment premises. 
    Overlay district means a zoning district which is established for the distinct purpose of defining the area in which a type of business or activity can occur or be located and which is a zoning designation implementing zoning regulations and requirements in addition to those applicable to the zoning designation previously assigned to the area defined by the overlay district. 
    Park means any city, county, state or federal public park. 
    Public place means any area generally visible to public view, including streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and automobiles whether moving or not. 
    Premises means any place of business of an adult business which shall include the entire lot and building occupied by the adult business and any other property owned, leased or controlled by the adult business, including any parking areas adjacent to the business which are regularly utilized by employees, entertainers, servers, managers or customers of such business. 
    Regular and substantial portion of its business means 20 percent or more of the gross floor space is devoted to that purpose; 20 percent or more of the retail floor space is devoted to that purpose; 20 percent or more of the gross sales of the business are derived from that purpose; or 20 percent or more of the stock in trade is devoted to that purpose. 
    Residential building means a building which is primarily designed and devoted for human habitation, excluding motels and hotels. 
    Residential district means, for the purposes of this article, areas zoned for residential use and defined as districts inclusive of O-E Open Estates District, R-1 Residence District, R-2 Residence District, R-3 Residence District, M-H Mobile Home District and PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
    Server means any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment business or adult business. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola encircling the nipple, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means sexual conduct, being actual or simulated; acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent object in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-20; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Sec. 30-836. - Establishment of overlay district. 
    A C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be established as follows: 
(1)  The C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be established only by amendment of the zoning maps in accordance with section 30-2 and C.R.S. § 31-23-301 et seq., provided that the planning and zoning commission of the city shall recommend and the city council shall find that the proposed C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District meets all of the requirements without exception described in this article, and further, that the proposed use to be constructed or operated will neither negatively impact nor materially injure property within 500 feet of the proposed district boundaries. 
(2)  No C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be established without the submission and approval of a site development plan. Failure to comply with the plan so approved and established as part of the C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. 
(3)  The C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be established as an overlay district only in districts designated as C-1 Commercial District, C-2 Commercial District or I-1 Industrial District. 
(4)  The C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall be established only if the boundaries of the district are a minimum of 1,000 feet from any church or place of worship, day care facility, park, educational institution, library, museum, community center, residential district, children's amusement park or residential building. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-30; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Sec. 30-837. - Location and site requirements for permitted uses. 
    Any adult business shall meet the following location and site requirements: 
(1)  Not more than two of such uses, excluding any uses having a certificate of legal nonconformance, shall be located within 300 feet of each other as measured in a straight line from the lot line of the affected properties. 
(2)  All access shall be provided from a public street or roadway. 
(3)  The property on which such use is located shall have a minimum of 50 feet of street frontage. 
(4)  The property on which the use is located shall be screened by a solid masonry wall at least six feet in height along the side and rear property lines, provided that the parking lot devoted to said use may be screened by decorative fencing such as wrought iron or brick and need not be screened by a solid masonry wall. 
(5)  The facility on which the use is located and the parking for such facility shall have a front yard setback of 20 feet, a side yard setback of ten feet and a rear yard setback of ten feet, provided that, where the use is proposed in an existing building and parking lot, the setback requirements need not be met. 
(6)  The parking and loading requirements of the city shall be met, provided that the city council may approve a development plan where the parking provided is consistent with solid planning principles in consideration of anticipated use, mass transit accessibility and off-site parking availability. The parking provided on the development plan shall remain available and shall be the basis of a violation if not provided. 
(7)  If the parking and maneuvering space of any parking lot exceeds 7,500 square feet, at least five percent of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area, provided that a credit toward the overall required landscaped area may be provided if the landscaping provides for trees either at least 15 feet in height or at least three inches in diameter for each 2,000 square feet of required landscaped parking area. Additionally, 15 percent of the entire lot area, including parking area, shall be maintained as an open landscaped area with a 20-foot landscape buffer along all street frontage, provided that the city council may approve the development plan where an appropriate alternative is proposed for an existing building and parking lot, such as decorative wrought iron or brick fencing. 
(8)  The facility in which the use is located shall be designed in such a fashion that all openings, entries and windows prevent view into such facilities from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street or other public area, provided that the development plan may provide for openings into such facility where needed for security reasons and provided that no merchandise or pictures can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building. 
(9)  The facility in which such use is located shall be limited to one wall-mounted sign no greater than one square foot of sign area per linear foot of wall length, not to exceed a total of 50 square feet, provided that the city council may approve the location of up to three signs, which collectively shall not exceed a total of 50 square feet in area. The sign shall not flash, blink or move by mechanical means and shall not extend above the roofline of the building. Further, no merchandise or pictures of products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where such merchandise or pictures can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building. No flashing lights or lighting which leaves the impression of motion or movement shall be permitted. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-40; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Sec. 30-838. - Site plan. 
    The site plan accompanying the application for approval of a C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District shall include the following information: 
(1)  The site plan shall be drawn at a scale of one-inch equals 100 feet or larger. 
(2)  The site plan shall delineate the property lines of the proposed project. 
(3)  The site plan shall delineate existing rights-of-way and easements. 
(4)  The site plan shall delineate the general location and width of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way, such as alleys, pedestrian ways and easements. 
(5)  The site plan shall delineate the solid masonry screening as provided in section 30-837(4). 
(6)  The site plan shall delineate the proposed building layout with the front, side and rear building setbacks as required in section 30-837(5). 
(7)  The site plan shall characterize the proposed usage of the building and description of the proposed use by type, character and intensity. 
(8)  The site plan shall delineate the location and number of parking spaces and the proposed parking and loading ratio and its location requirements in accordance with section 30-837(6). 
(9)  The site plan shall delineate all points of access and egress. 
(10)  The site plan shall present, in tabular form, the proposed net density of the use, providing the number of seats, employees or other applicable units of measure. 
(11)  The site plan shall delineate the gross floor area of the building or structure. 
(12)  The site plan shall detail the proposed stages of construction for all land in development and improvements with the proposed district. 
(13)  The site plan shall describe the landscaping to be provided. 
(14)  The site plan shall delineate the proposed exterior lighting. 
(15)  The site plan shall delineate the proposed architectural details of the facility. 
(16)  The site plan shall indicate the signage in accordance with section 30-837(9). 
(17)  The site plan shall set forth any other information necessary for determination of the suitability of the proposed use for the site. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-50; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Sec. 30-839. - Location of uses outside C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District. 
    No adult business shall be permitted except within a C-X Adult Entertainment Overlay District, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 16-24-60; Ord. No. 1045, 2002) 
Secs. 30-840-30-858. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REGULATION AND ZONING OF MEDICAL USE AND PERSONAL USE OF MARIJUANA 

Sec. 30-859. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in section 8-213 are hereby incorporated herein by this reference. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Marijuana social club means any gathering of related or unrelated persons for the purpose of ingestion, by any means, of marijuana for recreational use in any place, whether private or open to the public, and where any persons of any age shall transfer, sell or distribute any amount of marijuana to any other person, with or without remuneration, and where any persons shall openly consume marijuana or marijuana products as part of a social gathering. Said marijuana social clubs shall be deemed an illegally operated business under section 8-214. 
    Marijuana storage facility means any building, vehicle, structure, container or object, natural or manmade, where more than one ounce of marijuana or marijuana products are kept, stored or warehoused. 
(Code 2000, § 16-25-10; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 2013) 
Sec. 30-860. - Zoning of marijuana establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, company or association of persons, for profit or not for profit, to establish or operate any marijuana establishment, marijuana social club, marijuana storage facility, medical marijuana center or medical marijuana dispensary within the city in any zoning district, whether now herein acted or enacted or annexed hereafter. Said acts are prohibited on any plot or parcel of land, platted or unplatted, zoned or unzoned, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 16-25-20; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 2013) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Prior Code. Sections of the Prior Code, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-2 1-2 - 1-4 - 1-7 1-3 1-8 1-4 1-14 1-5 1-20 1-6 1-27 2-1 2-80 2-2 2-56 2-3 2-57 2-4 2-82 2-5 2-82 2-6 2-82 2-7 2-252 2-8 2-253 2-9 2-254 2-10 2-255 2-11 2-256 2-12 2-257 3-5 8-125 3-6 8-126 3-7 8-127 3-8 8-128 3-13 8-129 3-14 8-130 3-15 8-131 3-16 8-132 4-26 4-65 4-27 4-66 5-4 8-147 5-4.1 8-148 6-1 20-92 6-2 20-93 6-3 20-94 6-5 20-125 6-6 20-126 - 20-156 6-8 20-127 6-10 20-155 - 20-156 6-12 20-158 6-13 20-159 6-14 20-156 - 20-160 - 20-161 6-16 20-162 7-l 10-55 7-2 10-56 7-3 2-116 7-4 2-117 7-11 2-118 7-12 2-119 8-4 2-108 8-5 2-109 8-6 2-110 8-7 2-111 8-8 2-112 8-9 2-113 8-10 2-114 9-1 6-78 9A-1 14-167 9A-2 14-167 10-2 6-158 10-4 14-2 10-5 14-3 10-9 6-159 10-10 6-160 10-12 6-161 10-18 6-162 10-22 6-163 12-1 18-1 12-2 18-21 12-4 18-22 12-5 18-23 12-6 18-24 12-7 18-25 12-8 18-26 12-9 18-28 14-1 8-2 14-2 8-6 14-3 8-9 14-7 8-99 - 8-100 - 8-101 14-7.1 8-102 14-8 8-120 14-10 8-121 14-11 8-122 14-12 8-123 14-14 8-124 14-15 8-268 14-17 8-269 14-18 8-270 14-19 8-271 14-21 8-272 14-22 8-273 14-23 8-274 14-26 8-275 14-27 8-276 14-28 8-278 14-29 8-229 14-29.1 8-230 14-29.2 8-231 14-29.3 8-232 14-29.4 8-233 16-4 26-7 16-5 26-8 16-11 26-9 16-12 26-10 16-13 26-11 17-1 14-28 17-4 14-7 17-5 14-165 17-5.1 14-119 17-5.2 14-121 17-5.3 14-120 17-7.1 14-49 17-9 14-80 17-10 14-21 17-18 14-81 17-18.1 14-29 17-19 14-19 17-20 14-50 17-21 14-48 17-23 14-30 17-24 14-26 17-26 14-83 17-28 14-17 17-29 14-13 17-30 14-31 17-31 14-20 - 14-32 17-33 14-4 18-2 20-68 18-2.1 20-69 18-2.2 20-70 18-3 20-71 18-4 20-72 18-5 20-73 18-5.1 20-74 21-1 28-51 21-2 28-52 22-1 20-1 22-2 20-2 22-5 30-662 22-7 20-3 22-8 20-4 22-9 20-5 22-10 20-6 22-11 20-7 22-12 20-8 22-13 20-9 23-1 8-248 23-2 8-249 23-3 8-250 23-4 8-251 23-5 8-252 23-6 8-253 24-1 28-85 24-2 28-53 24-3 28-53 24-4 28-53 24-5 28-53 24-6 28-53 24-7 28-53 24-8 28-53 24-9 28-86 24-10 28-87 24-11 28-88 24-12 28-88 24-14 28-22  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2000 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2000 Code, as supplemented through November, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
2000 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1-20 1-1 1-1-50 1-10 1-1-70 1-11 1-2-10 1-2 1-2-20 1-4 1-2-30 1-5 1-2-40 1-6 1-2-50 1-7 1-3-10 1-8 1-3-20 1-12 1-3-40 1-13 1-3-60 1-14 1-3-70 1-15 1-3-80 1-16 1-3-90 1-17 1-3-100 1-18 1-3-110 1-19 1-3-120 1-20 1-4-50 1-22 1-4-60 1-23 1-5-10 1-24 1-5-20 1-25 1-5-30 1-26 1-6-10 1-27 2-1-10 2-56 2-1-20 2-57 2-1-30 2-58 2-1-40 2-59 2-1-50 2-60 2-2-10 2-79 2-2-20 2-80 2-2-30 2-81 2-2-40 2-82 2-3-10 2-108 2-3-20 2-109 2-3-30 2-110 2-3-40 2-111 2-3-50 2-112 2-3-60 2-113 2-3-70 2-114 2-3-80 2-115 2-4-10 10-17 2-4-20 10-18 2-4-30 10-19 2-4-40 10-20 2-4-50 10-21 2-5-10 10-55 2-5-20 10-56 2-5-30 2-116 2-5-40 2-117 2-5-50 2-118 2-5-60 2-119 2-6-10 2-156 2-6-20 2-157 2-6-40 2-158 2-6-50 2-159 2-6-60 2-160 2-8-10 2-189 2-8-20 2-190 2-8-30 2-191 2-8-40 2-192 2-8-50 2-193 2-9-10 2-225 2-9-20 2-226 2-9-30 2-227 2-9-40 2-228 2-9-50 2-229 2-10-10 2-252 2-10-20 2-253 2-10-30 2-254 2-10-40 2-255 2-10-50 2-256 2-10-60 2-257 2-11-10 2-278 2-11-20 2-279 2-11-30 2-280 2-11-40 2-281 2-12-10 2-311 2-12-20 2-312 2-12-30 2-313 2-12-40 2-314 2-13-10 10-1 2-13-20 10-2 2-14-10 2-332 2-14-20 2-333 2-14-30 2-334 2-14-40 2-335 2-15-10 2-359 2-15-20 2-360 2-15-30 2-361 2-15-40 2-362 2-15-50 2-363 2-15-60 2-364 2-15-70 2-365 2-15-80 2-366 4-1-10 24-2 4-1-20 24-4 4-1-30 24-130 4-1-40 24-131 4-1-50 24-132 4-1-55 24-133 4-1-70 24-30 4-1-80 24-31 4-1-90 24-32 4-1-100 24-135 4-1-110 24-33 4-1-120 24-134 4-1-130 24-65 4-1-140 24-35 4-1-160 24-38 4-1-170 24-66 4-1-180 24-69 4-1-190 24-70 4-1-200 24-71 4-1-210 24-34 4-1-220 24-36 4-1-230 24-37 4-1-240 24-67 4-1-250 24-68 4-1-260 24-72 4-1-280 24-5 - 24-39 4-1-300 24-29 4-2-10 24-154 4-2-20 24-155 4-2-70 24-2 4-2-80 24-156 4-2-90 24-157 4-2-100 24-73 4-3-10 24-105 4-3-20 24-106 4-3-30 24-107 4-3-40 24-108 4-4-10 2-1 5-1-10 28-139 5-1-20 28-140 5-1-30 28-141 5-1-40 28-142 5-1-50 28-143 5-1-60 28-144 5-2-10 28-172 5-2-20 28-173 5-2-30 28-174 5-2-40 28-175 5-2-50 28-176 5-2-60 28-177 5-2-70 28-178 5-2-80 28-179 5-2-90 28-180 5-2-100 28-181 5-2-110 28-182 5-2-120 28-183 5-2-130 28-184 5-2-140 28-185 5-2-150 28-186 5-2-160 28-187 5-2-170 28-188 5-2-180 28-189 5-2-190 28-190 5-2-200 28-191 5-2-210 28-192 5-2-220 28-193 5-2-230 28-194 5-2-240 28-195 5-2-250 28-196 5-2-260 28-197 5-3-10 10-36 5-3-20 10-37 5-3-30 10-38 5-3-40 10-39 5-3-50 10-40 6-1-10 8-1 6-1-20 8-2 6-1-30 8-3 6-1-40 8-4 6-1-50 8-5 6-1-60 8-6 6-1-70 8-7 6-1-80 8-8 6-1-90 8-9 6-1-100 8-10 6-1-110 8-11 6-1-120 8-12 6-1-130 8-13 6-1-140 8-14 6-1-150 8-15 6-2-10 8-96 6-2-20 8-97 6-2-30 8-98 6-2-40 8-99 6-2-50 8-100 6-2-60 8-101 6-2-70 8-102 6-2-80 8-103 6-2-90 8-104 6-2-100 8-105 6-3-10 8-120 6-3-20 8-121 6-3-30 8-122 6-3-40 8-123 6-3-50 8-124 6-3-70 8-125 6-4-10 8-126 6-4-20 8-127 6-4-30 8-128 6-4-40 8-129 6-4-50 8-130 6-4-60 8-131 6-4-70 8-132 6-5-10 8-147 6-5-20 8-148 6-6-10 8-164 6-6-20 8-165 6-6-30 8-166 6-7-10 8-229 6-7-20 8-230 6-7-30 8-231 6-7-40 8-232 6-7-50 8-233 6-8-10 8-248 6-8-20 8-249 6-8-30 8-250 6-8-40 8-251 6-8-50 8-252 6-8-60 8-253 6-9-10 8-268 6-9-20 8-269 6-9-30 8-270 6-9-40 8-271 6-9-50 8-272 6-9-60 8-273 6-9-70 8-274 6-9-80 8-275 6-9-90 8-276 6-9-100 8-277 6-9-110 8-278 6-10-10 8-34 6-10-30 8-35 6-10-210 8-50 6-10-220 8-51 6-10-230 8-52 6-10-240 8-53 6-10-250 8-54 6-10-260 8-55 6-10-270 8-56 6-10-280 8-57 6-10-310 8-62 6-10-320 8-63 6-10-330 8-64 6-10-410 8-79 6-10-420 8-80 6-10-430 8-81 6-11-10 8-195 6-11-20 8-196 6-11-30 8-197 6-11-40 8-198 6-12-10 8-213 6-12-20 8-214 6-12-20 14-66 7-2-20 16-31 7-4-10 18-1 7-4-20 18-21 7-4-30 18-22 7-4-40 18-23 7-4-50 18-24 7-4-60 18-25 7-4-70 18-26 7-4-90 18-27 7-6-10 4-1 7-6-20 4-2 7-7-10 6-311 7-7-20 6-312 7-7-30 6-313 7-7-40 6-314 7-7-50 6-315 7-7-60 6-316 7-7-70 6-317 7-7-80 6-318 7-7-90 6-319 7-1-100 16-4 7-1-110 16-5 7-1-120 16-6 7-1-130 16-7 7-1-150 16-8 7-2-100 16-32 7-2-110 16-33 7-2-140 14-127 7-4-100 18-28 7-6-200 4-23 7-6-210 4-24 7-6-220 4-25 7-6-240 4-26 7-6-250 4-27 7-6-260 4-28 7-6-270 4-28 7-6-280 4-28 7-6-290 4-29 7-6-400 4-113 7-6-410 4-114 7-6-420 4-115 7-6-440 4-116 7-6-450 4-117 7-6-460 4-118 7-6-470 4-119 7-6-500 4-91 7-6-510 4-92 7-6-600 4-47 7-6-610 4-48 7-6-620 4-49 7-6-630 4-50 7-6-640 4-52 7-6-660 4-53 7-6-670 4-54 7-6-680 4-55 7-6-700 4-56 7-6-720 4-57 7-6-730 4-58 7-6-740 4-59 7-6-760 4-60 7-6-770 4-61 7-6-790 4-62 7-6-800 4-65 7-6-810 4-63 7-6-820 4-64 7-6-830 4-66 7-7-100 6-320 7-7-110 6-321 7-7-120 6-322 7-7-130 6-323 7-7-140 6-324 7-7-150 6-325 7-7-160 6-326 8-1-10 26-1 8-1-20 26-2 8-1-30 26-3 8-1-40 26-4 8-1-50 26-5 8-1-60 26-6 8-2-10 26-7 8-2-20 26-8 8-2-30 26-9 8-2-40 26-10 8-2-50 26-11 8-3-10 26-12 10-1-10 14-1 10-1-20 14-79 10-1-30 14-80 10-1-40 14-81 10-1-50 14-82 10-1-60 14-83 10-1-70 14-84 10-1-80 14-85 10-2-10 14-4 10-2-20 14-5 10-2-30 14-6 10-2-40 14-7 10-2-50 14-8 10-2-60 14-9 10-3-10 14-10 10-3-20 14-11 10-3-30 14-12 10-3-40 14-12 10-3-50 14-12 10-3-60 14-12 10-3-70 14-12 10-3-80 14-13 10-3-90 14-14 10-4-10 14-15 10-4-20 14-16 10-4-30 14-17 10-4-50 14-18 10-4-60 14-19 10-4-70 14-20 10-4-80 14-21 10-5-10 14-119 10-5-20 14-120 10-5-30 14-121 10-5-40 14-122 10-5-50 14-123 10-5-60 14-124 10-5-70 14-125 10-5-80 14-126 10-6-10 14-47 10-6-20 14-48 10-6-30 14-49 10-6-40 14-50 10-6-50 14-51 10-6-60 14-52 10-6-70 14-53 10-6-80 14-54 10-7-10 14-100 10-7-20 14-101 10-7-30 14-102 10-7-40 14-103 10-7-50 14-104 10-8-10 14-164 10-8-20 14-165 10-8-30 14-166 10-8-40 14-167 10-8-50 14-168 10-9-10 14-146 10-9-20 14-147 10-9-30 14-148 10-9-40 4-51 10-9-50 14-149 10-10-10 14-128 10-10-20 14-129 10-10-30 14-130 10-10-40 14-131 10-10-50 14-132 10-11-10 14-28 10-11-20 14-29 10-11-30 14-30 10-11-40 14-31 10-11-50 14-32 10-12-10 14-56 10-12-20 14-57 10-12-30 14-58 10-12-40 14-59 10-12-50 14-60 10-12-60 14-61 10-12-70 14-62 10-12-80 14-63 10-12-90 14-64 10-4-100 14-22 - 16-34 10-4-110 14-23 10-4-130 14-24 10-4-140 14-25 10-4-150 14-26 10-4-160 14-27 10-6-110 14-55 11-1-10 20-1 11-1-20 20-2 11-1-50 30-662 11-1-70 20-3 11-1-80 20-4 11-1-90 20-5 11-2-10 20-39 11-3-20 20-68 11-3-30 20-69 11-3-40 20-70 11-3-50 20-71 11-3-60 20-72 11-3-70 20-73 11-3-80 20-74 11-4-10 20-92 11-4-20 20-93 11-4-30 20-94 11-4-50 20-95 11-4-60 20-96 11-4-70 20-97 11-1-100 20-6 11-1-110 20-7 11-1-120 20-8 11-1-130 20-9 11-1-140 20-10 11-4-200 20-125 11-4-210 20-126 11-4-220 20-127 11-4-240 20-128 11-4-300 20-155 11-4-310 20-156 11-4-320 20-157 11-4-330 20-158 11-4-340 20-159 11-4-350 20-160 11-4-360 20-161 11-4-370 20-162 11-4-400 20-193 11-4-410 20-194 11-4-420 20-195 11-4-430 20-196 11-4-440 20-197 11-4-450 20-198 11-4-460 20-199 13-1-10 28-120 13-1-20 28-50 13-1-30 28-51 13-1-40 28-52 13-1-50 28-80 13-1-60 28-81 13-1-70 28-82 13-1-80 28-83 13-1-90 28-84 13-2-10 28-85 13-2-20 28-53 13-2-30 28-86 13-2-40 28-87 13-2-50 28-88 13-2-60 28-19 13-2-70 28-20 13-2-80 28-21 13-2-90 28-22 15-1-10 2-21 15-1-20 2-22 15-1-30 2-23 15-1-40 2-24 15-1-50 2-25 15-1-60 2-26 16-1-10 30-1 16-1-20 30-2 16-1-30 30-3 16-1-40 30-4 16-1-50 30-5 16-1-60 30-6 16-1-70 30-7 16-1-80 30-8 16-1-90 30-9 16-2-10 30-69 16-2-20 30-70 16-2-30 30-71 16-2-40 30-72 16-2-50 30-73 16-2-60 30-74 16-2-70 30-75 16-2-80 30-76 16-2-90 30-77 16-3-10 30-98 16-3-20 30-99 16-3-30 30-100 16-3-40 30-101 16-3-50 30-102 16-3-60 30-103 16-3-70 30-104 16-3-80 30-105 16-3-90 30-106 16-3-100 30-107 16-3-110 30-108 16-3-120 30-109 16-4-10 30-132 16-4-20 30-133 16-4-30 30-134 16-4-40 30-135 16-4-50 30-136 16-4-60 30-137 16-4-70 30-138 16-4-80 30-139 16-4-90 30-140 16-4-100 30-141 16-4-110 30-142 16-4-120 30-143 16-5-10 30-170 16-5-20 30-171 16-5-30 30-172 16-5-40 30-173 16-5-50 30-174 16-5-60 30-175 16-5-70 30-176 16-5-80 30-177 16-5-90 30-178 16-5-100 30-179 16-5-110 30-180 16-5-120 30-181 16-6-10 30-201 16-6-20 30-202 16-6-30 30-203 16-6-40 30-204 16-6-50 30-205 16-6-60 30-206 16-6-70 30-207 16-6-80 30-208 16-6-90 30-209 16-6-100 30-210 16-6-110 30-211 16-6-120 30-212 16-6-130 30-213 16-6-140 30-214 16-7-10 30-237 16-7-20 30-238 16-7-30 30-239 16-7-40 30-240 16-7-50 30-241 16-7-60 30-242 16-7-70 30-243 16-7-80 30-244 16-7-90 30-245 16-7-100 30-246 16-7-110 30-247 16-7-120 30-248 16-7-130 30-249 16-7-140 30-250 16-8-10 30-279 16-8-20 30-280 16-8-30 30-281 16-8-40 30-282 16-8-50 30-283 16-8-60 30-284 16-8-70 30-285 16-8-80 30-286 16-8-90 30-287 16-8-100 30-288 16-8-110 30-289 16-8-120 30-290 16-8-130 30-291 16-8-140 30-292 16-9-10 30-318 16-9-20 30-319 16-9-30 30-320 16-9-40 30-321 16-9-50 30-322 16-9-60 30-323 16-9-70 30-324 16-10-10 30-352 16-10-20 30-353 16-10-30 30-354 16-10-40 30-355 16-10-50 30-356 16-10-60 30-357 16-10-70 30-358 16-10-80 30-359 16-10-90 30-360 16-10-100 30-361 16-10-110 30-362 16-10-120 30-363 16-10-130 30-364 16-10-140 30-365 16-10-150 30-366 16-1-100 30-10 16-1-110 30-11 16-11-10 30-391 16-11-20 30-392 16-11-30 30-393 16-11-40 30-394 16-11-50 30-395 16-11-60 30-396 16-11-70 30-397 16-11-80 30-398 16-11-90 30-399 16-11-100 30-400 16-11-110 30-401 16-11-120 30-402 16-11-130 30-403 16-11-140 30-404 16-12-10 30-422 16-12-20 30-423 16-12-30 30-424 16-12-40 30-425 16-12-50 30-426 16-12-60 30-427 16-12-70 30-428 16-12-80 30-429 16-12-90 30-430 16-12-100 30-431 16-12-110 30-432 16-12-120 30-433 16-12-130 30-434 16-12-140 30-435 16-13-10 30-454 16-13-20 30-455 16-13-30 30-456 16-13-40 30-457 16-13-50 30-458 16-13-60 30-459 16-13-70 30-460 16-13-80 30-461 16-13-90 30-462 16-13-100 30-463 16-13-110 30-464 16-13-120 30-465 16-13-130 30-466 16-13-140 30-467 16-14-10 30-488 16-14-20 30-489 16-14-30 30-490 16-14-40 30-491 16-14-50 30-492 16-14-60 30-493 16-14-70 30-494 16-14-80 30-495 16-14-90 30-496 16-14-100 30-497 16-14-110 30-498 16-14-120 30-499 16-14-130 30-500 16-15-10 30-524 16-15-20 30-525 16-15-30 30-526 16-15-40 30-527 16-15-50 30-528 16-15-60 30-529 16-15-70 30-530 16-15-80 30-531 16-15-90 30-532 16-15-100 30-533 16-15-110 30-534 16-15-120 30-535 16-15-130 30-536 16-16-10 30-566 16-16-20 30-567 16-16-30 30-568 16-16-40 30-569 16-16-50 30-570 16-16-60 30-571 16-16-70 30-572 16-16-80 30-573 16-16-90 30-574 16-16-100 30-575 16-16-110 30-576 16-16-120 30-577 16-16-130 30-578 16-16-140 30-579 16-17-10 30-607 16-17-20 30-608 16-17-30 30-609 16-17-40 30-610 16-17-50 30-611 16-17-60 30-612 16-17-70 30-613 16-17-80 30-614 16-17-90 30-615 16-17-100 30-616 16-17-110 30-617 16-17-120 30-618 16-17-130 30-619 16-17-140 30-620 16-17-150 30-621 16-17-160 30-622 16-17-170 30-623 16-17-180 30-624 16-17-190 30-625 16-17-200 30-626 16-17-210 30-627 16-17-220 30-628 16-18-10 30-660 16-18-20 30-661 16-18-30 30-663 16-18-40 30-664 16-18-50 30-665 16-19-10 6-1 16-19-20 6-2 16-19-30 6-3 16-19-40 6-4 16-19-50 6-5 16-19-60 6-6 16-20-10 30-689 16-20-20 30-690 16-20-30 30-691 16-20-40 30-692 16-20-50 30-693 16-20-60 30-694 16-20-70 30-695 16-20-80 30-696 16-20-90 30-697 16-20-100 30-698 16-20-110 30-699 16-20-120 30-700 16-20-130 30-701 16-21-10 30-731 16-21-20 30-732 16-21-30 30-733 16-21-40 30-734 16-21-50 30-735 16-21-60 30-736 16-21-70 30-737 16-21-80 30-738 16-22-10 30-760 16-22-20 30-761 16-22-30 30-762 16-22-40 30-763 16-22-50 30-764 16-22-60 30-765 16-22-70 30-766 16-22-80 30-767 16-22-90 30-768 16-23-10 12-1 16-23-20 12-2 16-23-30 12-3 16-23-40 12-4 16-23-50 12-5 16-23-60 12-6 16-23-70 12-7 16-23-100 12-8 16-23-110 12-9 16-23-120 12-10 16-23-130 12-11 16-23-140 12-12 16-23-150 12-13 16-23-160 12-14 16-23-170 12-15 16-24-10 30-834 16-24-20 30-835 16-24-30 30-836 16-24-40 30-837 16-24-50 30-838 16-24-60 30-839 16-25-10 30-859 16-25-20 30-860 17-1-10 22-1 17-1-20 22-2 17-1-30 22-3 17-1-40 22-4 17-1-50 22-5 17-1-60 22-6 17-2-10 22-31 17-2-20 22-32 17-2-30 22-33 17-2-40 22-34 17-2-50 22-35 17-2-60 22-36 17-2-70 22-37 17-3-10 22-63 17-3-20 22-64 17-3-30 22-65 17-3-40 22-66 17-3-50 22-67 17-3-60 22-68 17-3-70 22-69 17-3-80 22-70 17-3-90 22-71 17-3-100 22-72 17-3-110 22-73 17-3-120 22-74 18-1-10 6-49 18-1-20 6-50 18-1-30 6-51 18-1-40 6-52 18-2-10 6-78 18-2-20 6-79 18-2-30 6-80 18-3-10 6-104 18-3-20 6-105 18-3-30 6-106 18-4-10 6-126 18-4-20 6-127 18-4-30 6-128 18-5-10 6-155 18-5-20 6-156 18-5-30 6-157 18-5-50 6-158 18-5-60 14-2 18-5-70 14-3 18-5-80 6-159 18-5-90 6-160 18-5-100 6-161 18-5-110 6-162 18-5-130 6-163 18-6-10 6-182 18-6-20 6-183 18-6-30 6-184 18-7-10 6-207 18-7-20 6-208 18-7-30 6-209 18-8-10 16-1 18-8-20 16-2 18-8-30 16-3 18-9-10 6-252 18-9-20 6-253 18-9-40 6-254 18-10-10 6-272 18-10-20 6-273 18-10-30 6-274 18-10-40 6-275 18-10-50 6-276 18-10-60 6-277 18-10-70 6-278 18-10-80 6-279 18-10-90 6-280 18-10-100 6-281  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 2 1 6-158 2 6-158 Ord. No. 19 1 20-125 2 20-126 - 20-156 5 20-127 Ord. No. 21 2 20-8 3 20-9 4 20-4 5 20-4 6 20-6 7 20-5 8 20-7 9 20-7 10 20-7 11 20-7 12 20-7 13 20-8 16 20-4 Ord. No. 36 1 14-48 Ord. No. 46 1 28-22 Ord. No. 74 1 20-8 Ord. No. 87 1 14-21 4 14-4 6 14-19 7 14-4 8 14-17 11 14-165 12 14-80, 14-81 13 14-83 Ord. No. 112 1 20-1, 20-2 2 20-1 4 14-31 5 14-7 - 14-20 - 14-32 6 14-2 7 20-3 Ord. No. 149 2 2-56 8 2-80 9 1-27 Ord. No. 166 1 30-662 2 30-662 3 30-662 Ord. No. 191 1 14-28 Ord. No. 237 1 20-155, 20-156 3 20-158 4 20-155, 20-156 5 20-159 6 20-159 7 20-156 8 20-156 - 20-160, 20-161 10 20-156 11 20-156 13 20-162 Ord. No. 260 1 8-2 2 8-9 3 8-268 11 8-269, 8-270 12 8-123 14 8-121 15 8-122 17 8-273 18 8-272 19 8-124 32 8-274 33 8-274 34 8-274 35 8-274 36 8-274 39 8-271 41 8-6 Ord. No. 270 2 8-270 Ord. No. 286 1 28-51 Ord. No. 294 1 8-120 Ord. No. 303 1 14-30 Ord. No. 304 2 6-160 4 6-161 11 6-162 16 6-163 Ord. No. 328 1 8-249 2 8-250 3 8-252 4 8-251 - 8-253 Ord. No. 338 1 20-92 2 20-68 - 20-93 3 20-71 - 20-94 5 20-72 Ord. No. 340 1 8-125 Ord. No. 346 1 8-248 Ord. No. 354 1 8-126 2 8-127 3 8-127 4 8-128 9 8-131 10 8-131 11 8-132 12 8-130 13 8-129 Ord. No. 376 11 14-3 Ord. No. 383 1 14-48 2 14-48 Ord. No. 416 1 8-120 Ord. No. 419 1 28-86 2 28-86 3 28-53 4 28-53 - 28-87 5 28-53 6 28-88 7 28-88 Ord. No. 426 1 8-268 Ord. No. 432 1 8-274 Ord. No. 434 1 14-50 Ord. No. 443 6 26-9 7 26-9 9 26-10, 26-11 Ord. No. 448 4 26-8 Ord. No. 449 2 28-52 Ord. No. 450 1 10-56 2 10-55 3 2-116 4 2-117 9 2-119 12 2-118 Ord. No. 451 1 2-110 2 2-111 3 2-112 4 2-113 5 2-108 6 2-109 7 2-114 Ord. No. 457 1 28-85 2 28-85 Ord. No. 459 1 28-52 Ord. No. 470 1 14-13 2 14-13 3 14-13 Ord. No. 471 1 28-86 2 28-53 Ord. No. 488 6 26-9 7 26-9 10 26-10, 26-11 Ord. No. 500 1 14-26 Ord. No. 511 2 28-86 Ord. No. 517 4 20-73 Ord. No. 525 1 26-7 2 26-7 3 26-7 Ord. No. 526 1 6-162 Ord. No. 543 1 14-167 Ord. No. 547 - 6-162 Ord. No. 550 1 14-29 2 14-29 Ord. No. 553 1 14-19 Ord. No. 556 1 28-86 Ord. No. 558 1 26-9 Ord. No. 561 1 8-268 2 8-268 3 8-268 4 8-268 5 8-268 Ord. No. 574 1 26-9 Ord. No. 577 1968 1 24-2 2 24-4 3 24-130 4 24-131 5 24-132 7 24-30 8 24-31 9 24-32 10 24-135 11 24-33 12 24-134 13 24-65 14 24-35 16 24-38 17 24-66 18 24-69 19 24-70 20 24-71 21 24-34 22 24-36 23 24-37 24 24-67 25 24-68 26 24-72 28 24-5 - 24-39 30 24-29 31 24-154 32 24-155 37 24-2 38 24-156 39 24-157 40 24-73 Ord. No. 579 1968 I 2-156 II 2-157 IV 2-158 V 2-159, 2-160 Ord. No. 580 1 20-74 2 20-74 Ord. No. 581 1 8-99-8-101 2 8-99-8-101 3 8-99-8-101 Ord. No. 586 1 2-56 2 2-56 3 2-56 Ord. No. 591 1 6-162 Ord. No. 606 1 18-1 2 18-21 4 18-22 6 18-23 7 18-24 8 18-25 9 18-26 10 18-28 Ord. No. 608 1 14-119 2 14-121 3 14-120 Ord. No. 609 2 6-78 Ord. No. 617 1 28-86 Ord. No. 618 1 2-57 Ord. No. 621 3 18-26 Ord. No. 625 1 14-49 2 14-49 Ord. No. 643 1 20-69 2 20-70 Ord. No. 644 1 4-65 2 4-66 3 4-66 Ord. No. 656 1 14-167 Ord. No. 664 1974 2 24-131 3 24-132 4 24-33 5 24-154 8 24-134 Ord. No. 679 1 28-86 Ord. No. 686 1 2-82 2 2-82 3 2-82 Ord. No. 700 1 8-102 Ord. No. 707 2 18-1 6 18-1 7 18-1 Ord. No. 728 1 28-86 Ord. No. 748 13 8-147 14 8-148 Ord. No. 751 1 8-273 Ord. No. 754 1980 2 24-131 3 24-132 4 24-33 5 24-154 Ord. No. 757 1 14-119 2 14-121 Ord. No. 769 1 20-126 - 20-156 - 20-160, 20-161 Ord. No. 775 1 28-86 Ord. No. 791 1 28-85 2 28-85 3 28-85 4 28-85 Ord. No. 798 1 8-229 2 8-230 4 8-232 5 8-232 6 8-233 Ord. No. 806 1 6-159 3 6-159 Ord. No. 808 4 8-120 5 8-124 7 8-271 8 8-272 9 8-274 Ord. No. 814 1 8-229 3 8-231 Ord. No. 823 1 26-9 2 26-9 3 26-9 Ord. No. 839 1986 200 30-2 300 30-3 400 30-4 510 30-5 520 30-6 530 30-7 540 30-8 550 30-9 560 30-10 570 30-11 605.01 30-69 605.02 30-70 605.03 30-71 605.04 30-72 605.05 30-73 605.06 30-74 605.07 30-75 605.08 30-76 610.01 30-98 610.02 30-99 610.03 30-100 610.03.16 30-101 610.04 30-102 610.05 30-103 610.05.02 30-104 610.06 30-105 610.07 30-106 610.08 30-107 610.09 30-108 610.10 30-109 615.01 30-132 615.02 30-133 615.03 30-134 615.04 30-136 615.05 30-137 615.06 30-138 615.07 30-139 615.08 30-140 615.09 30-141 615.10 30-142 615.11 30-143 620.01 30-170 620.02 30-171 620.03 30-172, 30-173 620.04 30-174 620.05 30-175 620.06 30-176 620.07 30-177 620.08 30-178 620.09 30-179 620.10 30-180 620.11 30-181 625.01 30-201 625.02 30-202 625.03 30-203 625.03.07 30-204 625.04 30-205 625.05 30-206 625.06 30-207 625.07 30-208 625.08 30-209 625.09 30-210 625.10 30-211 625.11 30-212 625.12 30-213 630.01 30-237 630.02 30-238 630.03 30-239 630.03.11 30-240 630.03.12 30-241 630.04 30-242 630.05 30-243 630.06.02 30-244 630.07 30-245 630.08 30-246 630.09 30-247 630.10 30-248 630.11 30-249 630.12 30-250 635.01 30-279 635.02 30-280 635.03 30-281 635.03.11 30-282 635.03.12 30-283 635.04 30-284 635.05 30-285 635.06 30-286 635.07 30-287 635.08 30-288 635.09 30-289 635.10 30-290 635.11 30-291 635.12 30-292 640.01 30-318 640.02 30-319 640.03 30-320 640.04 30-321 640.05 30-322 640.06 30-323 640.11 30-362 645.01 30-352 645.02 30-353 645.03 30-354 645.04 30-355 645.05 30-356 645.06 30-357 645.07 30-358 645.08 30-359 645.09 30-360 645.10 30-361 645.12 30-363 645.13 30-364 645.14 30-365 650.01 30-391 650.02 30-392 650.03 30-393 650.03.07 30-394 650.04 30-395 650.05 30-396 650.06 30-397 650.07 30-398 650.08 30-399 650.09 30-400 650.10 30-401 650.11 30-402 650.12 30-403 655.01 30-422 655.02 30-423 655.03 30-424 655.03.09 30-425 655.04 30-426 655.05 30-427 655.06 30-428 655.07 30-429 655.08 30-430 655.09 30-431 655.10 30-432 655.11 30-433 655.12 30-434 660.01 30-454 660.02 30-455 660.03 30-456 660.03.16 30-457 660.04 30-458 660.05 30-459 660.06 30-460 660.07 30-461 660.08 30-462 660.09 30-463 660.10 30-464 660.11 30-465 660.12 30-466 665.01 30-488 665.02 30-489 665.03 30-490 665.03.08 30-491 665.04 30-492 665.05 30-493 665.06 30-494 665.07 30-495 665.08 30-496 665.09 30-497 665.10 30-498 665.11 30-499 665.12 30-500 670.01 30-524 670.02 30-525 670.03 30-526 670.03.08 30-527 670.04 30-528 670.05 30-529 670.06 30-530 670.07 30-531 670.08 30-532 670.09 30-533 670.10 30-534 670.11 30-535 670.12 30-536 675.01 30-566 675.02 30-567 675.03 30-568 675.03.01 30-569 675.04 30-570 675.05 30-571 675.06 30-572 675.07 30-573 675.08 30-574 675.09 30-575 675.10 30-576 675.11 30-577 675.12 30-578 675.13 30-579 700.01 30-607 700.02 30-608 700.03 30-609 700.04 30-610 700.05 30-611 700.06 30-612 700.07 30-613 700.08 30-614 700.09 30-615 700.10 30-616 700.11 30-617 700.12 30-618 700.13 30-619 700.14 30-620 700.15 30-621 700.16 30-622 700.17 30-623 700.18 30-624 700.19 30-625 800.01 30-660 800.02 30-661 800.03 30-663 800.05 30-665 900.01 6-1 900.02 6-2 900.03 6-3 900.04 6-4 900.05 6-5 900.06 6-6 1000 30-701 1100.01 30-689 1100.02 30-690 1100.03 30-691 1100.04 30-692 1100.05 30-693 1100.05.01 30-694 1100.05.02 30-695 1100.05.03 30-696 1100.05.04 30-697 1100.05.05 30-698 1100.06 30-699 1200 30-731 1300.01 30-732 1300.02 30-733 1300.3 30-734 1300.04 30-735 1400 30-736 1500 30-737 1600 30-738 1800 30-1 Ord. No. 840 1986 art. I 22-1, 22-2 art. II 22-3 art. III 22-4-22-6 art. IV 22-32-22-36 art. V 22-37 art. VI 22-31 - 22-63-22-67 art. VII 22-68 art. VIII 22-69-22-72 art. IX 22-73 art. X 22-74 Ord. No. 843 1 2-252 2 2-253 3 2-254 4 2-255 5 2-256 6 2-257 Ord. No. 845 1986 1 30-622 - 30-625 Ord. No. 856 1988 2 14-12 3 14-12 Ord. No. 857 1988 1 14-11 2 14-11 Ord. No. 859 1988 4-1 4-1 4-2 4-113-4-119 4-3 4-23-4-29 4-4 4-91, 4-92 4-5 4-47-4-50 - 4-52-4-61 - 4-65, 4-66 4-7 4-2 Ord. No. 865 1989 1 2-278 2 2-279 3 2-280 4 2-281 Ord. No. 869 1989 1 28-52 2 28-80 3 28-81 4 28-82 5 28-83 6 28-84 7 28-84 Ord. No. 870 1989 - 2-56 Ord. No. 872 1989 - 28-50 Ord. No. 877 1989 1 28-19 2 28-19 3 28-20 7 28-21 Ord. No. 881 1990 2 24-132 - 24-154 Ord. No. 882 1990 1 30-394 - 30-425 Ord. No. 889 1991 1 2-157 Ord. No. 890 1991 1 30-1 2 30-101 - 30-135 - 30-173 - 30-203, 30-204 - 30-283 - 30-239 - 30-281 - 30-320 - 30-353 - 30-394 - 30-425 - 30-457 - 30-491 - 30-527 - 30-569 2 30-283 Ord. No. 891 1991 1 2-225 2 2-226 3 2-227 4 2-228 Ord. No. 893 1991 1 30-664 Ord. No. 895 1991 1 2-229 Ord. No. 896 1991 1 30-394 - 30-425 - 30-457 Ord. No. 905 1992 4 24-157 Ord. No. 907 1992 - 30-1 Ord. No. 915 1993 1 30-457 2 30-1 3 30-1 4 30-690 5 30-693 6 30-695, 30-695 - 30-697, 30-698 7 30-699 8 30-700 Ord. No. 916 1993 1 10-36 2 10-37 3 10-38 4 10-39 5 10-40 Ord. No. 917 1993 1 24-2 2 24-4 3 24-130 4 24-130 5 24-134 6 24-65 7 24-37 8 24-67 9 24-68 10 24-155 14 24-68 42 24-105 43 24-106 44 24-107 45 24-108 Ord. No. 920 1993 1 2-58 2 2-58 Ord. No. 921 1993 - 30-1 Ord. No. 922 1993 1 2-59 Ord. No. 924 1993 1 18-27 Ord. No. 925 1993 2 14-47 - 14-53 4 14-54 Ord. No. 927 1993 1 30-394 - 30-425 Ord. No. 932 1993 1 1-22 2 1-22 3 1-22 4 1-22 Ord. No. 940 1994 1 14-10 2 14-10 Ord. No. 941 1994 1 2-256 Ord. No. 946 1995 1 28-139 2 28-140 3 28-141 4 28-142 5 28-143 6 28-143 7 28-144 Ord. No. 947 1995 1 30-527 - 30-1 Ord. No. 950 1995 1 28-172 2 28-173 3 28-174 4 28-175 5 28-176 6 28-177 7 28-178 8 28-179 9 28-180 10 28-181 11 28-182 12 28-183 13 28-184 14 28-185 15 28-186 16 28-187 17 28-188 18 28-189 19 28-190 20 28-191 21 28-192 22 28-193 23 28-194 24 28-195 25 28-196 26 28-197 Ord. No. 953 1995 2 20-96 5 20-97 Ord. No. 956 1995 1 2-252 Ord. No. 958 1 26-1 2 26-1 3 26-2 5 26-3 8 26-4 Ord. No. 959 1996 1 10-1 2 10-2 Ord. No. 960 1996 - 2-115 Ord. No. 961 1996 1 2-157 Ord. No. 962 1996 - 14-147 Ord. No. 963 1996 1 28-50 Ord. No. 965 1996 1 10-1 2 10-2 Ord. No. 967 1996 1 1-23 2 1-23 Ord. No. 968 1996 2 20-39 Ord. No. 971 1996 2 14-100 3 14-101 4 14-102 5 14-103 6 14-104 Ord. No. 972 1996 1 30-239 2 30-281 3 30-1 4 30-1 5 30-1 Ord. No. 973 1996 1 30-490 Ord. No. 974 1997 1 8-147 2 8-148 Ord. No. 975 1997 1 6-49 - 6-51 3 6-126 4 6-104 5 6-157 6 6-252 7 6-253 9 6-254 Ord. No. 978 1997 2 6-51 Ord. No. 979 1997 1 22-4 2 22-5 3 22-71 Ord. No. 980 1997 1 2-115 2 2-115 3 2-115 4 2-115 Ord. No. 981 1997 1 2-189 2 2-190 3 2-191 4 2-192 5 2-193 Ord. No. 983 1997 - 2-79 Ord. No. 984 1997 1 26-2 Ord. No. 985 1997 1 2-311 2 2-312 3 2-313 4 2-314 Ord. No. 987 1997 1 8-5 2 8-5 3 8-5 4 8-5 5 8-5 Ord. No. 991 1998 - 14-148 1 28-120 2 28-120 3 28-120 4 28-120 Ord. No. 996 1998 3 2-313 Ord. No. 1001 1999 1 14-164 2 14-167 Ord. No. 1004 1999 1 30-205 2 30-239 3 30-281 4 30-1 Ord. No. 1008 1999 2 8-164 3 8-165 4 8-166 Ord. No. 1013 1999 - 30-760-30-768 Ord. No. 1014 1999 1 2-313 Ord. No. 1017 2000 - 8-97 Ord. No. 1018 2000 1 14-147 2 14-147 Ord. No. 1019 2000 2 14-15 Ord. No. 1022 2000 1 1-1, 1-2 - 1-4-1-8 - 1-10-1-20 - 1-22-1-26 - 2-1 - 2-21-2-26 - 2-56-2-60 - 2-79 - 2-81, 2-82 - 2-108, 2-109 - 2-111, 2-112 - 2-114-2-117 - 2-119 - 2-156, 2-157 - 2-159 - 2-189 - 2-191-2-193 - 2-225-2-229 - 2-252-2-254 - 2-278-2-281 - 2-311-2-313 - 4-1, 4-2 - 4-23 - 4-28, 4-29 - 4-51 - 4-61 - 4-63 - 4-65 - 4-91, 4-92 - 4-114-4-116 - 4-118 - 6-3 - 6-6 - 6-49-6-52 - 6-78-6-80 - 6-104-6-106 - 6-126-6-128 - 6-155-6-162 - 6-252-6-254 - 8-1-8-15 - 8-96-8-104 - 8-120-8-132 - 8-147, 8-148 - 8-166 - 8-229 - 8-231-8-233 - 8-248 - 8-250-8-252 - 8-268-8-278 - 10-1 - 10-17-10-20 - 10-36 - 10-39, 10-40 - 10-55, 10-56 - 14-1 - 14-4-14-14 - 14-16 - 14-18-14-20 - 14-22-14-25 - 14-27, 14-28 - 14-30, 14-31 - 14-47-14-55 - 14-79-14-85 - 14-100, 14-101 - 14-103, 14-104 - 14-119-14-125 - 14-146-14-149 - 14-164-14-168 - 16-4-16-8 - 16-31-16-34 - 18-1 - 18-21, 18-22 - 18-26, 18-27 - 20-1 - 20-4-20-7 - 20-10 - 20-39 - 20-69-20-72 - 20-92 - 20-94 - 20-96, 20-97 - 20-126, 20-127 - 22-1-22-6 - 22-31, 22-32 - 22-34, 22-35 - 22-37 - 22-63-22-74 - 24-2 - 24-4, 24-5 - 24-30 - 24-34-24-37 - 24-39 - 24-65, 24-66 - 24-68-24-72 - 24-105 - 24-107, 24-108 - 24-132 - 24-134 - 24-154-24-157 - 26-1-26-3 - 26-5 - 26-8-26-11 - 28-19, 28-20 - 28-50 - 28-52, 28-53 - 28-80-28-86 - 28-88 - 28-120 - 28-142 - 28-172 - 28-174-28-176 - 28-178 - 28-181 - 28-184 - 28-188, 28-189 - 28-191 - 30-1-30-9 - 30-70, 30-71 - 30-99-30-104 - 30-106 - 30-132-30-140 - 30-170-30-178 - 30-201-30-210 - 30-237-30-240 - 30-242-30-247 - 30-279-30-282 - 30-284-30-289 - 30-319, 30-320 - 30-352 - 30-354-30-362 - 30-365 - 30-391-30-400 - 30-422-30-431 - 30-454-30-458 - 30-460 - 30-462, 30-463 - 30-489-30-497 - 30-525-30-527 - 30-529-30-533 - 30-566-30-568 - 30-570 - 30-572, 30-573 - 30-576 - 30-613 - 30-621-30-624 - 30-660-30-662 - 30-664 - 30-693 - 30-695-30-701 - 30-732-30-734 Ord. No. 1030 2001 - 22-70 Ord. No. 1031 2001 - 20-193-20-199 Ord. No. 1032 2001 1 24-155 2 24-2 Ord. No. 1034 2001 - 6-311-6-326 Ord. No. 1035 2001 1 30-77 2 30-214 3 30-324 4 30-366 5 30-404 6 30-435 - 30-467 Ord. No. 1036 2001 - 20-195, 20-196 Ord. No. 1039 2001 - 2-332-2-335 Ord. No. 1040 2002 - 30-611 Ord. No. 1042 2002 - 2-359-2-366 Ord. No. 1043 2002 1 20-74 Ord. No. 1044 2002 - 8-105 Ord. No. 1045 2002 - 30-834-30-839 Ord. No. 1046 2002 - 8-34, 8-35 - 8-50-8-57 - 8-62-8-64 - 8-79-8-81 Ord. No. 1048 2002 - 30-665 Ord. No. 1049 2002 4 24-133 5 24-132 6 24-33 7 24-154 Ord. No. 1050 2002 - 30-1 Ord. No. 1052 2002 1 6-49 - 6-51 2 6-51 - 6-106 - 6-128 - 6-184 - 6-209 - 16-3 - 6-157 3 6-182-6-184 - 6-208 4 6-126-6-128 5 6-207 - 6-209 6 6-104-6-106 7 16-1-16-3 8 6-155-6-157 Ord. No. 1055 2002 - 30-491 Ord. No. 1056 2002 1 8-54 2 8-62 3 8-62 4 8-63 Ord. No. 1057 2003 - 14-128-14-132 Ord. No. 1059 2003 - 28-19, 28-20 Ord. No. 1060 2003 1 30-100 Ord. No. 1061 2003 1 26-1-26-5 Ord. No. 1067 2003 1 8-148 Ord. No. 1069 2004 1 30-568 Ord. No. 1077 2004 1 8-105 2 8-105 Ord. No. 1082 2005 1 2-56 2 2-56 3 2-56 4 2-56 5 2-56 Ord. No. 1084 2006 1 24-37 Ord. No. 1085 2006 1 2-157 Ord. No. 1088 2006 1 30-241 2 30-283 3 30-1 Ord. No. 1089 2006 1 30-664 Ord. No. 1093 2006 1 30-661 2 30-661 3 30-661 4 30-664 Ord. No. 1094 2006 1 6-272-6-281 Ord. No. 1099 2007 1 6-49-6-51 Ord. No. 1100 2007 1 6-182-6-184 Ord. No. 1101 2007 1 6-104-6-106 Ord. No. 1102 2007 1 6-207-6-209 Ord. No. 1103 2007 1 6-126-6-128 Ord. No. 1104 2007 1 16-1-16-3 Ord. No. 1105 2007 1 6-155-6-157 Ord. No. 1112 2007 1 26-12 Ord. No. 1119 2008 1 6-254 Ord. No. 1123 2009 1 20-95 3 20-128 4 20-157 Ord. No. 1125 2009 1 30-172 Ord. No. 1128 2009 1 30-241 2 30-283 Ord. No. 1129 2009 1 14-126 2 14-127 Ord. No. 1139 2009 1 10-21 Ord. No. 1053 2010 1 30-1 2 30-1 3 30-1 Ord. No. 1150 2010 1 4-2 3 4-62 Ord. No. 1152 2010 1 24-2 2 24-2 3 24-134 Ord. No. 1153 2010 4 30-626 Ord. No. 1155 2010 1 14-56-14-63 Ord. No. 1157 2010 1 6-252 Ord. No. 1165 2010 1 8-195-8-198 2 30-1 3 30-1 4 30-1 5 30-627 6 30-628 Ord. No. 1166 2010 1 14-56-14-63 Ord. No. 1174 2012 - 26-1 - 26-3-26-7 Ord. No. 1182 2013 1 8-213, 8-214 - 14-66 Ord. No. 1184 2013 1 30-859, 30-860 Ord. No. 1194 2015 3 12-1-12-15 Ord. No. 1195 2015 pt. 1 14-59 pt. 2 14-62 pt. 3 14-63 pt. 4 14-64 Ord. No. 1196 2015 1 4-1 2 4-1 3 4-64 4 4-66 Ord. No. 1197 2015 pt. 1 26-7 Ord. No. 1201 2016 - 12-6 Ord. No. 1203 2016 - 30-172 Ord. No. 1205 2016 1 30-100 2 30-490 Ord. No. 1206 1206 - 20-126 - 20-156 Ord. No. 1207 2016 - 6-272, 6-273 Ord. No. 1209 2016 - 14-19 Ord. No. 1215 12-27-2016 - 2-360-2-362 - 2-365, 2-366 Ord. No. 1217 6-12-2017 1 20-193 2 20-194-20-196 Ord. No. 1222 11-27-2017 - 24-2, 24-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Colorado Revised Statutes (C.R.S.). 
C.R.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-101 et seq. 2-58 1-12-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 9-7-103 14-164 11-10.5-101 et seq. Char. § 7-5 12-43.3-101 et seq. 8-195 - 8-196 - 8-197 - 8-198 - 8-213 12-43.3-310 Ch. 8, Art. VI, Div. 2 12-43.3-404 8-196 12-46-101 et seq. 8-97 12-46-107 8-102 12-47-101 et seq. 8-97 - 8-105 12-47-103(6) 8-105 12-47-103(20) 8-105 12-47-103(30) 8-105 12-47-309 et seq. 8-98 12-47-310 8-104 12-47-311 8-98 12-47-312 8-98 12-47-313(1)(d)(I) 8-97 12-47-505 8-102 12-47-601 8-103 12-47-901 14-48 12-48-101 et seq. 8-97 13-10-104 1-22 13-10-111 1-22 13-10-113 1-23 13-10-113(1.5) 26-5 13-10-113(4) 1-22 13-10-113(5) 1-22 13-10-114 2-115 17-27-104 et seq. 30-100 - 30-355 18-1-405 26-5 18-1-603 14-27 18-4-401 14-12 18-4-501 14-10 18-4-502 et seq. 14-11 18-4-509 14-7 - 14-8 18-4-511 14-9 18-7-301 14-24 18-7-302 14-25 18-8-101 14-1 18-8-102 14-79 18-8-103 14-82 18-8-104 14-81 18-8-111 14-84 18-8-113 14-80 18-8-201 et seq. 14-83 18-9-101 14-17 18-9-106 14-15 - 14-21 18-9-107 14-6 - 14-16 18-9-116 14-23 18-9-117 14-4 18-9-201 4-48 18-9-201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 18-9-202 4-48 18-9-202.5 Ch. 4, Art. V - 4-114 - 4-115 - 4-117 18-9-204 4-48 - 14-21 18-9-204.5 4-60, 4-61 18-9-206 4-56 18-12-105.1 14-167 18-12-105.6 Ch. 14, Art. VII 18-12-201 Ch. 14, Art. VII 18-13-104 14-21 18-13-114 14-13 18-13-121(5) 14-126 18-18-10 et seq. 8-195 18-18-102(18) 14-57 18-18-412 14-55 18-18-426 14-56 19-1-103 1-22 19-1-103(18) 1-22 24-4.2-104(1) 26-5 24-6-401 2-360 24-6-402 et seq. 2-360 24-32-706 24-3 24-33.5-1206.1 Ch. 8, Art. V, Div. 2 24-33.5-2001(11) 14-100 24-33.5-2007 Ch. 14, Art. IV 24-68-101 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. VII - 30-760 - 30-765 - 30-768 24-68-102 30-761 25-1.5-106 8-198 - 30-625 25-4-601 et seq. 4-92 - 4-113 25-4-3601 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. IV 25-5-410(1)(i)(II) 14-50 25-7-503(1)(b)(I)(A) 6-272 25-7-503(1)(b)(I)(B) 6-272 25-14-301 14-126 29-2-105(2) 24-157 29-2-109(7) 24-157 29-11-102(2) 10-37 29-11-102(3) 10-37 31-1-102 Ch. 2 (Note) 31-4-404(2) Char. § 3-12 31-4-405 2-80 31-10-101 2-58 31-10-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 31-10-306 2-59 31-10-507 2-60 31-12-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II - 2-21 31-12-105 2-23 31-12-107 2-23 31-15-707 28-191 31-15-707(1)(a)(II) 28-193 31-16-201 et seq. 6-49 - 6-78 - 6-104 - 6-126 - 6-155 - 6-182 - 6-184 - 6-252 - 6-254 - 16-1 - Ch. 26 (Note) - 26-1 31-16-204 Ch. 26 (Note) 31-20-201 Char. Art. XI 31-23-101 et seq. Ch. 22 (Note) 31-23-213 et seq. Ch. 22 (Note) 31-23-214 Ch. 22 (Note) - 22-33 31-23-301 et seq. 30-2 - 30-836 31-23-301 30-692 31-23-304 8-55 (Note) - Ch. 30, Art. V - 30-763 32-2-211 Ch. 2, Art. III 37-45.1-101 28-120 37-45.1-101 et seq. 26-9 37-45.1-102 28-120 37-45.1-104(2) 28-120 39-10-101 et seq. 18-25 40-101(4)(a) 8-248 42-1-102(33) 24-3 42-1-102(44) 24-3 42-3-103 24-3 42-4-1709(1.5) 26-5 42-4-1710 26-5 42-4-1801 et seq. 10-21 42-4-2101 et seq. 10-21  
