MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF ROCKY FORD COLORADO 
2016 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado 

> 
Book No. _____ 
ROCKY FORD OFFICIALS 
Mayor 
J. R. Thompson 
City Council 
Marty E. Lee 
Rachel Patrick 
Cuco Ruiz 
Rich Geist 
Susan Jung 
Barbara Hunter 
Interim City Manager 
Steve Rabe 
City Clerk 
Cheryl Grasmick 
Deputy City Clerk 
Rebecca Korinek 
City Attorney 
H. Barton Mendenhall 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last. 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instruction sheet should be placed behind the Supplementation tab, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions : Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Rocky Ford Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-2-90, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Rocky Ford Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions : A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Rocky Ford Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Rocky Ford Municipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal : Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Rocky FordMunicipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
PREFACE 
The City of Rocky Ford, a statutory City, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Table of Contents is the table containing each chapter and article title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each article by the subject name provided. 
The three-place section numbering system places the chapter number first, followed by the article number and section number, separated by hyphens. Each section may be cited by the chapter, article and section number which are in sequence within each chapter. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved chapter and page numbers for expansion or revision of the code without undue complication when changes are made to the code by supplementation. 
The Code Comparison Table identifies the sources for the contents of the code. The Code Comparison Table identifies prior code sections and their location in the new code and provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether a prior code section, an ordinance or a portion thereof, is contained within the code, the Code Comparison Table will provide that information. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the code provide regular updating of the code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the Code. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE OF - COLORADO 
CITY OF ROCKY FORD, COLORADO 
    ORDINANCE NO. 914 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ROCKY FORD, COLORADO, ADOPTING BY REFERENCE AND ENACTING A NEW MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE CITY OF ROCKY FORD; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF SECONDARY CODES BY REFERENCE; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado , 2010 edition, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, as adopted and amended in Section 8-1-10, et seq.; 
(2)  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings , 1997 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted in Section 18-8-10, et seq.; and 
(3)  The Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings , adopted November 1977, published by the Colorado Office of State Planning and Budgeting, Board for Energy Efficient Nonresidential Building Standards, as adopted and amended in Section 18-9-10, et seq. 
Section  4. The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. One copy of each code is on file in the City Clerk's office: 
(1)  The International Building Code , 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-1-10, et seq.; 
(2)  The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-2-10; 
(3)  The National Electrical Code , 2011 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended in Section 18-3-10, et seq.; 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code , 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-4-10; 
(5)  The International Plumbing Code , 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-5-10; 
(6)  The International Fire Code , 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-6-10; and 
(7)  The International Sign Code , 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-7-10. 
(1) Sec. 1-4-20. General penalty for violation. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of this City hereafter enacted or any section, rule or regulation prorogated under the provisions of this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful in offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code, for which a different penalty is not specifically provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30. Such person may also be directed to serve community service, in addition to such penalty and/or imprisonment. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  Every day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2) Sec. 1-4-30. Application of penalties to juveniles. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten but not yet 18 years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit incarceration in an appropriate facility, at the time of charging, of a juvenile violating any section of this Code. 
(3) Sec. 1-4-40. Altering or tampering with Code; penalty. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
    Any person who alters, changes or amends this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Chapter, or who alters or tampers with this Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the City to be misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by Section 1-4-20 hereof. 
(4) Sec. 1-4-50. Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
    Any person who violates any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(5) Sec. 2-4-90. Contempt power. (Chapter 2, Administration; Article 4, Municipal Court) 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed $300.00 and imprisonment not to exceed a term of ten days. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. 
(6) Sec. 2-4-100. Notice to appear or pay fine. (Chapter 2, Administration; Article 4, Municipal Court) 
(a)  Tender by a peace officer or the Code Enforcement Officer of a summons and complaint or a penalty assessment notice shall constitute notice to that person to appear in Municipal Court at the time and date specified or to pay the required fine and surcharge thereon. 
(b)  It is a violation of this Section for any person to fail to appear before the Municipal Court at the time and date specified in the summons and complaint or at any subsequent time and date to which the matter is continued or otherwise set by the Municipal Court, or to fail to pay the required fine, surcharge or costs. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this Section may be incarcerated for a period of time not to exceed 90 days or fined an amount not to exceed $300.00, or both. 
(7) Sec. 2-10-70. Willful retention of books. (Chapter 2, Administration; Article 10, Library Board) 
    A person who willfully retains any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging in or to the public library or other educational institution for 30 days after notice in writing to return the same, given at the expiration of the time that, by the rules of such institution, such article or other property may be kept, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(8) Sec. 4-4-130. Violation; penalty. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 4, Use Tax) 
    It shall be a violation of this Article for any person who, by this Article, is required to make any return or pay any tax to fail or refuse to make any return or pay any tax required to be made or paid by this Article; to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statements in any return; to fail or refuse to make payment to the Finance Director, City Clerk or County Clerk of any taxes collected or due the City; or in any manner to evade the collection of any payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this Article; or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this Article. Any corporation or officer thereof making a false return or a return containing a false statement shall be guilty of a violation of this Article and shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(9) Sec. 4-5-50. Penalty clause. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 5, Occupational Tax) 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article fails, neglects or refuses to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-5-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00; provided that each day after said statement becomes delinquent, during which said officer, agent, manager or person fails, neglects or refuses to make and file such statement, shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(10) Sec. 4-6-50. Penalty clause. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 6, Telephone Utility Occupation Tax) 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article fails, neglects or refuses to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-6-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00; provided that each time the officer, agent, manager or person fails, neglects or refuses to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(11) Sec. 5-5-330. Crimes and penalties. (Chapter 5, Franchises and Communication Systems; Article 5, Cable Television Franchise) 
(a)  Injury to property of Grantee . No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully injure the property of the Grantee. 
(b)  Intercepting signals of Grantee . No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully intercept the signals of the Grantee. If a wire, apparatus or other equipment of a cable television system has been altered or tampered with, a rebuttable presumption is created that the person lacking authorization of the cable system operator has created the condition as existing. 
(c)  Penalty . Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. 
(12) Sec. 6-1-160. Violation, penalty. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 1, Business Licenses) 
(a)  Each day that any person carries on, pursues, conducts or manages any business avocation or calling in the City without first obtaining a license therefor shall be deemed a separate offense, and such person may be convicted accordingly. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article for which a fine or penalty is not herein specifically provided shall, on conviction, be fined in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(13) Sec. 6-2-140. Suspension or revocation; fine. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 2, Alcoholic Beverages) 
(a)  The City Council, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, shall have the authority to impose a fine in lieu of a suspension of a liquor license for all or a portion of the period of suspension under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The City Council has made a final decision to suspend the licensee's liquor license for a period of 14 days or less. 
(2)  Prior to the operative date of the suspension, the licensee petitions the City for permission to pay a fine in lieu of suspension. 
(3)  The City is satisfied that the following are met: 
a.  The public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
b.  The books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcoholic beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
c.  The retail licensee has not had his or her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license. 
(b)  The City may impose a fine of up to 20 percent of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from the sales of alcoholic beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $5,000.00. All fines shall be paid in cash or certified funds, made payable to the City Clerk, and deposited in the general fund of the City. 
(c)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to this Section, the City Council shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. 
(d)  In connection with any petition pursuant to this Section, the authority of the City Council is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(e)  If the City Council does not make the findings required in Subsection (a) above and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the City Council. 
(14) Sec. 6-2-230. Keg tagging requirements. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 2, Alcoholic Beverages) 
(a)  Any retail liquor establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City shall be required to affix to the keg, at the time of sale, a self-locking plastic identification seal. 
(b)  Any retail liquor establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City shall be required at the time of sale to fill out an identifying form with information as to the purchaser's name, address, date of birth, driver's license number and date of sale. The Police Department shall provide the form. 
(c)  At the time of sale of any keg of alcoholic beverage, the retail liquor establishment shall be obligated to affix the seal, fill out the form and maintain those identifying records for purposes of inspection by the Police Department. 
(d)  Retail liquor outlets shall keep identifying forms for a period of six months, and said records shall be kept in a place open for inspection at all reasonable times at the request of the City. 
(e)  Any retail liquor outlet which fails to affix the plastic seal as required in Subsection (c) above, or to fill out the forms as required pursuant to Subsections (b) and (c), shall be in violation of this Section, and as such shall be subject to fines and penalties as authorized herein. 
(f)  Any owner or operator of any premises who, through act of omission or commission, fails to ensure that the owner's employees properly comply with this law, shall be guilty of violation of Subsections (b) and (c). 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person who has purchased alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City to remove the self-locking plastic identification seal required pursuant to Subsection (c). It shall not be a violation of this Subsection if the person removing the tag is an employee of an owner or operator of a retail liquor establishment or a representative of a vendor of wholesale alcoholic beverages, who removes the tag after the return of the keg to the place of retail establishment and after any deposit has been returned to the consumer. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any purchaser of a keg of alcoholic beverage to allow anyone to remove the fixed seal from the keg prior to its return to the retail liquor outlet which sold the keg. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase a keg of alcoholic beverage pursuant to the terms of this Section, and to thereafter allow consumption of said alcoholic beverage by minors, unless said consumption is authorized and allowed pursuant to the laws of the State, as enumerated in Section 18-13-122, C.R.S. 
(j)  An owner, operator or employee of a retail liquor outlet who, upon receipt of a keg being returned by a consumer of the alcoholic beverage, shall inspect the returned keg, and, if the tag has been removed or tampered with in any way, the owner or operator shall immediately notify the Police Department of the same. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee to fail to notify the Police Department as required herein. 
(k)  It is unlawful for any person to be in possession of a keg of alcoholic beverage, wherein that keg was purchased within the City and the keg fails to have the appropriate self-locking plastic identification seal as required by Subsection (a) above. 
(l)  Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. 
(m)  The Police Department may use the penalty assessment procedure as provided in Section 16-2-201, C.R.S., for the enforcement of this Section. 
(15) Sec. 6-2-210. Minors in licensed establishments. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 2, Alcoholic Beverages) 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose and intent of this Section is to prohibit minors from having access to or being on the premises of establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises at certain times. 
(b)  Prohibition . This Section shall pertain to any licensed premises. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor to be in or remain in or on any licensed premises from 11:00 p.m. to closing of the licensed premises for business that same night. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any licensee or his or her agents or employees to permit a minor to be in or remain in or on any licensed premises from 11:00 p.m. to closing of the licensed premises for business that same night. 
(c)  Exceptions . 
(1)  This Section shall not prohibit the minor children of the licensee or necessary employees of the licensee from being in or remaining in a licensed premises while the licensee or employee is actually working or performing. 
(2)  This Section shall not prohibit minors who are members of an entertainment group or the minor children of entertainment group members paid or employed by the licensee from being present in a licensed premises while the entertainment group is actually working or performing. 
(3)  This Section shall not prevent a minor from remaining on the licensed premises during a private party when the licensed premises are otherwise closed to members of the general public, provided that adequate adult supervision exists. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this Section to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that a minor at issue was required by the licensee or his or her agents or employees to produce a Colorado photo identification for viewing and that the Colorado photo identification produced by the minor was fraudulent. 
(d)  Penalties . Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00. Prosecution of a person under this Section or imposition of a penalty under this Section shall not prohibit the City from taking other action with respect to the licensee's alcoholic beverage or 3.2 beer license. 
(16) Sec. 6-2-260. Penalty. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 2, Alcoholic Beverages) 
    Any person who violates any provision of this Division may be subject to a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Any violation of the provisions of this Division may form the basis of a notice of violation and show cause why the licensee's license should not be revoked or suspended pursuant to proper notice and hearing. 
(17) Sec. 6-3-90. Registration of nonprofit organizations. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 3, Peddlers, Solicitors and Dealers) 
(a)  Any person engaged in short-term fundraising door-to-door within the City on behalf of a nonprofit or government-related organization, including but not limited to school organizations, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H and church organizations, does not require a license, but shall register with the City Clerk. 
(b)  Each person shall complete the same form as required for a license as set forth in this Article, but no fee shall be required. The registration for a nonprofit fundraising event shall be effective for a limited period of time, not to exceed 90 days. When the registration is for a youth organization and the youths participating in the fundraising are all less than 18 years of age, an adult representing the organization may register on behalf of the organization in lieu of individual registration. 
(c)  As part of the registration, the organization shall provide the City Clerk with written documentation demonstrating the nonprofit status of the organization. Acceptable documentation shall include, but not be limited to, a copy of an I.R.S. determination of nonprofit status or a letter from a governmental administrator, such as a school superintendent, stating that the organization is approved by and operates under the umbrella of that government organization. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any nonprofit organization to engage in door-to-door fundraising without registering with the City Clerk. Every person who unlawfully engages in door-to-door fundraising on behalf of a nonprofit organization without registering with the City Clerk as provided for in this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00. 
(18) Sec. 6-3-130. Unlawful engagement of business. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 3, Peddlers, Solicitors and Dealers) 
    Every person who unlawfully engages in or allows another to unlawfully engage in, on or about his or her property, the business of a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, and every person who transacts any business which would make him or her a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, without having a valid license as provided for in this Article, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(19) Sec. 6-3-140. Unlawful actions. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 3, Peddlers, Solicitors and Dealers) 
    No person shall make any false or untrue statement in an application for a license as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor. No transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor; sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise by any false or short weight; measure or sell any goods, wares or merchandise as being composed or manufactured in whole or in part of a material different from which such manufactured goods, wares or merchandise are actually composed or manufactured; or sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise which are partly or entirely of a poisonous or injurious character or nature, for consumption by human beings, animals or fowl or for application to the body, hair or skin of any human being or animal. Every person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(20) Sec. 6-4-20. Rubbish. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 4, Tree Maintenance) 
    It is unlawful for any person engaged in tree maintenance to deposit any rubbish, trimmings, branches, leaves or other residue from their contract obligation upon any City property, including streets and alleys, and the person so engaged shall be solely responsible for the removal and disposal thereof. In the event that the licensee shall fail to make such proper removal or disposal, the City may, in its discretion, remove and dispose of the same and make a direct charge to the licensee at the rate as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule per man hour for labor and as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule per hour for equipment. In addition, such failure on the part of the licensee shall constitute a violation of this Section and shall subject the licensee to the penalty provisions hereof. In addition, the annual license shall be automatically revoked. 
( 21) Sec. 6-4-60. Penalty. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 4, Tree Maintenance) 
    Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined for each offense in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(22) Sec. 6-4-70. Forfeiture of bond. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 4, Tree Maintenance) 
    In addition to the above provisions, in the event that any person is convicted of a violation of this Section in accordance with the terms hereof, the City may declare the required bond in default, or as much thereof as may be necessary for the payment of any fines levied hereunder. 
(23) Sec. 6-5-120. Suspension and revocation of license. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 5, Non-Cigarette Tobacco Product Retail Licenses) 
(a)  Suspension of license for violation . In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be suspended if a court of competent jurisdiction determines (or the Department finds, based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard) that the licensee has violated any of the requirements, conditions or prohibitions of this Article or has pleaded guilty, no contest or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 6-5-30 of this Article. A non-cigarette tobacco product retailer whose license has been suspended is deemed not to have a valid license during the suspension period for purposes of this Article. 
(1)  After suspension for a first violation of this Article at a location within any 12-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 15 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(2)  After suspension for a second violation of this Article at a location within any 24-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 30 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(3)  After suspension for a third violation of this Article at a location within any 36-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 90 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(b)  Revocation of license for violation . After suspension for a fourth violation of this Chapter within any 48-month period, the non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be revoked and the licensee shall be ineligible for one year from the date of suspension to apply for a new non-cigarette tobacco product retail license within the City. 
(c)  Appeal of suspension or revocation of license . A decision of the City or Department to suspend or revoke a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is appealable to the City Manager and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the mailing of the Department's decision. If an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. 
(24) Sec. 6-5-130. Penalties and fines. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 5, Non-Cigarette Tobacco Product Retail Licenses) 
(a)  Each such violation of any local, state or federal law pertaining to the sale of tobacco products to minors or any violation of any law designated above shall be subject to administrative fines as follows: 
(1)  First violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(2)  Second violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(3)  Third violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $300.00. 
(4)  Fourth violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Penalties and fines collected under this Article shall be paid directly to the Department and used to support education, administration or enforcement of non-cigarette tobacco product retail licenses in the City. 
(25) Sec. 6-5-160. Non-cigarette tobacco product retailing without license. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 5, Non-Cigarette Tobacco Product Retail Licenses) 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the Department finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at a location without a valid non-cigarette tobacco product retail license, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a non-cigarette tobacco product retailing license as follows: 
(1)  After a first violation of this Section at a location within any 12-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until 14 days have passed from the date of the violation. 
(2)  After a second violation of this Section at a location within any 24-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until 30 days have passed from the date of the violation. 
(3)  After a third or subsequent violation of this Section at a location within any 36-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction) until one year has passed from the date of the violation. 
(b)  Non-cigarette tobacco products offered for sale or exchange in violation of this Section are subject to seizure by the Department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the non-cigarette tobacco products seized are given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the non-cigarette tobacco products were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this Article. 
(c)  The decision by the Department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(d)  Forfeited non-cigarette tobacco products shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final. 
(e)  For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this Article, the following provisions shall constitute a separate violation of this Article: 
(1)  Each day on which a non-cigarette tobacco product is offered for sale in violation of this Article; or 
(2)  Each individual non-cigarette tobacco product that is distributed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this Article. 
(26) Sec. 6-5-170. Enforcement. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 5, Non-Cigarette Tobacco Product Retail Licenses) (a) The remedies provided by this Article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. (b) Whenever evidence of a violation of this Article is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this Article and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. (c) Violations of this Article are subject to a civil action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than $200.00 and not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. (d) Violations of this Article may, at the discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. (e) Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this Article shall also constitute a violation of this Article. (f) Violations of this Article are hereby declared to be public nuisances. (g) In addition to other remedies provided by this Article or by other law, any violation of this Article may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney, including administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief. 
(27) Sec. 7-1-120. Judgment; relief. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 1, Administration and Abatement of Nuisances) 
(a)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include a permanent injunction to restrain, abate and prevent the continuance or reoccurrence of the nuisance. The Court may grant declaratory relief, mandatory orders or any other relief deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the injunction and enforce the same, and the Court may retain jurisdiction of the case for the purpose of enforcing its order. 
(b)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include an order directing the Chief of Police to seize and close the public nuisance and to keep the same effectually closed until further order of the court, not to exceed one year. 
(c)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to other injunctive relief, an order requiring the removal, correction or other abatement of a public nuisance, in whole or in part, by the Chief of Police at the expense of the owner or operator of the public nuisance. 
(d)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to any other relief authorized by the provisions of this Article, the imposition of a fine of not more than $300.00, conditioned upon failure or refusal of compliance with the orders of the Court within any time limits therein fixed. 
(28) Sec. 7-1-190. Violation and penalties. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 1, Administration and Abatement of Nuisances) 
(a)  Whenever the doing of any act is required, prohibited or declared to be unlawful and no definite fine or penalty is provided for a violation of this Chapter, any person who is convicted of a violation shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in Section 7-1-110 of this Article. 
(b)  Any person who has possession or control of any private ground or premises, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, in or upon which any such nuisance exists or may be found, whether such nuisance has been heretofore or is hereafter created, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense as the author of a nuisance for every period of 24 hours' continuance of such nuisance after due notice has been given to abate the same. 
(c)  Any violation or disobedience of any injunction or order issued by the Court in an action to abate a public nuisance shall be punished as a contempt of court by a fine of not more than $300.00 and imprisonment of not more than five days; but the Municipal Court may treat each day on which the violation or disobedience of any injunction order continues or recurs as a separate contempt. 
(d)  Fees; costs and fines; liens and collection. 
(1)  For seizing and closing any building or premises as provided in this Chapter, or for performing other duties pursuant to the direction of the Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall be entitled to a reasonable sum fixed by the Municipal Court in addition to the actual costs incurred or expended. 
(2)  All fees and costs allowed by the provisions of this Section, the costs of a court action to abate any public nuisance and all fines levied by the Municipal Court in contempt proceedings incidental to any action to abate a public nuisance shall be a first and prior lien upon any real property seized or closed under the provisions of this Chapter, and the same shall be enforceable and collectible by execution issued by order of the Municipal Court, from the property of any person liable therefor. 
(3)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to destroy the validity of a bona fide lien upon real or personal property appearing of record prior to recording of court orders involving real estate as authorized under this Chapter. 
(29) Sec. 7-3-100. Penalty. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 3, Junk Vehicles) 
    Any person convicted of violating any portion of this Article shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(30) Sec. 7-4-70. Penalty. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 4, Garbage and Refuse) ;p2; 
    Any person convicted of violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-1-120 of this Chapter. 
(31) Sec. 7-5-80. Penalty for nonpayment. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 5, Weeds and Brush) If said assessment is not paid within 60 days, the same may be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection, together with a ten-percent penalty, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(32) Sec. 7-5-90. Violation. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 5, Weeds and Brush) 
    In addition to the notice and penalty provisions set forth above, any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Article is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(33) Sec. 7-6-40. Penalty. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 6, Trees) 
(a)  In case any assessment due and payable under this Article, except that set forth in Subsection 7-6-30(g) above, is not paid within 30 days from the date the assessment is made, the City Clerk shall certify the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed by him or her upon the tax rolls of the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection. 
(b)  The maintenance of untreated elm trees and bushes upon any premises on or after May 15 of any calendar year is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person owning, controlling or occupying any premises upon which such untreated elm trees or elm bushes are in existence shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined. 
(34) Sec. 7-7-190. Failure to register. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 7, Animals) The minimum penalty for failing to register an animal in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be a fine of $200.00, and the maximum penalty shall be a fine of $500.00. The amount of $100.00 of the penalty shall not be waived or suspended. (1) All of the penalty may be waived where the owner provides proof that the owner properly registered the animal with the City subsequent to the issuance of the summons and complaint. (2) Where a portion of the penalty was waived pursuant to Paragraph (1) above, an additional portion or all of the penalty may be waived if the owner also provides proof from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been spayed or neutered. 
(35) Sec. 7-7-390. Animal disturbance of peace and quiet prohibited. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 7, Animals) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any animal owner or for any person in charge of any animal to own, keep or have in his or her possession an animal which disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood by barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting any other similar unreasonable noise. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, unreasonable noise shall mean any sound of such level and duration as to be, or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. Continuous or intermittent barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting any other similar unreasonable noise over a period of ten minutes shall constitute prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of life or property. 
(c)  No summons and complaint shall be issued nor shall there be a conviction for violation of this Section unless there is at least one complaining witness who has signed such complaint and has testified at trial. The Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer who personally observed the behavior of the animal with regard to its barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting other similar unreasonable noise shall satisfy the requirement of having at least one complaining witness and may testify as to his or her observations at trial. 
(d)  This Section shall not apply to the Code Enforcement Officer or police officers in the performance of their duties, nor to veterinary hospitals or animal shelters. 
(e)  Violations of the provisions of this Section shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For a first violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Not more than 50 percent of the fine may be suspended where the owner had registered the animals with the City prior to the hearing. 
(2)  For a second violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Not more than 50 percent of the fine may be suspended where the owner permanently removed the animals from the City prior to the hearing. 
(3)  For a third and subsequent violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $300.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. 
(36) Sec. 7-7-510. Animals prohibited within City designated; exceptions. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 7, Animals) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor at his or her dwelling within the City more than a total of four animals over the age of three months. This Subsection shall not include fish or birds. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor any livestock or fowl such as, but not limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, chickens, geese, ducks or turkeys, within the City; provided, however, that this Section shall be coordinated with the City's zoning regulations contained in Chapter 16 of this Code, wherein certain animals and numbers thereof may be permitted within certain zoning districts. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain, possess, harbor, sell or in any manner deal or traffic within the City in any living exotic, wild, dangerous or unusual animals, whether domesticated or tamed, including but not necessarily limited to the following: Africanized Apis mellifera (honey bees); bats of any species; bears of any species; felines, other than ordinary domesticated house cats; gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutans, baboons or any other infra-human primate; any member of the Mustelidae family, except ferrets, including but not limited to fishers, martens, minks, otters, porcupines, raccoons, skunks, weasels and wolverines; poisonous reptiles; wolves, foxes, coyotes or other species of canines other than dogs; any animal or bird which has received state or federal government designation as an endangered species; or any other terrestrial predator or other animal determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions, procedures and means of abatement therefor established by the City. 
(d)  For purposes of this Section, any hybrid or breed mix between wild animals and domestic animals shall be considered a domesticated animal, and as such is allowed. Alleged domestication and keeping of any wild animal is not allowed. 
(e)  This Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A zoo or circus authorized by the City. 
(2)  Any entrant in a rodeo, fair or show authorized by the City. 
(3)  The temporary maintenance of an animal by a licensed veterinarian during the time necessary for treatment. 
(4)  The City animal shelter while holding an animal pending legal disposition of the animal. 
(5)  Any animal properly boarded on the Arkansas Valley Fairgrounds. 
(6)  Any person lawfully engaged in the operation of a packing house or slaughter house governed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment regulations, who keeps animals or fowl for a temporary period of time not to exceed 72 hours in connection with the operation of such business. 
(7)  Any person granted a hardship permit as set forth below so long as the hardship permit remains valid. 
(f)  The minimum penalty for failure to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be $100.00 for each animal over the stated limit of four or for each excluded animal owned unlawfully. The amount of $50.00 of each penalty shall not be waived or suspended. The owner will have 30 days to comply in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. In the event the owner refuses to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, a summons will be issued. 
(37) Sec. 7-8-190. Penalties. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 8, Dogs) 
    Violation of a provision of this Division, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(38) Sec. 7-8-330. Penalties for violations. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 8, Dogs) 
    Violations of the provisions of this Division shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For any unlawful attack, as defined in Section 7-8-310 of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order the implantation in the dog of a unique identifying computer microchip by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense, and the owner will be ordered to register the identifying microchip information with the City Clerk and the central registry for such information. 
(2)  For any unlawful attack where there is no injury to a human or other animal, a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the Municipal Court deems proper, including but not limited to evaluation and successful completion of a recommended animal owner course, mandatory kenneling, confinement, muzzling or, in the case of a dog, compliance with the requirements for vicious dogs as set forth in this Article. 
(3)  For a second attack by the same animal that was involved in the first violation, or any other animal owned by the same person or of the same household during a three-year period following the first violation, a fine of not less than $450.00 and not more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the court deems proper. 
(4)  For unlawful attacks, as defined in Section 7-8-310 of this Article, where bodily injury to a human or other animal occurs, the penalties shall be: 
a.  For a first violation involving the biting of a human being or an animal, a fine of not less than $300.00 and not more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the Municipal Court deems proper, including the humane destruction of the animal. A portion of the penalties in this Subsection may be suspended upon order of the Municipal Court for compliance with any other court-ordered conditions, such as evaluation and successful completion of a recommended animal owner course, mandatory kenneling, confinement, muzzling or, in the case of a dog, compliance with the requirements for vicious dogs as set forth in this Article. 
b.  For a second violation involving the biting of or an attack upon a human being or an animal by the same animal that was involved in the first violation, or any other animal owned by the same person or of the same household occurring within a three-year period following the first violation, a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and a jail sentence of not less than five days, plus any additional penalty the Municipal Court deems proper. A portion of the penalties in this Subsection may be suspended upon order of the Municipal Court for compliance with any other court-ordered conditions. Additionally, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(39) Sec. 7-8-510. Penalties. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 8, Dogs) Whoever violates any provisions of this Division shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The Municipal Court shall order appropriate restitution when a vicious dog caused personal or property damage. 
(40) Sec. 8-1-60. Violation; penalty. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 1, Model Traffic Code) 
    The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Article: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this Article. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this Article shall be punished by a fine of $35.00 per point lost, not exceeding $300.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(41) Sec. 8-2-90. Penalty. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 2, Motorized Golf Carts) 
    Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(42) Sec. 8-3-40. Penalty. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 3, Motorized Wheelchairs) 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(43) Sec. 8-4-80. Penalties. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 4, Handicap Parking) 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this Article, or any owner of a vehicle who authorizes or permits the violation of this Article, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(44) Sec. 10-1-20. Penalties. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 1, General Provisions) 
    Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(45) Sec. 10-4-20. Trespassing. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 4, Public, Private and Personal Property) 
(a)  Definitions . The following definitions shall apply to this Section: 
    Premises means any public or private real property, buildings or other improvements thereon located within the City. 
    Trespass means when a person: 
(1)  Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced. 
(2)  Knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains upon the premises of a hotel, motel, condominium or apartment building. 
(3)  Enters or remains upon premises clearly and conspicuously posted with no trespassing signs; 
(4)  In the case of a solicitor, hawker, itinerant merchant or salesman, enters or remains upon premises and knocks on doors or rings doorbells of any entrance thereto upon which are clearly posted signs prohibiting solicitation or sale. 
(5)  Refuses or fails to leave the premises when asked to do so by the owner or person in charge of the premises, whether the premises are a private residence or a building or business open to the public. 
(6)  Returns to any premises, public or private, from which he or she has been barred by the owner or person in charge of the premises after having been advised by the owner or person in charge that he or she shall no longer be permitted on the premises. 
    Unlawfully enters or remains means when a person enters or remains in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed, invited or otherwise privileged to do so. 
(b)  It is illegal and unlawful for any person to trespass, knowingly enter or remain in or upon any premises of another without the permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof. 
(c)  Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Section shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imposition of a sentence to useful public service. There is hereby imposed a minimum mandatory fine of $50.00 for a first offense hereunder. 
(46) Sec. 10-4-40. Theft. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 4, Public, Private and Personal Property) 
(a)  Definitions . The following definitions shall apply to this Section: 
    Knowingly or willfully. A person acts knowingly or willfully with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by this Section when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exists. A person acts knowingly or willfully with respect to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
    Thing of value includes real property, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights, choses in action, services, confidential information, medical records information, and any rights of use or enjoyment connected therewith. 
    Unpurchased means that the item was not paid for in monies or consideration of payment by any other means. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft. It is the intent of this Section to define one offense of theft and to incorporate therein the offenses of larceny, stealing, embezzlement, false pretenses, confidence games and shoplifting, thereby removing distinctions and technicalities which previously existed in the pleading and proof of such offenses. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization or by threat or deception when the value of the thing is less than $1,000.00 and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value. 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit. 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
a.  If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of said store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the offense of theft. 
b.  If any person conceals upon his or her person or otherwise carries away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the store owner, merchant or any employee thereof, or any police officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause, may detain and question any person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether a person has committed the offense of theft. Such detention and questioning shall not render the store owner, merchant, employee or police officer liable civilly or criminally for slander, libel, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or unlawful detention. 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(c)  Penalties . Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Section shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and imposition of a sentence to useful public service. There is hereby imposed a minimum mandatory fine of $50.00 for a first offense hereunder. 
(47)  Sec. 10-4-200. Violation. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 4, Public, Private and Personal Property) 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating this Division shall be subject to a penalty and fine of up to $1,000.00. The Municipal Court shall have the authority to order the violator to perform useful public service up to and including 100 hours. 
(b)  The City may elect to place all or a part of the fines collected into a separate account to be used for the removal and eradication of graffiti within the City. 
(48) Sec. 10-6-60. Sale of cigarettes and tobacco products. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 6, Minors) 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Cigarettes means premanufactured cigarettes and/or hand-rolled cigarettes. 
    Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Tobacco products means cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cutting and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly furnishes to a minor, by gift, sale or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $200.00. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this Subsection that the person furnishing the cigarettes or tobacco products was presented with and reasonably relied upon a valid state driver's license or other government-issued form of identification which identified the person receiving the cigarettes or tobacco products as being 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  Any minor who purchases or attempts to purchase any cigarettes or tobacco products, and/or is found to be in possession of any cigarettes or tobacco products commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $100.00; except that, following a conviction or adjudication for a first offense under this Subsection, the Court in lieu of the fine may sentence the person to participate in a tobacco education program. The Court may allow such person to perform community service and be granted credit against the fine and court costs at the rate of $5.00 for each hour of work performed, for up to 50 perecent of the fine and court costs. 
(d)  No retailer shall sell or permit the sale of cigarettes or tobacco products by use of a vending machine or other coin-operated machine; except that cigarettes may be sold at retail through vending machines only in: 
(1)  Factories, businesses, offices or other places not open to the general public; 
(2)  Places to which minors are not permitted access at any time during the day or night; or 
(3)  Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an adult employee of the owner, including but not limited to establishments holding a valid liquor license issued pursuant to Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(e)  Any person who sells or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products shall display a warning sign as specified in this Subsection. Said warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place in the building and on such machine at all times, shall have a minimum height of three inches and a width of six inches, and shall read as follows: 
    WARNING 
    IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND, UPON CONVICTION, A $100.00 FINE MAY BE IMPOSED. 
(f)  Any violation of Subsection (e) above shall not constitute a violation of any other provision of this Section. 
(49) Sec. 10-6-70. Protection of minors from tobacco. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 6, Minors) 
(a)  Purpose and intent . 
(1)  The City Council hereby finds that: 
a.  The City recognizes the dangers associated with youth access to tobacco products; 
b.  Research shows that most adult smokers began using tobacco products before reaching the legal age at which they could purchase tobacco products; 
c.  Regulating the sale of tobacco products is an appropriate proven deterrent to protect the health, safety and welfare of young people in the City; and 
d.  The requirement of retail sellers of tobacco products to comply with the foregoing regulations will not unduly burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell tobacco products to youth and will not burden the revenue received by the City for the cigarette excise tax. 
(2)  It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit the sales of tobacco products to youth; to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those laws that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors; and to reduce the impact of tobacco and nicotine product use by youth in the City. 
(b)  Definitions . As used in this Section, the following words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Retail tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is less than five percent gross sales receipts. For purposes of enforcement of this Section, retail tobacco business includes, but is not limited to, a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale or manufacture of hookah or shisha products and related smoking products, including but not limited to any plant or other organic matter packaged for smoking or held out as a smoking product, or any sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other enterprise engaged in the promotion of hookah or shisha smoking, sometimes referred to as a hookah bar, cafe or lounge. 
    Self-service display means the open display or storage of tobacco products in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
    Tobacco paraphernalia means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing or consumption of tobacco products. 
    Tobacco product means and includes: 
(1)  Any product that contains tobacco or nicotine, or is made or derived from tobacco that is intended or expected to be ingested, smoked, inhaled, placed in oral or nasal cavities or applied to the skin; or 
(2)  Any electronic device that can be used to deliver nicotine or tobacco to the person using the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe. 
The term tobacco product does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in reducing, treating or eliminating nicotine or tobacco dependence, or for other medical purposes, when such product is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
(c)  Minimum age for persons selling and handling tobacco products . No person in the course of employment who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall sell, stock, retrieve or otherwise handle tobacco products. 
(d)  Positive identification required . No person shall sell or transfer a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 30 years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under the laws of the State to purchase and possess tobacco products. 
(e)  No minors permitted in a retail tobacco business . 
(1)  No person who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall be admitted to or be on the premises of a retail tobacco business unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. The presence of an unaccompanied minor in or on the premises of a retail tobacco business shall result in a violation of this Section by the minor and the owner of the business establishment. 
(2)  The owner of a retail tobacco business shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be provided by the City Clerk's office, which shall read as follows: 
    WARNING: 
    IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE TO BE ADMITTED TO OR BE ON THE PREMISES OF THIS BUSINESS, UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR GUARDIAN, AND UPON CONVICTION, A FINE MAY BE IMPOSED. 
(f)  Possession of tobacco paraphernalia by minors prohibited . No person who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall possess tobacco paraphernalia. 
(g)  Prohibition of sale of tobacco products by self-service display . The sale of tobacco products through the use of a self-service display is prohibited. 
(h)  Penalty for violations . 
(1)  Any retail establishment or adult found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00. 
(2)  Any minor found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine of up to $100.00. Within the discretion of the Court, this fine may be made payable at a rate of $5.00 per hour for services provided to the City by the offending minor. 
(50) Sec. 10-6-80. Juvenile curfew. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 6, Minors) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any juvenile to be, remain or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public place, right-of-way, park, playground, school yard or any other public place or any establishment open to the public generally after the hour of 11:00 p.m. or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day within the City. 
(b)  Exceptions . It shall not be a violation of Subsection (a) above under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the juvenile is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such juvenile. 
(2)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control of and is accompanied by a person who is over the age of 18 years and possesses the written consent of such parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of the juvenile. 
(3)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control of and is accompanied by a person who has reached 21 years of age. 
(4)  During the period of time when the juvenile is lawfully employed and for a period of 30 minutes before and after said employment hours when commuting directly to and directly from said employment. 
(5)  When the juvenile is performing or conducting an errand, which errand was directed and requested by the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(6)  When the juvenile is attending, traveling to or returning from such events as movies, school-sponsored activities or sporting events, theater performances or religious services, provided that such attendance at these events was approved by the parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(7)  When the juvenile is on private residential property or a sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which the juvenile resides. 
(c)  Penalty . In the event any person violates the provisions of this Section, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(51) Sec. 10-6-90. Curfew; parental responsibility. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 6, Minors) 
(a)  Permitting violation of curfew . It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, legal custodian or other individual having the legal care, custody or control of a juvenile to knowingly permit or allow such juvenile to be, remain upon or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, playground, park, school yard or any other public place or establishment after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day within the City. 
(b)  Exceptions . It shall not be a violation of Subsection (c) above under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the juvenile is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such juvenile. 
(2)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control and is accompanied by a person who is over the age of 18 years and possesses the written consent of such parent, guardian, or other person having legal care or custody of the juvenile; 
(3)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control and being accompanied by a person who has reached 21 years of age; 
(4)  During the period of time when the juvenile is lawfully employed and for a period of one-half hour before and after said employment hours when commuting directly to and directly from said employment; 
(5)  When the juvenile is performing or conducting an errand, which errand was directed and requested by the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian; 
(6)  When the juvenile is attending, traveling to or returning from such events as movies, school-sponsored activities or sporting events, theater performances or religious services, provided that such attendance at these events was approved by the parent, guardian or legal custodian; and 
(7)  When the juvenile is on private residential property or a sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which the juvenile resides. 
(c)  Penalty . In the event any person violates the provisions of this Section, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(52) Sec. 10-7-120. Possession of marijuana. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 7, Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs) 
(a)  Any person who knowingly possesses two ounces or less of marijuana commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(b)  Whenever a person is arrested or detained for a violation of Subsection (a) above, the arresting or detaining officer shall prepare a written notice or summons for such person to appear in court. The written notice or summons shall contain the name and address of such arrested or detained person, the date, time and place where such person shall appear and a place for the signature of such person indicating the person's written promise to appear on the date and at the time and place indicated on the notice or summons. One copy of said notice or summons shall be given to the person arrested or detained, one copy shall be sent to the Municipal Court and such other copies as may be required by the Sheriff's Department shall be sent to the places designated by the Sheriff's Department. The date specified in the notice or summons to appear shall be at least five days after such arrest or detention unless the person arrested or detained demands an earlier hearing. The arrested or detained person, in order to secure release from arrest or detention, shall promise in writing to appear in court by signing the notice or summons prepared by the arresting or detaining officer. 
(c)  Any person who openly and publicly displays, consumes or uses two ounces or less of marijuana commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished, at a minimum, by a fine of not less than $100.00 or, at a maximum, by a fine of not more than $100.00 and, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18-1.3-503, C.R.S., by 15 days in jail. 
(53) Sec. 10-7-130. Possession of drug paraphernalia. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 7, Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs) 
(a)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if he or she possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of state law. 
(b)  Any person who commits possession of drug paraphernalia commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(54) Sec. 10-7-140. Abusing toxic vapors. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 7, Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs) 
(a)  As used in this Section, the term toxic vapors means the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; Freons, including Freon 11 and Freon 12; hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl ketone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; trichloroethane; or xylene. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such substance for the purposes described in this Section. This Subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away to any other person any substance or product releasing toxic vapors, where the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that such substance will be used for the purpose of inducing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(d)  Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of Subsection (b) or (c) above commits the offense of abusing toxic vapors. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for a first offense; and upon conviction of a second or third offense, by a fine of not more than $500.00 and by not more than six months in jail. 
(e)  In a prosecution for a violation of this Section, evidence that a container lists one or more of the substances described in Subsection (a) above as one of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(55) Sec. 10-7-230. Penalty. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 7, Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs) 
    In addition to any other penalties that may exist under federal, state and local law, any person charged with a violation of this Division, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the standard penalty as proscribed in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be a separate violation, and the violator shall be punished accordingly. 
(56) Sec. 10-8-60. Penalty. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 8, Weapons) 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code and imposition of community or useful public service. 
(57) Sec. 10-9-100. Penalties. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 9, Noise) 
    The following penalties may be imposed for violation of this Article: 
(1)  First offense. Upon conviction for a first offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(2)  Second offense. Upon conviction for a second offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(58) Sec. 10-10-110. Penalty. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 10, Fireworks) 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, other than Section 10-10-40 above, upon conviction, shall be punished by revocation of the permit or license issued to such person if the same has been issued to such person. In addition, such person shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00. Any person violating Section 10-10-40, upon conviction, shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(59) Sec. 10-10-120. Ban on fireworks. (Chapter 10, General Offenses; Article 10, Fireworks) 
(a)  When the Fire Chief determines that conditions are such that the use of fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman candles, skyrockets and other pyrotechnic displays within the City limits are hazardous, he or she may ban the use of the same and announce said ban, which shall be in effect until he or she lifts the ban. 
(b)  Each firework, firecracker, torpedo, Roman candle, skyrocket or other pyrotechnic display used shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(60) Sec. 11-2-30. Penalties. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property; Article 2, Excavations) 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(61) Sec. 11-4-40. Authority of City to remove obstruction. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property; Article 4, Other Regulations) 
    The Mayor, any Councilmember or the City Manager is hereby authorized to order any article or thing which may encumber or obstruct any street, alley or other public place to be removed; and, if such article or thing is not removed within one day after notice to the owner of the article, or his or her agent, to remove the same, to cause the same to be removed to some suitable place. The owner of any article or thing so removed shall be fined, in addition to the sums named, the amount of the expenses of such removal, which expenses shall also be recoverable in the same manner as expenses for the removal of nuisances, as set forth in Chapter 7 of this Code. 
(62) Sec. 11-4-60. Placing building in streets and alleys prohibited. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property; Article 4, Other Regulations) 
    Every person who erects or places any building in whole or in part upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds within the City shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(63) Sec. 11-4-80. Violation of notice to remove obstruction. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property; Article 4, Other Regulations) 
    Whenever the owner of any building, fence or other obstruction standing or encroaching upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground in this City refuses or neglects to remove the same after notice as provided in Section 11-4-70 above, the cause shall be deemed a nuisance and it shall be lawful for the Mayor to cause the same to be taken down at his or her discretion. The expense thereof shall be recoverable from the owner in an action of debt or by assessment on the premises in the manner provided for other municipal charges and assessments, and every person who opposes or resists the execution of the order of the Mayor made in pursuance hereof shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(64) Sec. 11-5-40. Penalties. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property; Article 5, Park Regulations) 
(a)  Any person found entering into or upon the park facilities above described other than at the time permitted by this Article shall be deemed guilty of a breach of the peace. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of committing injury to public property in violation of the terms of this Article, if over the age of 18 years, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00. 
(c)  All parents of minors under the age of 18 years, which minors have been found committing injury to public property in the park systems described by this Article, shall be individually and collectively liable in an amount not to exceed $300.00 for such injury committed, and the City shall have full authority to commence a civil action at law against said parents for the recovery of all damages resulting from injury to the public property and disorderly conduct by said minors, plus all court costs and reasonable attorney fees. Such actions may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of record of competent jurisdiction within the State. 
(65) Sec. 13-2-110. Uncontrolled cross-connection prohibited. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 2, Water Regulations) 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Backflow preventer means a device accepted by the Department of Public Health and Environment for a specified type of cross-connection that prevents backflow and that is approved for installation at a specific location by the Superintendent of Water and Wastewater. 
    Cross-connection , in this Section, means any point in the water distribution system where chemical, biological or radiological contaminants may come into contact with potable water. 
(b)  Cross-connection without installation of an approved backflow preventer for the specific type of cross-connection is prohibited. 
(c)  Each installed backflow preventer shall be tested annually by a certified backflow prevention technician. 
(d)  Backflow preventer testing and maintenance records shall be kept for three years from the date of testing or maintenance. 
(e)  The water supply to any cross-connection without an approved backflow preventer shall be shut off where the cross-connection is not disconnected or a backflow preventer installed, and shall not be reconnected until the cross-connection is disconnected or an approved backflow preventer is installed and the corrective measure is inspected by the Superintendent of Water and Wastewater. 
(f)  The City Manager shall inform the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment of the uncontrolled cross-connection and the corrective action being taken. 
(g)  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 and not more than $300.00, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offenses. 
(66) Sec. 13-2-360. Penalties. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 2, Water Regulations) 
    It is unlawful, after water service has been discontinued by shutting off the water supply, or in any other manner for the person to re-connect the same without the consent of the City. Any person violating this Subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for each offense, and an additional penalty of not less than $25.00 for each day said violation continues. 
(67) Sec. 13-2-440. Penalties. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 2, Water Regulations) 
(a)  Penalty . Any person found guilty of violating this Article or any part thereof shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(b)  Additional penalty . The water of any person charged with a violation of this Division shall be disconnected forthwith by the Superintendent of Water Works pending the ultimate disposition of those charges. Any person whose water has been so disconnected may have the same reconnected by posting with the Municipal Judge a bond running to the City, with a surety to be approved by the Municipal Judge, of not less than $300.00, conditioned upon the appearance of such person for trial hereon and payment of any penalties and charges arising therefrom. 
(68) Sec. 13-3-170. Penalties. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 3, Sewer Regulations) 
    The violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(69) Sec. 13-6-120. Authorization for collection of fees. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 6, Garbage and Refuse Collection) 
(a)  The City Council shall by resolution establish charges for collection service for removal and hauling of garbage and refuse in the City, prescribe the time and manner of payment of such charges and adopt measures or regulations designed to enforce the payment thereof as, in its discretion, are necessary or desirable. Such resolution, when adopted, shall be of the same force and effect as if incorporated in this Section. 
(b)  Charges for garbage and refuse removed shall be a lien on the property served until paid in full. If payment of any such charge is not made within 90 days after the same is due, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of such charge to be given to the owner of such property by publishing the same for two consecutive weeks in a local newspaper, stating the amount of the charges. If the same are not paid within ten days thereafter, along with publication charges, the City Clerk shall certify such charges as assessed to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax rolls for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected, with a penalty of ten percent to defray the cost of collection as provided by state law. 
(70) Sec. 13-6-210. Penalties. (Chapter 13, Municipal Utilities; Article 6, Garbage and Refuse Collection) 
    It is unlawful for any persons to violate any provision of this Article. Any person violating the same shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(71) Sec. 16-10-20. Penalties for violations. (Chapter 16, Zoning; Article 10, Violations and Penalties) 
(a)  Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code; and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(72) Sec. 17-1-30. Authority. (Chapter 17, Subdivisions; Article 1, General Provisions) 
(a)  The Rocky Ford Subdivisions Regulations are authorized by state statutes, and are hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these statutes. 
(b)  Any person, being the owner or agent of any land located within a subdivision, who transfers, sells, agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to, exhibition of or use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded or filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred, sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this Chapter. The City may enjoin such transfer of sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(73) Sec. 18-1-90. Violation; penalty. Chapter 18, Building Regulations; Article 1, Building Code) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine not more than $300.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(74) Sec. 18-10-140. Supervision; penalties. (Chapter 18, Building Regulations; Article 10, Mobile Home Parks and Campgrounds) 
(a)  The person to whom a license for a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground is issued shall at all times operate the park or campground in compliance with this Article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park or campground, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(b)  The City Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this Article. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(c)  Any person who violate any provision of these regulations shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
INTRODUCED this 12th day of January, 2016. 
CITY OF ROCKY FORD, COLORADO 
      Jarold B. Sitton, Mayor   ATTEST: 
      Cheryl Grasmick, City Clerk   (SEAL) 
ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED on this 9th day of February, 2016. 
CITY OF ROCKY FORD, COLORADO 
ATTEST: 
      Jarold B. Sitton, Mayor         Cheryl Grasmick, City Clerk   (SEAL) 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      H. Barton Mendenhall, City Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 915  4-26-2016 Omit 1 916  4-26-2016 Include 1 917  7-12-2016 Omit 1 918  9-13-2016 Omit 1 919  9-13-2016 Include 1 920 12-13-2016 Omit 1 921 12-27-2016 Omit 1 905  8-25-2015 Include 2 906 11-10-2015 Omit 2 907 11-10-2015 Omit 2 908 11-10-2015 Omit 2 909 11-10-2015 Omit 2 910 11-10-2015 Omit 2 911 12- 8-2015 Omit 2 912 12- 8-2015 Omit 2 913 12-11-2015 Omit 2 922  5- 9-2017 Omit 2 923  8- 8-2017 Omit 2 924  9-12-2017 Include 2 928  3-13-2018 Include 3 929  3-13-2018 Include 3 930  3-13-2018 Include 3 931  3-13-2018 Include 3 933  5-22-2018 Include 3 934  5-22-2018 Omit 3 935  5-22-2018 Include 3 936  7-24-2018 Include 3 937  7-24-2018 Omit 3 938 11-27-2018 Include 3  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE 1 - Code 

Sec. 1-1-10. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Rocky Ford Municipal Code , published by Municipal Code Corporation, of which one copy is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado, as a codification of all the ordinances of the City of Rocky Ford of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. 914, 2016, for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the City. 
(Prior code 1.02.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Title and scope. 
    This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known as the Rocky Ford Municipal Code . It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Rocky Ford Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision hereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion hereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of or repeal of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code . Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, articles, sections and subsections of this Code, and such references shall, apply to that numbered title, chapter, article, section or subsection as it appears in this Code. 
(Prior code,  1.02.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-30. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other municipal codes consisting of compilations of general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-40. - Adoption of secondary codes by reference. 
    Secondary codes may be adopted by reference, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-50. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All existing ordinances and portions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature, which are inconsistent with any ordinance included in the adoption of this Code, are hereby repealed. 
(Prior code,  1.02.150; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-60. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1-1-50 above shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. 
(Prior code,  1.02.150; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-70. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. Among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Promising, guaranteeing or authorizing the payment of money by or for the City. 
(2)  Authorizing or relating to the issuance of general obligation bonds or other evidences of indebtedness. 
(3)  Levying taxes, making appropriations or adopting a budget. 
(4)  Relating to the compensation of City officers or employees. 
(5)  Calling or providing for a specific election. 
(6)  Vacating, closing, accepting, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, dedicating, naming or renaming a specific street, alley or other public way. 
(7)  Establishing the grades or lines of specific streets, sidewalks and other public ways. 
(8)  Creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvement districts. 
(9)  Making special assessments for local improvement districts and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district bond proceeds. 
(10)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the City. 
(11)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. 
(12)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the City. 
(13)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State, with other governmental bodies or with others. 
(14)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property. 
(15)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers. 
(16)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(17)  Amending the Official Zoning Map. 
(Prior code,  1.02.150; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-1-80. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances. 
    In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the City for adoption and revision as part of this Code, certain grammatical changes and other changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of this Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-2-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Code or the ordinances of the City, shall be construed as defined in this Section unless a different meaning is intended from the context or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such word or phrase: 
    City means the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Rocky Ford, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado. All its members means the total number of Council Members provided by the general laws of the State of Colorado. 
    Code means the Rocky Ford Municipal Code as published and subsequently amended, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    County means the County of Otero, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means the Colorado Revised Statutes, including all amendments thereto. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the City and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor means and is to be construed as meaning violation and is not intended to mean crime or criminal conduct. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed . 
    Ordinance means a law of the City; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
    Owner , applied to a building, land, motorized vehicle, animal or other real or personal property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety or any other person with a possessory interest in the whole or a part of said building, land, motor vehicle, animal or other real or personal property. 
    Person means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, firm, corporation, business, trust, organization or other entity, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall and must are both mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies all or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures; however, this definition does not affect any law relating to signatures. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Prior code,  1.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-2-20. - Computation of time. 
    Except as provided by applicable state law, the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Prior code,  1.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-2-30. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City, or his or her designated representative. 
(Prior code,  1.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-2-40. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Prior code,  1.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-2-50. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to this Code and to City ordinances: 
(1)  Gender. Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  Use of words and phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Prior code,  1.02.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - General 

Sec. 1-3-10. - Titles and headings not part of Code. 
    Chapter, article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article or section hereof. Chapter and Article titles, headings, numbers and titles of sections and other divisions in this Code or in supplements made to this Code are inserted in this Code, may be inserted in supplements to this Code for the convenience of persons using this Code, and are not part of this Code. 
(Prior code,  1.02.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Authorized acts. 
    When this Code requires an act to be done by any officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City which may be done as well by an agent, designee or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed when done by an authorized agent, designee or representative. 
(Prior code,  1.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-30. - Purpose of Code. 
    The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice. 
(Prior code,  1.02.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-40. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Prior code,  1.02.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-50. - Publication of ordinances. 
    All ordinances, as soon as possible after their passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and City Clerk. All ordinances of a general or permanent nature, and those imposing any fine or forfeiture, shall be published in a newspaper published within the City or, if there is none, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such ordinances shall not take effect until 30 days after such publication, except for ordinances calling for special elections or necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety and containing the reasons making the same necessary in a separate section. The excepted ordinances shall take effect upon their final passage and adoption and the approval and signature of the Mayor, if they are adopted by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-60. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature, passed or adopted after the adoption of this Code, may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this Code or without specific reference to this Code. However, in either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to this Code, and all of the substantive, permanent and general parts of said ordinances and changes made thereby shall be inserted and made in this Code as provided in Section 1-3-70 below. 
(b)  In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the City for adoption and revision as part of this Code, certain grammatical changes and other changes may be made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of this Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-70. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  The City Council shall cause supplementation of this Code to be prepared and printed from time to time as it may see fit. All substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum, and all amendments and changes in temporary and special ordinances or other measures included in this Code prior to the supplementation and since the previous supplementation, shall be included. 
(b)  The City Clerk is hereby directed to certify and forward to the codifier of this Code all ordinances enacted by the City Council since the most recent codification of ordinances, to coincide with chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections as they currently exist within this Code and to resolve any inconsistencies regarding capitalization, grammar and numbering or placement of chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections in this Code. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up to date one certified copy of the book containing this Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for the use of the public. 
(Prior code,  1.02.160; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-80. - Examination of Code. 
    The Mayor and City Clerk shall carefully examine at least one copy of the Code adopted by this ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of this Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in this Code, the Mayor and City Clerk shall carefully examine at least one copy of this Code as supplemented. The copy of this Code as originally adopted or amended shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the City and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-90. - Copy of Code on file. 
(a)  At least one copy of this Code as examined and any secondary code adopted by the City shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the City Clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
(b)  One copy of each adopted secondary code may also be kept in the office of the Chief Enforcement Officer in addition to the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  1.02.160; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-100. - Sale of Code books. 
    Copies of this Code book may be purchased from the City Clerk upon the payment of a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  1.02.160; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-110. - Public record. 
    Records of the City shall be open to inspection at reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the City, as provided by Article 72 of Title 24, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 773,  12, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-3-120. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof is held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that, if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
(Prior code,  1.02.180; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-4-10. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this Code for any person to do or perform any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful or to fail to do or perform any act required in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - General penalty for violation. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of this City hereafter enacted or any section, rule or regulation prorogated under the provisions of this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful in offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code, for which a different penalty is not specifically provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30. Such person may also be directed to serve community service in addition to such penalty and/or imprisonment. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  Every day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Prior code,  1.02.170; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-4-30. - Application of penalties to juveniles. 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten but not yet 18 years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit incarceration in an appropriate facility, at the time of charging, of a juvenile violating any section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-4-40. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalty. 
    Any person who alters, changes or amends this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Chapter, or who alters or tampers with this Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the City to be misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by Section 1-4-20 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-4-50. - Penalty for violation of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person who violates any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-4-60. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this Code, it is also unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet or suffer such unlawful act or omission. Concealing or in any manner aiding in the concealing of any unlawful act or omission is similarly unlawful. 
(Prior code,  1.02.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Inspections 

Sec. 1-5-10. - Entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Code or any ordinance, or whenever there is probable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any public inspector of the City may, upon presentation of proper credentials and upon obtaining permission of the occupant or, if unoccupied, the owner, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by ordinance. In the event the occupant or, if unoccupied, the owner, refuses entry to such building or premises, or the public inspector is unable to obtain permission of such occupant or owner to enter such building or premises, the public inspector is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-5-20. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers certified with the State, members of the Fire Department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the City, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics during the course of employment with a governmental agency are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the City without invitation from the occupant of the residence at any time such persons have reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant of such premises is incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 1-5-30. - Announcement of purpose and authority to enter premises. 
    Unauthorized entry pursuant to Section 1-5-20 shall be permissible only after the individuals seeking entry have announced both their purpose and authority in a loud and conspicuous voice and have waited a reasonable period of time for the occupant to respond before making entry. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Seal 

Sec. 1-6-10. - Corporate seal. 
    A seal, not exceeding two inches in diameter, having in the center the impression of a shock of wheat and surrounding this the inscription "City of Rocky Ford, Colorado," shall be the Seal of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration 
ARTICLE 1 - Elections 

Sec. 2-1-10. - Conduct of elections. 
(a)  The City hereby adopts the Uniform Election Code of 1992 in lieu of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, for the purpose of participating in coordinated elections with Otero County, in accordance with the provisions of Section 31-10-102.7, C.R.S. 
(b)  The City Clerk is hereby directed to work with the County Clerk and Recorder and to take all necessary actions to conduct regular municipal elections in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (a) above and all other appropriate statutes. 
(Prior code,  2.10.010, 2.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-1-20. - Write-in candidate affidavit. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal election shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to 20 days before the day of the election, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Prior code,  2.02.112; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Cancellation of election. 
(a)  If the only matter before the voters in a City election is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent as set forth in Section 2-1-20 above, the City Clerk if instructed by resolution of the City Council either before or after such date, shall cancel the election and the candidates, by resolution of the City Council, shall be declared to be elected. 
(b)  Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one other public place. 
(Prior code,  2.02.112; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-1-40. - Election wards. 
    The City is hereby divided into three wards for municipal purposes, at any and all municipal elections held by the City. The wards shall be as follows: 
(1)  First Ward. All that part of the City of Rocky Ford lying West and North of a line described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North Eighth Street with the City Limit line; thence South along the center line of North Eighth Street to the intersection with the center line of Ash Avenue; thence West along the center line of Ash Avenue to the intersection with the center line of Seventh Street; thence Southerly along the center line of Seventh Street to the intersection with the North line of Lot 1, Swink's Second Subdivision; thence East along said line to the Northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence South along the East line of said Lot 1 to the Southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence West along the South line of said Lot 1 to the Southwest corner of said Lot 1; thence South along the West lines of Lots 8, 13 and 20 of Swink's Second Subdivision to the center line of Washington Avenue; thence West along the center line of Washington Avenue to the intersection with the center line of Meloneer Lane; thence Southerly along said center line of Meloneer Lane to the Southerly City Limit line. 
(2)  Second Ward. All that part of the City of Rocky Ford described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North Eighth Street with the City Limit line; thence South along the center line of North Eighth Street to the intersection with the center line of Ash Avenue; thence West along the center line of Ash Avenue to the intersection with the center line of Seventh Street; thence Southerly along the center line of Seventh Street to the intersection with the North line of Lot 1, Swink's Second Subdivision; thence East along said line to the Northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence South along the East line of said Lot 1 to the Southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence West along the South line of said Lot 1 to the Southwest corner of said Lot 1; thence South along the West lines of Lots 8, 13 and 20 of Swink's Second Subdivision to the center line of Washington Avenue; thence West along the center line of Meloneer Lane to the Southerly City Limit line; thence following the City Limit line to the East to the intersection with the East line of Lot 30, Swink's Second Subdivision; thence North along the East lines of Lots 30, 27, 22 and 11, Swink's Second Subdivision, to the intersection with the center line of Spruce Avenue; thence East along said center line to Tenth Street; thence Northeasterly along the center line of Tenth Street to the City Limit line; thence following the City Limit line in a counterclockwise direction to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Third Ward. All that part of the City of Rocky Ford lying East of a line described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of North Tenth Street with the Northerly City Limit line; thence Southerly along the center line of Tenth Street to the intersection with the center line of Spruce Avenue; thence West along the center line of Spruce Avenue to the South along the East line of Lots 11, 22, 27 and 30, Swink's Second Subdivision, to the Southerly City Limit. 
(Prior code,  2.02.114; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Mayor and City Council 

Sec. 2-2-10. - City Council; terms, authority, qualifications and vacancies. 
(a)  Term of office. At the November 7, 1989 election, six Council Members shall be elected. The candidate for Council Member from each election ward receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a four-year term, and the candidate for Council Member from each election ward receiving the next highest number of votes shall be elected for a two-year term. At the next subsequent regular election and at each regular election thereafter, three Council Members shall be elected to serve four-year terms. 
(b)  Authority. The City Council shall constitute the legislative body of the City, shall have the power and authority, except as otherwise provided by statute, to exercise all power conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
(c)  Qualifications. Each Council Member shall be a resident of the City and a registered elector who has resided within the City limits for a period of at least 12 consecutive months immediately preceding the date of the election. He or she shall also be at least 18 years of age. However, in case of annexation of property, any person who has resided within the annexed territory for the time prescribed in this Subsection shall be deemed to have met the residence requirements for the City. 
(d)  Removal from office. Any Council Member who willfully absents himself or herself from two consecutive meetings of the City Council, one of which is a regular meeting, may be removed from office by a quorum of all the members elected to City Council. When any officer ceases to reside within the City limits, he or she may be removed from office pursuant to this Subsection. 
(e)  Vacancies. In case of the death, resignation, vacation or removal of any Council Member during his or her term of office, the City Council, by a majority vote of all remaining members thereof, may select and appoint, from among the duly qualified electors of the City, a suitable person to fill the vacancy in the City Council or in any other elected office. The person so appointed shall hold office until the next regular election and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. If the term of the person creating the vacancy in any election ward was to extend beyond the next regular election, the person elected to fill the vacancy in such election ward shall be elected for the unexpired term. Where vacancies exist in any election ward in the office of Council Members and successors are to be elected at the next election to fill the unexpired terms, the candidate for Council Member from such election ward receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to a four-year term and the candidate from such election ward receiving the next highest number of votes shall be elected to fill the unexpired term. 
(Prior code,  2.02.080, 2.02.110; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Mayor. 
(a)  The Mayor shall be elected to serve a term of two years. The Mayor shall meet the same qualifications as a Council Member and, in the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as a vacancy in the office of Council Member, as set forth in Section 2-2-10 above. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council and shall have the same voting powers as any Council Member. 
(c)  The Mayor shall be considered a member of the City Council and shall be recognized as the head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes. 
(d)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature all bonds, warrants, contracts and instruments of and concerning the business of the City, as the Council members or any statutes or ordinances may require. The Mayor may authorize the City Manager to perform any of the duties listed herein. 
(e)  The Mayor shall exercise all powers and perform such other duties as are conferred upon him or her by state statutes and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 773,  1, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-30. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    At its first meeting following each biennial election, the City Council shall choose one of the Council Members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem. In the absence of the Mayor from any meeting of the City Council, during the absence of the Mayor from the City or during the inability of the Mayor to act, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor. 
(Prior code,  2.02.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-40. - Acting Mayor. 
    In the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Council Members may designate another Council Member to serve as acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-50. - Compensation. 
(a)  The Mayor shall receive such compensation for his or her services as set by ordinance of the City Council. 
(b)  Each Council Member shall receive such compensation for his or her services as set by ordinance of the City Council. 
(c)  The compensation paid to any member of the City Council, including the Mayor, shall not be increased or diminished for the term of office for which he or she has been elected or appointed. Any Mayor or Council Member who has resigned or vacated an office prior to the end of his or her elective or appointed term shall not be eligible to election or reappointment to the same during such term if the rate of compensation has been increased. 
(Prior code,  2.02.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-60. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held two times per month at the Rocky Ford City Hall, and the date and time of the meetings shall be established at the first meeting of the newly elected City Council. No meeting shall be held on any legal holiday. 
(Prior code,  2.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-70. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Any four members of the City Council are hereby authorized to call special meetings of the City Council for the transaction of all corporate business when in their judgment special meetings shall be deemed necessary. 
(b)  Whenever a special meeting of the City Council is deemed necessary, a written notice of the time and place of such special meeting shall be given to each member of the City Council, which notice shall be personally served or left at the member's usual place of residence by the City Clerk, at least two hours in advance of the meeting. 
(c)  The City Council at any duly convened meeting may, by majority vote, call a special meeting for a future date. Notice of such meeting shall be given to any member of the City Council not in attendance. 
(d)  Should the City Council convene for a special meeting pursuant to a request of an interested party for the purpose of accommodating time constraints of said interested party, the City Council may, in its discretion, assess fees for the special meeting against the interested party. The City Council may from time to time by resolution adopt a Fee Schedule which may be assessed for special meetings. Said fees shall reasonably compensate the staff of the City and the City Attorney for time spent in preparation for attendance at special meetings. 
(Prior code,  2.02.020, 2.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-80. - Meeting rules. 
    In accordance with Section 31-4-108, C.R.S., the City Council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The City Council may compel attendance of Council Members and may punish any Council Member for misconduct. 
(Ord. No. 773,  2, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-90. - Adjourned meetings. 
(a)  The City Council may at any regular or special meeting adjourn the meeting to any other evening prior to the evening for the next regular meeting. In such cases, notice thereof shall be given to each member of the City Council by the City Clerk, by mail or otherwise. 
(b)  Three members shall be a quorum for adjourning a meeting, as provided in Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code,  2.02.040, 2.02.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-2-100. - Boards and commissions. 
    The following boards and commissions are responsible to the City Council, and the Mayor may establish formal lines of communication with the boards and commissions: 
(1)  Arts Commission. 
(2)  Board of Adjustment. 
(3)  Library Board. 
(4)  Museum Board. 
(5)  Planning Commission. 
(6)  Rocky Ford Country Club. 
(7)  Swimming Pool Commission. 
(8)  Tree Board. 
(Prior code,  2.02.071; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Officers and Employees 
Division 1 - General 

Sec. 2-3-10. - Appointed officers. 
(a)  The following officers of the City shall be appointed by a majority vote of all the members of the City Council: 
(1)  City Manager; 
(2)  City Attorney; and 
(3)  Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Said officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Powers and duties of officers. 
    Appointed officers of the City shall have such powers and perform such duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by state law and the ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-30. - Oath of office; bond. 
(a)  When required by the City Council, each officer or employee, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe to an oath to support the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the State and the ordinances of the City. 
(b)  The City Manager, the City Clerk and such other officers and employees as the City Council may require shall give bonds in such amounts and with such sureties as may be approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties pertaining to such office, the proper care of all money or property of the City coming into his or her hands and the proper accounting for or delivery of the same. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the City. The City Council may waive the requirements of such bonds. 
(Ord. No. 773,  14, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-40. - Compensation. 
    The salary or compensation of officers and employees shall be established by ordinance of the City Council, which shall provide uniform compensation for like services. Such schedules of compensation may fix the minimum and maximum for any grade. An increase in compensation, within the limits provided for the grade, may be granted at any time by the City Manager or other appointing authority upon the basis of efficiency and seniority. 
(Ord. No. 773,  13, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-50. - Removal of City officers. 
(a)  Cause for removal. By a majority vote of all members of the City Council, any appointed officer of the City may be removed from office. No such removal shall be made without a charge in writing and an opportunity of hearing being given unless the officer against whom the charge is made has moved out of the limits of the City. Appointed officers or employees of the City need not reside within the limits of the City. A Municipal Judge may be removed during his or her term of office only for cause, as set forth in Section 13-10-105(2), C.R.S. 
(b)  Specification of charges. All charges preferred against any such officer of the City, for any cause or causes specified in the foregoing subsection for the removal of such officer, shall be made in writing to the City Council and shall clearly specify any such cause or causes of removal. 
(c)  Service of charges and notice of hearing. A copy of such charges and specifications, together with a notice of the time and place of hearing, shall be served upon the accused at least 15 days before the day of hearing. 
(d)  Hearing. At the time and place so set, the City Council shall meet and proceed according to its rules to hear the evidence against the accused officer, as well as the evidence offered in his or her behalf, adjourning from time to time as may be necessary, until all the evidence has been given. 
(e)  Decision. Within three days after the evidence has been given, the City Council shall vote by yeas and nays upon each charge and specification separately. The question upon each charge shall be "Is the accused guilty?" If the City Council, by a lawful number, finds the accused officer guilty of any specified charge aforesaid, it shall resolve that the accused be removed from office and his or her office declared vacant. 
(f)  Appearance by counsel. Upon the trial as aforesaid, the accused shall be heard by himself or herself or by counsel in his or her defense, and the City may also be represented by counsel in the prosecution of such charges. The Chief of Police, the Mayor or the City Clerk may serve any paper required to be served by any provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-60. - City Attorney. 
(a)  The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who, upon taking office, shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice law in the State. The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney shall advise the City Council and City officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties, and perform such other duties as the City Council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  The City Council may provide the City Attorney with such assistants as the City Council may deem necessary and may, on its own motion or upon request of the City Attorney in special cases, employ special counsel. 
(c)  The City Council shall establish compensation for the City Attorney, his or her assistants and special counsel. Any agreement for compensation to special counsel shall be made only upon approval of the City Council and prior to the service being rendered. 
(Ord. No. 773,  3, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-70. - Social Security. 
    In the opinion of the City Council, the extension of the Social Security system to employees and officers of the City will be of great benefit, not only to the employees and officers by providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provision of the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System, but also to the City by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government. 
(Prior code,  2.20.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - City Manager 

Sec. 2-3-110. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The City Council shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City or the State. 
(b)  No member of the City Council shall be chosen as City Manager during his or her term of office. 
(c)  The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term. However, the City Manager may be removed at the pleasure of the City Council for cause. 
(1)  Before the City Manager may be removed, he or she must be given, if he or she so demands, a written statement of the reasons alleged for his or her removal. The City Manager has the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the City Council prior to the final vote on the question of his or her removal. Pending and during such hearing, the City Council may suspend him or her from office. 
(2)  The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intent of this Section to vest all authority and to fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the City Council. 
(d)  In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate a qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. 
(Ord. No. 773,  5, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-120. - Powers and responsibilities. 
(a)  The City Manager is responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City placed in his or her charge and, to that end and except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b) below, he or she shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the administrative service of the City except the City Attorney and the Municipal Judge. Appointments made by the City Manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability, training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. All such appointments shall be without definite term. 
(b)  Officers and employees appointed by the City Manager may be removed by him or her at any time for cause. The decision of the City Manager in any such case shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 773,  6, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-130. - City Council not to interfere. 
(a)  Neither the City Council nor any of its committees or members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his or her removal from office by the City Manager or in any other manner take part in the appointment or removal of employees in the administrative service of the City. 
(b)  The City Council and its members shall deal with that portion of the administrative service for which the City Manager is responsible solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City, either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this Section by a member of the City Council constitutes misconduct and is punishable in such manner as may be determined by the other members of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 773,  7, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-140. - Duties of City Manager. 
    It is the duty of the City Manager to perform the following actions: 
(1)  Act as chief conservator of the peace within the City. 
(2)  Supervise the administration of the affairs of the City. 
(3)  See that the ordinances of the City and the applicable laws of the State are enforced. 
(4)  Make such recommendations to the City Council concerning the affairs of the City as seem desirable to him or her. 
(5)  Keep the City Council advised of the financial conditions and future needs of the City. 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget estimate. 
(7)  Prepare and submit to the City Council such reports as are required by the City Council. 
(8)  Prepare and submit each month to the City Council a detailed report covering all activities of the City, including a summary statement of revenues and expenditures for the preceding month, detailed as to appropriations and funds in such a manner as to show the exact financial condition of the City and of each department and division thereof as of the last day of the previous month. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be required by him or her by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 773,  8, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-150. - Responsibilities at meetings. 
    The City Manager shall attend and participate in all City Council meetings, but shall have no vote therein. The City Manager has the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 773,  9, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-160. - Administrative plan. 
(a)  The City Council, upon the report and recommendation of the City Manager, has the power to create and establish by ordinance administrative departments of City administration. 
(b)  It is the duty of the City Manager to propose a plan of administrative organization to the City Council within 60 days after his or her appointment, which plan, if approved by the City Council, shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(c)  The administrative plan shall provide for the establishment of the office of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall be ex officio Finance Director and Clerk of the City Council. Subject to the supervision and control of the City Manager in all matters, the City Clerk shall issue licenses, collect license fees, make and keep a journal of proceedings of the City Council, have custody of all public records of the City not specifically entrusted to any other office, and perform such other duties pertaining to such offices as are by ordinance required or assigned to the City Clerk by the City Manager. 
(d)  The administrative plan shall also provide for a Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Finance Director and such other officers as are deemed necessary for the efficient administration of the City, and such plan may or may not include, in the discretion of the City Council, all of the officers named in Sections 31-4-105 and 31-4-107, C.R.S. All such officers shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided in Section 31-4-211, C.R.S. 
(e)  The plan of the City Manager shall be placed on file and shall be a matter of public record open to the examination by the public at all reasonable times. The City Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager, may change or abolish, by ordinance, any department or office established by ordinance; prescribe, distribute or discontinue the functions and duties of departments and offices so established; or assign additional functions and duties to departments and offices. 
(Ord. No. 773,  10, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Code Enforcement Officer 

Sec. 2-3-210. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created within the City a position to be called and referred to as the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 709,  2, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-220. - Duties and requirements. 
    The primary duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to investigate and enforce this Code and the ordinances of the City, to sign, issue and serve summonses and complaints into Municipal Court for violations of this Code and City ordinances, and to otherwise perform those functions as indicated and directed by the City Manager and the Chief of Police. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be under the direct supervision of the City Manager and the Chief of Police, and the City Manager and the Chief of Police shall outline the duties, responsibilities and requirements of the job. 
(Ord. No. 709,  3, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-230. - Status of employment. 
    The Code Enforcement Officer may be employed on a full-time or a part-time basis, as determined by the Chief of Police, and shall be subject to all of the provisions, conditions, benefits and obligations of the City personnel system. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve at the pleasure and will of the Chief of Police. This Section does not create any express or implied right of employment or continued employment. 
(Ord. No. 709,  4, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-3-240. - Requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall not be required to be a certified law enforcement officer. 
(b)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall not be authorized to participate in the investigation or prosecution of criminal matters. 
(Ord. No. 709,  5, 1-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Municipal Court 
Division 1 - Generally 

Sec. 2-4-10. - Creation of Municipal Court. 
    A qualified Municipal Court of record in and for the City is hereby created and established pursuant to and governed by the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-20. - Original jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction of all cases arising under the provisions of this Code and ordinances of the City, with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed in this Code or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-30. - Appointment of Municipal Judge. 
    The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge, appointed by the City Council in accordance with Section 13-10-105(1), C.R.S. The Municipal Judge may be removed during his or her term of office only for cause, as provided in Section 13-10-105(2), C.R.S. In the absence of the Municipal Judge so appointed, the City Council shall designate one or more substitute Judges to serve. 
(Ord. No. 773,  4, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Compensation of Judge. 
    The Municipal Judge shall receive such fixed compensation as may be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 773,  4, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Municipal Judge shall take an oath or affirmation that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State and the laws of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of his or her office. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Municipal Court Clerk. 
    The City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, may appoint a person to serve as Municipal Court Clerk, whose duties shall be those assigned by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge may also act as Municipal Court Clerk in accordance with state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-70. - Sessions generally. 
(a)  There shall be regular sessions of the Municipal Court for the trial of cases as may be fixed by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge may hold special sessions of court at any time, including Sundays, holidays and evenings. All sessions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceedings, the Municipal Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-80. - Rules of procedure. 
    In addition to other powers, the Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-90. - Contempt power. 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed $300.00 and imprisonment not to exceed a term of ten days. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-100. - Notice to appear or pay fine. 
(a)  Tender by a peace officer or the Code Enforcement Officer of a summons and complaint or a penalty assessment notice shall constitute notice to that person to appear in Municipal Court at the time and date specified or to pay the required fine and surcharge thereon. 
(b)  It is a violation of this Section for any person to fail to appear before the Municipal Court at the time and date specified in the summons and complaint or at any subsequent time and date to which the matter is continued or otherwise set by the Municipal Court, or to fail to pay the required fine, surcharge or costs. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this Section may be incarcerated for a period of time not to exceed 90 days or fined an amount not to exceed $300.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 789,  1-3, 9-23-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-110. - Court fees and surcharges. 
(a)  Surcharge. A flat surcharge as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule on all violations of the Model Traffic Code and this Code shall be assessed where the Municipal Court finds a defendant guilty or the defendant enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. The surcharge shall be in addition to any penalty assessment and other costs imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(b)  Use of funds. Use of all monies received from the surcharge shall be restricted to the following purposes: 
(1)  The surcharge may be used to pay for the training and any related expense of all Police Department employees, including certified officers and civilian employees. 
(2)  Where available and needed, the surcharge fees may be used to cover the costs of incarcerated offenders. 
(3)  Surcharge funds may be used for training and education of community members with regard to community policing programs, crime prevention programs, community relations programs, community problem-solving programs and other educational programs dealing with community issues and concerns. 
(4)  The surcharge may be used to pay for the acquisition of law enforcement safety equipment as required to ensure the safety of City police officers and citizens. 
(c)  Scheduled payment fee. Upon imposition of a fine or costs by the Municipal Court, a defendant may elect to pay the fines and costs over a period of time pursuant to a schedule established by the Municipal Court from time to time, subject to the following: 
(1)  Where the defendant elects to make payments, a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be imposed by the Municipal Court. This fee shall be in addition to any fine or other costs imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(2)  A late payment fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be imposed by the Municipal Court for each late payment. 
(d)  Amendment. The City Council may change or modify all surcharges and fees established in this Section by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 850,  a-c, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 892, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Sentencing Alternatives 

Sec. 2-4-210. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Division is to establish, authorize and set forth the terms and conditions of a useful public service program and home detention program as sentencing alternatives to the Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge. 
(Prior code,  7.15.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-220. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Division, the following words or phrases are defined as follows: 
    Defendant means any adult or juvenile convicted of or placed on a deferred sentence or deferred prosecution of a Code violation, whether that conviction results following a trial or voluntary plea negotiation. 
    Home detention means an alternative to a sentence to incarceration in any jail, wherein the defendant is allowed to serve his or her sentence or term of incarceration or supervision, or some portion thereof, within his or her home or other appropriate residence. 
(Prior code,  7.15.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-230. - Authorization and establishment. 
    There is hereby authorized and established within the City a useful public service program and home detention program as sentencing alternatives, which are available and may be utilized by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Judge shall be authorized and entitled to consider, as alternative sentencing provisions, that any defendant who is convicted of a violation may be required to participate in useful public service within the City, or may be required to participate in home detention as a further requirement of any sentence imposed by the Municipal Court. Said useful public service sentence shall not exceed 75 hours, and said home detention shall not exceed 14 days. 
(Prior code,  7.15.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-240. - Specific conditions or requirements for useful public service. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Section, useful public service shall mean any work which is beneficial to the public, which work involves a minimum of direct supervision or other public costs in which work would not, with the exercise of reasonable care, endanger the health or safety of the person required to work. All such work to be performed must be of a public nature, and no work shall generate profit for any individual or have a direct benefit to any private business, organization or individual. 
(b)  No person shall be required to perform community service subject to the terms of this Division; however, any person who fails or refuses to participate in or complete community service as ordered by the Municipal Court shall be subject to further punishment, resentence or incarceration, as deemed appropriate by the Municipal Judge. 
(Prior code,  7.15.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-250. - Factors to be considered in useful public service. 
    The Municipal Court will take into account the defendant's health and physical condition; the defendant's emotional condition and needs; the defendant's ability to do or complete the work to be assigned based on the capabilities and training of the defendant; and the hazards or dangers associated with any particular type of work. The Municipal Court shall be authorized to appoint a Useful Public Service Coordinator to assist in locating and assigning useful public service to defendants. Any work to be assigned shall not be of a religious nature or encourage or express a particular religious belief, and the work to be done shall not be considered to be political in nature, supporting or opposing any particular candidate for office, referendum or ballot question. 
(Prior code,  7.15.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-260. - Costs of useful public service. 
    Each individual defendant who is sentenced as an alternative sentence to useful public service shall be required to pay to the Municipal Court as a cost of the useful public service an amount as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  7.15.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-270. - Conditions and criteria of in-home detention. 
    The Municipal Court shall be entitled to impose, as a sentence for any violation, nonpayment of a fine or contempt of court, a term of supervision within his or her home or other approved residence. Such sentence or term of supervision shall cause the defendant to remain within such defendant's approved resident at all times, except for approved employment, education or related events, court-ordered activities or medical needs. Supervision of the defendant shall include personal monitoring by an agent of the Municipal Court, or monitoring by electronic devices which are capable of detecting and recording the defendant's absence or presence within the approved residence. 
(Prior code,  7.15.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-280. - Fees and costs of in-home detention. 
    The defendant shall be required to pay to the Municipal Court any and all fees or costs associated with in-home detention, including but not limited to the costs of any electronic devices to monitor the defendant's whereabouts or the additional costs imposed by supervision of the defendant's in-home detention. 
(Prior code,  7.15.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-4-290. - Policies and procedures. 
    The Police Department is hereby authorized to develop specific policies and procedures concerning the useful public service program and the in-home detention program. These policies and procedures would include, but not be limited to, coordinating, listing, contacting and making arrangements for community service at various locations and/or for various nonprofit organizations; handling of the costs and payment of those costs for the useful public service program and in-home detention program; and making arrangements for monitoring performance by defendants in both of these programs. 
(Prior code,  7.15.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Police Department 

Sec. 2-5-10. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the City, which shall consist of one Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Chief of Police; appointment and duties. 
(a)  In accordance with the administrative plan, the City Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  See that the Code and ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department are obeyed. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his or her duties and receipts as may be required by the City Manager, and keep the records of his or her office open to inspection by the City Council at any time. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Manager. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and ordinances of the City, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-5-30. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have power and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required by the Chief of Police. 
(2)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the City and shall see that the provisions of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are complied with. 
(3)  They shall execute and return all writs and processes directed to them by the Municipal Judge in any case arising under a City ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the County. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-5-40. - Oath of officers. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, each police officer shall take and subscribe an oath that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and the ordinances of the City, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Fire Department 

Sec. 2-6-10. - Purpose. 
    The Fire Department is hereby designated as the official Fire Department of the City, and shall be known as the "Rocky Ford Fire Department." The purpose of the Fire Department shall be to prevent and extinguish fires; to educate the public in all matters pertaining to fires and fire prevention; to engage in first aid and rescue operations; and to care for all fire, first aid, rescue and other City property in its charge. The Fire Department shall at all times be under the supervision and control of the City Manager. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-20. - Organization. 
(a)  New members shall be elected by the consent of the current members of the Fire Department. All compensation of firefighters shall be as provided by the City Council. 
(b)  The Fire Department shall adopt suitable bylaws, subject to the approval of the City Council, for the government of the Fire Department, such as are not in conflict with this Code, City ordinances or state and national laws. A copy of such bylaws and this Article shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place in the Fire Station. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-30. - Officers. 
    Officers of the Fire Department shall be a Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief and Captain, who shall be appointed by the City Manager, to serve at the will of the City Manager, and such other officers elected by a majority vote of members of the Fire Department as may be provided for in the bylaws of the Fire Department, to serve for such time as the bylaws may provide. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-40. - Duties of officers and members. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each officer and member of the Fire Department to obey without question the orders of his or her superior officer in the line of duty. Each member of the Fire Department shall wear at all times when on duty such distinctive uniform or insignia as shall be prescribed in the bylaws. 
(b)  The Fire Chief or officers of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the whole Fire Department, for the enforcement of all ordinances and regulations pertaining thereto, and for the care and condition of the Fire Station, fire apparatus, first aid and rescue equipment and all other property of the Fire Department or in its charge. The Fire Chief shall have command and control of all officers and members of the Fire Department and all hoses, fire apparatus, first aid and rescue equipment and other property of the Department or in its charge. The Fire Chief shall have control of all persons present at fires and shall have the power, if need be, to summon any and all able-bodied persons present to aid in extinguishing any fire, in removing property from any burning and exposed building and in guarding the same. Any able-bodied person refusing to obey such summons shall be liable to penalties contained in this Code. 
(c)  In the absence of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Captain or senior member present, in order of rank and seniority, a firefighter who is present shall assume the duties and full authority of the Fire Chief until the arrival of a superior officer. After responding to an alarm, no member shall leave the scene of a fire or the apparatus until the fire has been extinguished and the apparatus returned to the station and properly cared for, except by permission of the commanding officer. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-50. - Authority. 
    The Fire Chief and members acting under his or her orders shall have full and complete police power and authority at all fires. The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department present shall be subject to his or her orders at fires and shall cooperate with him or her in the maintenance of order and safety. The Fire Chief may prescribe limits at fires within which no person shall be permitted except by his or her orders. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-60. - Records and reports. 
(a)  The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of the activities of the Fire Department, and shall make a thorough investigation of each fire and make a report annually, and at such other times as may be directed by the Mayor, to the Mayor and the City Council, giving in detail the following information in regard to each fire, if available: cause, location, time, owner, tenant, occupancy, type of building, insurance carried, insurance paid, building loss, contents loss, how extinguished, apparatus used, firefighters present, firefighters absent, adequacy of water supply and pressure, and any other information of value. 
(b)  The Fire Chief, immediately after assuming office and annually thereafter, shall make an inventory of all property owned by the Fire Department or in its charge, (including first aid and rescue equipment), noting the condition of each article, which inventory shall be submitted to the Mayor and City Council, together with recommendations for the purchase of additional equipment needed and any other recommendations he or she may desire to submit affecting the Fire Department. 
(c)  The Fire Chief shall maintain in the office of the City Clerk an accurate list of the members of the Fire Department and shall report promptly any additions to or withdrawals from the membership. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-70. - Loaning of apparatus. 
    Fire apparatus and other City property in charge of the Fire Department shall not be loaned or rented, except by permission of the Fire Chief. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-80. - Interfering with Fire Department. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to enter the fire station unless accompanied by a member of the Fire Department or by permission of the Fire Chief or officer in charge. No person shall interfere in any way with the Fire Department in the performance of its duties. No person not a member of the Fire Department shall use any of the fire apparatus unless acting under orders of the commanding officer or firefighter in charge of the apparatus. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly give a false alarm of fire except those for test purposes given or caused to be given by the Fire Chief or the Fire Department. No person shall interfere with any part of the fire alarm system. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-90. - Right of entry. 
    The Fire Chief and members acting under orders shall have authority to enter any building in the proper performance of their duties. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-100. - Cooperation of Water Department. 
    The Water Department shall cooperate with the Fire Department in every way possible to provide an adequate supply of water at pressure suitable for firefighting and shall supply the Fire Department with one or more accurate maps of the distributing system, showing the size and location of all mains, valves and fire hydrants, which maps shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place in the Fire Station. The Water Department shall promptly report to the Fire Department the opening and closing of all valves in street mains and any other information relative to the water supply to any and all parts of the City, which information shall also be posted for the information of firefighters and others. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-6-110. - Emergency response authority. 
    The Fire Department is hereby designated as the emergency response authority for hazardous material incidents occurring within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Recreation Department 

Sec. 2-7-10. - Department established. 
    There is hereby created and established a Recreation Department for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the City and vicinity. 
(Prior code,  2.06.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-7-20. - Duties of employees. 
    The City Manager may employ such persons to perform the duties as the City Manager may consider necessary or advisable in furtherance of any recreation program of the City. All employees shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and shall perform such duties as required by the City Manager. 
(Prior code,  2.06.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-7-30. - Acquisition and disposal of property. 
    The City Council shall have the sole power to lease, purchase, acquire, hold and dispose of real or personal property for recreational purposes and shall have the sole power to contract any indebtedness for such purposes. The City may receive real or personal property by gift, grant or devise for use by the Recreation Department. 
(Prior code,  2.06.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-7-40. - Budget. 
    The City Manager shall prepare a budget for recreation each year. 
(Prior code,  2.06.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Arts Commission 

Sec. 2-8-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to set up, establish and create the Rocky Ford Arts Commission. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-20. - Creation. 
    There is hereby set up, established and created the Rocky Ford Arts Commission for the benefit of the inhabitants of the City and vicinity. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-30. - Directors. 
    The Arts Commission shall consist of not less than five nor more than eleven Directors, which Directors shall be appointed by the City Council. Directors need not be residents of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 802,  2, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-40. - Terms. 
    Each Director shall be appointed for a term of three years. Vacancies in the membership shall be appointed by the City Council to fill the unexpired term of a resigning Director. Directors shall not receive any salary or compensation. A Director may be removed by the City Council at any time. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-50. - Powers and duties. 
    The Arts Commission shall meet and organize by election of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer, and such other officers as deemed appropriate. The Arts Commission shall have the authority to establish bylaws to regulate its activities. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-60. - Annual report. 
    At the close of each year, the Chairperson shall make a report to the City Council concerning the activities of the Arts Commission during the year, sums of money received and expended, and all other matters deemed appropriate by the Arts Commission and City Council. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-8-70. - Title to property. 
    The title to property given to or for the benefit of the Arts Commission shall be held in the name of the City of Rocky Ford. 
(Prior code,  2.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9 - Board of Adjustment 

Sec. 2-9-10. - Creation. 
    A Board of Adjustment is hereby created by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 799,  1, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-20. - Membership. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall consist of all members of the Planning Commission, except that the Board of Adjustment shall not include the Mayor or any member of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 799,  2, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-30. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of a member shall be the same as each member's term of office as a member of the Planning Commission, and shall commence upon the appointment of a person to the Planning Commission without further action by the Mayor or City Council. 
(Ord. No. 799,  3, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-40. - Removal from office. 
    The City Council may, upon an affirmative vote of five members, remove a member of the Board of Adjustment for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The City Council shall give written notice to the member by certified mail, return receipt requested, 20 days prior to any action to remove that member. The member may make a written demand for a hearing and, upon receipt of the demand, the City Council shall conduct a hearing on the removal. Removal from the Board of Adjustment shall automatically terminate that member's term of office on the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 799,  4, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-50. - Duties. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative official charged with the enforcement of Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(c)  The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such zoning regulation, or to effect any variation in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 799,  5, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-60. - Appeal from decision. 
(a)  Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to review by certiorari by the Otero County District Court. 
(b)  Any appeal shall be filed with the District Court not later than 30 days from the final action taken by the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 799,  6, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-70. - Appeal to Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  Any appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be taken within 30 days of the final action taken by the administrative official. 
(b)  The appeal shall be commenced by filing with the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Ord. No. 799,  7, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-80. - Stay of appeal. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the District Court on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 799,  8, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-9-90. - Hearing. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable period of time. 
(b)  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(c)  The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and, to that end, has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(d)  Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of Chapter 16 of this Code, the Board of Adjustment has the power, in passing upon appeals, to vary or modify the application of the regulations or provisions of Chapter 16 or any other provision of this Code relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land, so that the spirit of the regulations is observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 799,  9, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 10 - Library Board 

Sec. 2-10-10. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to state statutes, the establishment of a public library in the City for the use and benefit of the inhabitants thereof is hereby created. The library shall be forever free for the use of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-20. - Funds. 
    The City Council may appropriate, levy and collect annually, in the same manner that the general taxes of the City are levied and collected, a tax upon real and personal property for the maintenance of the public library, said tax not to exceed one and one-half mills on each dollar of assessed valuation within the City, the same to be kept separate and apart in a special fund entitled the "Public Library Fund." The City may further appropriate property and sales tax for the maintenance and operation of the public library. The Finance Director shall be the custodian of all funds appropriated, collected or donated for the public library, and all such funds may be used to pay the cost of operation and maintenance of the library. All expenditures will be approved by the Library Board and the City Council and paid by the Finance Director. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 749,  1, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-30. - Members. 
    A Library Board consisting of seven Trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. A Trustee shall be appointed to serve for three years. Vacancies in the Library Board shall be filled for unexpired terms as soon as possible and in the same manner in which members of the Library Board are regularly chosen. A Trustee shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a Trustee, but necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred may be paid from the library fund. A Trustee may be removed only by vote of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 749,  2, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-40. - Organization, powers and duties. 
    The Library Board, immediately after appointment and annually thereafter, shall meet and organize by the election of a Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer, and such other officers as may be deemed necessary. The Library Board, with the consent and approval of the City Council, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt such laws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library as it deems expedient. 
(2)  Recommend a librarian for employment. 
(3)  Recommend the purchase of books, periodicals, maps, supplies and materials for the library on the recommendation of the librarian. 
(4)  Perform all other acts necessary for the orderly and efficient use of the library. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 749,  3, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-50. - Annual report. 
    At the close of each year, the Library Board or the librarian shall make a report to the City Council showing the condition of the library's trust during the year, the sums of money expended and the purpose of the expenditures, the number of books and periodicals on hand, the number added during the year, the number retired, the number loaned out, and such other statistics, information and suggestions as the Library Board deems of public interest. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City Clerk and the State Librarian. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 749,  4, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-60. - Nonresidents and inter-library exchanges. 
    The Library Board, under such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, may allow nonresidents of the City to use the books and other materials thereof, and make exchanges of books or other materials with any other library, either permanently or temporarily. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-70. - Willful retention of books. 
    A person who willfully retains any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging in or to the public library or other educational institution for 30 days after notice in writing to return the same, given at the expiration of the time that, by the rules of such institution, such article or other property may be kept, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-10-80. - Title to property. 
    The title to property given to or for the use and benefit of the public library shall be in the name of the City of Rocky Ford and shall be held and used according to the terms of the gift. 
(Prior code,  2.06.030; Ord. No. 749,  5, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 11 - Museum Board 

Sec. 2-11-10. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established and created a public museum in the City for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-11-20. - Custodian of funds. 
    The Finance Director shall be custodian of all funds for the museum. All expenditures shall be approved by the Museum Board and the City Council and paid by the Finance Director. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 749,  7, 1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-11-30. - Management and control. 
    The Museum Board shall consist of five Trustees. The Trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The appointment of the Trustees shall be for a term of four years. The terms of each Trustee may be staggered. Vacancies in the Museum Board shall be filled for unexpired terms as soon as possible in the same manner in which members of the Museum Board are regularly chosen. A Trustee shall not receive salary or other compensation for services as a Trustee, but a Trustee may be reimbursed by the City for necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred on behalf of museum affairs. A Trustee may be removed only by the vote of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 919, 9-13-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-11-40. - Powers and duties. 
    The Museum Board, immediately after appointment, shall meet and organize by the election of a Chairperson and Secretary, and such other officers as may be deemed necessary. The Museum Board, with the consent and approval of the City Council, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the welfare of the museum. 
(2)  Recommend a museum curator for employment by the City and, upon recommendation of the museum curator and approved by the Museum Board, such other employees as the Museum Board deems necessary, and prescribe the duties and fix the compensation of the museum curator and all employees. 
(3)  Participate in the preparation of an annual budget. 
(4)  Perform all other acts necessary for the orderly and efficient use of the museum. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 749,  8, 1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-11-50. - Annual report. 
    At the close of each year, the Museum Board shall make a report to the City Council showing the condition of the museum's trust during the year, including the sums of money expended and the purpose of the expenditures, the condition of the museum facilities, the condition of the contents of the museum and such other statistics, information and suggestions as the Museum Board deems of public interest. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 749,  9, 1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-11-60. - Title to property. 
    The title to the property given to or for the use of or benefit of the public museum shall be in the City of Rocky Ford, to be held and used according to and subject to the terms of the gift. 
(Prior code,  2.06.040; Ord. No. 749,  10, 1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 12 - Planning Commission 

Sec. 2-12-10. - Creation. 
    A Planning Commission for the City is hereby created pursuant to state statutes. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-20. - Members. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of five members, elected for five-year staggered terms. All members of the Planning Commission shall be bona fide residents of the City. If any member ceases to reside in the City, his or her membership on the Planning Commission shall immediately terminate. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation, and the non-Council appointed members shall hold no other municipal office. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-30. - Term of office; removal and vacancies. 
(a)  The terms of the City Council Members shall correspond to their respective official tenures. 
(b)  Members may be removed, after public hearing, by the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file a written statement of the reasons for such removal. 
(c)  Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-40. - Voting privileges. 
    All members of the Planning Commission shall be entitled to vote. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-50. - Organization and rules. 
    The Planning Commission shall, at its first meeting, elect a Chairperson from among the members of the Planning Commission, with all members being eligible. The Planning Commission shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine, with all members being eligible for such other offices. The term of the Chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-60. - Powers. 
    The Planning Commission shall have all of the powers and perform all of the duties specified by Parts 2 and 3 of Article 23 of Title 31, C.R.S., together with any other duties or authorities which may hereafter be conferred upon it by the laws of the State. The performance of such duties and the exercise of such authority shall be subject to the limitations expressed in said state statutes. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-12-70. - Master Plan. 
    In the preparation of a Master Plan, the Planning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the City, with due regard to its relation to neighboring territories. The Master Plan shall be made with the general purposes of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, the following: adequate provision for traffic; the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers; adequate provision for light and air; the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population; the promotion of good civil design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds; and an adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Prior code,  2.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 13 - Swimming Pool Commission 

Sec. 2-13-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to set up, establish and create the Rocky Ford Swimming Pool Commission, which will provide and encourage citizen participation in the development of swimming pool policies and swimming pool operations to the fullest extent possible under the laws of the State, provisions of City insurance carriers and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-20. - Creation. 
    The City Council hereby sets up, establishes and creates the Swimming Pool Commission for the benefit of the inhabitants of the City and vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-30. - Members. 
(a)  Appointment. The Swimming Pool Commission shall consist of not less than five and not more than eleven appointed members and two ex officio members. The appointed members shall include at least one City Council Member. The City Manager and/or the Superintendent of Public Works shall serve as ex officio members, to advise and support the Swimming Pool Commission, and shall have no vote. All appointed members shall have voting privileges. The City Council shall appoint all appointed members, including the City Council Member. Members need not be residents of the City. 
(b)  Terms. Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years. However, during the initial year, the terms for members on the Swimming Pool Commission shall be either for one year, two years or three years, as needed to establish and maintain, to the extent possible, staggered terms of office. All terms shall terminate at midnight on December 31 in the year the term concludes. 
(c)  Vacancies. Where an appointed member vacancy occurs, the City Council shall appoint a new member recommended by the Swimming Pool Commission, to fill the unexpired portion of the term. 
(d)  Removal of members. An appointed member may be removed by the City Council on recommendation of the Swimming Pool Commission, for unexcused absences at three or more consecutive meetings. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-40. - Compensation. 
    Members shall not receive any wage, salary or compensation. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-50. - Meetings and officers. 
    The Swimming Pool Commission shall meet as necessary and shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer at its first meeting each calendar year. The Swimming Pool Commission may elect such other officers as deemed appropriate. Ex officio members shall not serve as officers. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-60. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Policies and operations. The Swimming Pool Commission shall advise the City Council regarding swimming pool policies and shall assist and advise the City Manager with the day-to-day operation of the municipal swimming pool to the extent allowable under state regulations and law, City insurance policies and requirements and this Code. 
(b)  Standards. The Swimming Pool Commission and the City administration shall follow the standards set forth below: 
(1)  The swimming pool shall remain in compliance with all applicable Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment regulations, state law, this Code, requirements of the City insurance carrier and all safety rules established by or required by the City Safety Officer. 
(2)  In a calendar year, swimming pool operational expenses shall not exceed swimming pool revenues from all sources. 
(3)  The City administration shall take steps to assure that the Swimming Pool Commission receives sufficient financial information in a timely enough fashion to make decisions to avoid a deficit. 
(4)  Swimming pool revenues shall be deposited with the City, which shall use said revenues for the sole purpose of operating the swimming pool. 
(5)  The City shall pay swimming pool operational costs from swimming pool revenues, except where the City Council explicitly authorizes by motion or resolution the use of other assets or the transfer of other revenues to offset operational costs. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-70. - Employees. 
    All swimming pool employees shall be employees of the City, subject to the City personnel rules and regulations, and shall work under the direction and supervision of the Swimming Pool Manager, who shall report to the City Manager. The Swimming Pool Commission and Swimming Pool Manager shall interview and recommend to the City Manager individuals to be hired as lifeguards. The Swimming Pool Commission shall interview and recommend to the City Manager individuals to be hired as the Swimming Pool Manager. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-80. - Contracts for purchase. 
    All contracts for goods or services shall be approved by the City Council pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-90. - Reports. 
(a)  Monthly reports. The Swimming Pool Commission shall submit a verbal report to the City Council monthly when the swimming pool is operational. 
(b)  Annual reports. In addition, the Swimming Pool Commission shall provide the City Council with an annual written report following the seasonal closing of the swimming pool, and no later than October 15. The report shall provide information on the activities of the Swimming Pool Commission, sums of money received and expended, number of community members served and all other matters deemed appropriate by the Swimming Pool Commission and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-13-100. - Title to property. 
    The title to property given to or for the benefit of the Swimming Pool Commission or swimming pool shall be held in the name of the City of Rocky Ford. 
(Ord. No. 872, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 14 - Tree Board 

Sec. 2-14-10. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the City, which shall consist of seven members. Each member shall be a resident of the City and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-14-20. - Terms and vacancies. 
    Each Tree Board member shall be appointed for a five-year term; provided, however, that the first appointments to the Tree Board shall be for terms of one, two, three, four and five years respectively. The sixth and seventh members shall be appointed for initial terms whose lengths are determined by the City Council, so that not more than two terms shall end in the same year. Tree Board vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term following the same procedure used for the regular appointment of Tree Board members. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-14-30. - Compensation. 
    Tree Board members shall serve without compensation. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-14-40. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The Tree Board shall study, investigate, counsel, develop and update annually a written plan for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. The plan will be presented to the City Council annually and, upon acceptance and approval by the City Council, shall constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City. 
(b)  The Tree Board shall consider, investigate, make findings and recommendations and report upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work when requested by the City Council or City Manager. 
(c)  The Tree Board may assist with planting, pruning, trimming and other care of trees and shrubs located on all City-owned or City-controlled land, including but not limited to street trees and park trees. 
(d)  The Tree Board shall serve as a community resource to assist private land owners within the City who have questions or desire information regarding trees or proposed trees located on private property by providing information directly or by referral to other government or private sources of information and assistance. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-14-50. - Operation. 
    The Tree Board shall choose its own officers and shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The Tree Board may adopt bylaws, rules and regulations concerning the discharge of the Tree Board's duties and responsibilities under the terms of this Article. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 2-14-60. - Interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of its agents or any City employees while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, removing or replanting of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds as authorized in this Article or by any other section of this Code. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 839, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE 1 - Fiscal Year 

Sec. 4-1-10. - Fiscal year established. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January 1 of each year and shall extend through December 31 of the same year. The financial business of the City shall be conducted and executed in accordance with the fiscal year. 
(Prior code,  2.12; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - General and Special Funds 

Sec. 4-2-10. - Custody and management of funds. 
(a)  The following funds and associated activities within these funds are hereby declared and determined to be enterprises or excluded for purposes of the calculations required under Article 10, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, also known as the TABOR Amendment: 
(1)  Water Fund. 
(2)  Sewer Fund. 
(3)  Garbage Fund. 
(4)  Conservation Trust Fund. 
(b)  Moneys in the funds created in this Article shall be in the custody of and managed by the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said moneys as provided by law. Moneys in the funds of the City shall be invested or deposited by the Finance Director in accordance with the provisions of law. All income from the assets of the General Fund or a special fund shall become a part of the fund from which derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created; provided that, except as otherwise provided in this Code or by other ordinances or laws, the Finance Director may transfer out of any fund, other than any enterprise funds, any amount at any time to be used for such purpose within the appropriated budget unless a supplemental budget is required, which must be approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  3.08; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - General Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the General Fund, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All cash balances of the City not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the City. 
(2)  All fixed assets of the City (to be separately designated in an account known as the General Fund Fixed Assets) not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-2-30. - Capital Improvement Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Capital Improvement Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-2-40. - Conservation Trust Fund created. 
    There is hereby created and established a separate fund of the City, to be known as the Conservation Trust Fund, which fund shall be held, maintained and expended only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Prior code,  3.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-2-50. - Public Library Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Public Library Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-2-60. - Utility accounts. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership and operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and in accordance with the uniform classification of accounts as may be prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(Ord. No. 773,  11, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Sales Tax 

Sec. 4-3-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to impose a sales tax upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services in the City pursuant to the authority granted to incorporated towns and cities of the State by Article 2 of Title 29, C.R.S. This Article shall be so construed and interpreted as to effectuate the general purpose of making it uniform with the sales tax of the State levied by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. 
(Prior code,  3.14.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the definitions of words herein contained shall be as said words are defined in Section 39-26-102, C.R.S., except the definition of food in Section 39-26-102(4.5), C.R.S., and said definitions are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Prior code,  3.14.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-3-30. - Property and services taxed. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services, as provided in Section 4-3-50 below. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the City, or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the City. The gross recipients from such sales and use tax shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., regardless of the place to which delivery is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the City or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of a sales tax imposed by this Article shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(c)  The amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. 
(Prior code,  3.14.030; Ord. No. 812, 3-8-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-3-40. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to this Chapter shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to this Chapter are subject to the same sales tax exemptions as those specified in Part 7 of Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S., including but not limited to the exemption for sales and purchases of farm equipment under lease or contract specified in Sections 39-26-716(2)(b) and 39-26-716(2)(c), C.R.S., except: 
(1)  The exemption allowed by Section 39-26-709(1), C.R.S., for purchases of machinery or machine tools; 
(2)  The exemption of sales and purchases of those items in Section 39-26-715(1)(a)(II), C.R.S.; 
(3)  The exemption for sales of food specified in Section 39-26-707(1)(e), C.R.S.; 
(4)  The exemption for vending machine sales of food set forth in Section 39-26-714(2), C.R.S.; 
(5)  The exemption for occasional sales by a charitable organization set forth in Section 39-26-718(1)(b), C.R.S.; and 
(6)  The exemption for sales of low-emitting motor vehicles, power sources or parts used for converting such power sources, as specified in Section 39-26-719(1), C.R.S. 
(c)  All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from City sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(1)  The purchaser is a nonresident of or has his or her principal place of business outside of the City; and 
(2)  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the City under the laws of the State. 
(d)  In the event the limitation provided in Section 29-2-108, C.R.S., is to be exceeded in the City by a proposed county sales or use tax, such limitation shall be exceeded by a stated one percent in the City. 
(e)  The sales tax imposed pursuant to Section 39-26-104(1)(c), C.R.S., on a mobile telecommunications service is imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Act; and, pursuant to Section 117(b) of the Act, mobile telecommunications service taxable by the City is subject to sales tax or other charge imposed by the City on the service only if the customer's place of primary use is within City limits. As used in this Subsection, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Act means the federal "Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act," 4 U.S.C.,  116 to 126, as amended. 
    Customer means a customer as defined in Section 124(2) of the Act. 
    Mobile telecommunications service means mobile telecommunications service as defined in Section 124(7) of the Act. 
    Place of primary use means the place of primary use as defined in Section 124(8) of the Act. 
(f)  No sales tax shall apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in Section 29-2-109 C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(g)  No sales tax shall apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule city, city or town equal to or in excess of that sought to be imposed subsequently by the City. A credit shall be granted against the sales tax imposed by the City subsequently with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule city, city or town. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the sales tax imposed by the City. 
(h)  No sales or use tax shall apply to the sale of food purchased with food stamps. For the purposes of this Subsection, food shall have the same meaning as provided in 7 U.S.C.,  2012(g). 
(i)  No sales or use tax shall apply to the sale of food purchased with funds provided by the special supplemental food program for women, infants and children, 42 U.S.C.,  1786. For the purposes of this Subsection, food shall have the same meaning as provided in 42 U.S.C.  1786. 
(j)  This Section shall not be interpreted as adopting any new tax or increasing any existing tax. 
(Prior code,  3.14.040; Ord. No. 812, 3-8-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-3-50. - Amount and schedule of sales tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon all sales of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services, as specified in Section 4-3-30 above, a sales tax of three percent upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services as provided herein. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2018, there is hereby imposed upon all sales of tangible property and the furnishing of certain services, as specified in Section 4-3-30 above, a sales tax of one percent upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services as provided herein. The use of revenues from the sales tax shall be utilized for the repair of streets, sidewalks and other physical improvements in the City according to a Council-approved repair schedule. Said sales tax of one percent shall expire on December 31, 2020. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  The imposition of the tax on the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services subject to this tax shall be in accordance with schedules set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(Prior code,  3.14.050-3.14.090; Ord. No. 896, 7-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 928,  1, 2, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 4-3-60. - Collection, administration and enforcement. 
    The collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this Article shall be performed by the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the state sales tax. Accordingly, the provisions of Articles 26 and 21 of Title 39 and Article 2 of Title 29, C.R.S., and all rules and regulations promulgated by the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue pertaining to such collection, administration and enforcement are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Prior code,  3.14.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-3-70. - Vendor's fee. 
(a)  At any time of making his or her return of the tax as required by this Article, every retailer shall be entitled to subtract from the tax as remitted a State-approved percentage of said tax as his or her fee, said fee to be known as the "vendor's fee." 
(b)  If the retailer is delinquent in remitting said tax, he or she shall forfeit the vendor's fee unless good cause can be shown to the State for such delinquent remittance. 
(Prior code,  3.14.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Use Tax 

Sec. 4-4-10. - Use tax imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed a use tax of three percent for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the City any construction and building materials, and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required, purchased at retail. 
(Prior code,  3.14.120; Ord. No. 716,  1, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-20. - Purpose; applicability. 
    The purpose of this Article is to raise revenues and provide a companion tax to the sales tax. The tax imposed herein of three percent is a use tax on the use, storage or consumption within the City of construction and building materials purchased at retail outside the City for use, storage or consumption within the City. The legal authority for this Article is contained in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the definitions of words herein contained are as defined in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-40. - Exemptions. 
    Pursuant to state statutes, this tax, known as a use tax, shall not apply to: 
(1)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax collected for the City. 
(2)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the City, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business. 
(3)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the City by a nonresident thereof for his or her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the City; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the State by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of a business within the State. 
(4)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the U.S. government, the State or its institutions or political subdivisions, or the City in its governmental capacities only, or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(5)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label or furnished shipping case thereof. 
(6)  The storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property, the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales tax of another statutory or home rule city, town or city or county equal to or in excess of that imposed by this Article. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this Article with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the City of tangible person property purchased by him or her elsewhere. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him or her by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of another city, town, city or county on his or her purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this Article. 
(7)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the City and brought into the City by a nonresident acquiring residency. 
(8)  The storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract that was bid, let or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of the use tax ordinances imposing use tax. 
(9)  Any sales which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the U.S. or the Constitution of the State. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-50. - Motor and other vehicle use tax collection. 
(a)  The use tax of three percent provided for herein shall be applicable to every motor vehicle for which registration is required by the laws of the State. No registration shall be made of any motor vehicle or other vehicle for which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued for such vehicle by the Colorado Department of Revenue or its authorized agents, until any tax due upon the use, storage or consumption thereof pursuant to this Article has been paid. 
(b)  The use tax imposed by this Article shall be collected by the authorized agent of the Colorado Department of Revenue in the County. 
(c)  The proceeds of such tax shall be paid to the City periodically in accordance with an agreement entered into by and between the City and the Colorado Department of Revenue. 
(Prior code,  3.14.130; Ord. No. 716,  2, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-60. - Construction and building materials use tax collection. 
(a)  For construction and building materials, the use tax imposed by this Article shall be collected in full prior to issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit. The use tax shall be collected by the Building Department and/or the City Clerk. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to adopt all rules and regulations that may be necessary or appropriate for the collection, administration and enforcement of the use tax on construction and building materials. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the use tax for construction and building materials, the total valuation, including general contract costs and mechanical, electric and plumbing contract costs and delivery fees, shall be deemed to be the purchase price of such construction and building materials. 
(c)  If sales tax paid on construction and building materials to be used has been demonstrated as paid prior to commencing construction, and has been shown as acceptable proof to the City, no use tax shall be due at the time of permitting. 
(d)  For activities specifically requiring a building permit, a zoning compliance permit shall be pulled prior to the commencement of any activity. No final inspection on any permitted activity shall be given unless all use tax has been collected. 
(e)  For activities where no building permit is pulled or necessary as required by the current building code adopted by the City, i.e., re-roofing, remodeling, etc., a separate no-fee/no-permit zoning application shall be used to calculate applicable use tax at no cost to the applicant. 
(Prior code,  3.14.140; Ord. No. 716,  3, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-70. - Credit for use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    The City's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of three percent. A credit shall be granted against the City's use tax with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased by him or her in another statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed three percent. 
(Prior code,  3.14.200; Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-80. - Refunds for overpayment. 
    Upon completion of the construction or building project, the taxpayer may apply to the Finance Director for a refund for any overpayment of the use tax for construction and building materials, the tax having been computed upon an estimation of value, such application to be supported by a documented itemization of the actual purchases made for construction and building materials actually used or consumed in the project for which the building permit was issued and upon which the tax was paid. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-90. - Appeal. 
    After exhausting all local remedies, a taxpayer may elect to appeal a use tax assessment or claim for a refund to the Colorado Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. A notice of this right shall be included in any notice of assessment or denial of refund in clear and conspicuous type. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-100. - Lien on property. 
    If any person fails to pay the use tax within 30 days after it is due, the City Clerk shall issue a notice setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the use tax owed and the date of the accrual thereof, and that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and personal property of the taxpayer, except as to preexisting liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser, which right has attached prior to the filing of the notice as hereinafter provided. The notice shall be on forms prepared by the Finance Director, and, when filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the State in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property, such notice shall create a lien as aforesaid on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-110. - Funds deposited. 
    All funds received pursuant to this Article shall be deposited in the City's General Fund. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-120. - Amendments. 
    Except as to the use tax rate provided for in this Article and the items taxed and exempted from the use tax hereunder, the City Council may amend, alter, delete or change the provisions of its use tax regulations by the adoption of an amending ordinance in accordance with law. Such amendment, alteration, deletion or change need not be submitted to the electors of the City for their approval. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-4-130. - Violation; penalty. 
    It is a violation of this Article for any person who, by this Article, is required to make any return or pay any tax to fail or refuse to make any return or pay any tax required to be made or paid by this Article; to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statements in any return; to fail or refuse to make payment to the Finance Director, City Clerk or County Clerk of any taxes collected or due the City; or in any manner to evade the collection of any payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this Article; or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this Article. Any corporation or officer thereof making a false return or a return containing a false statement shall be guilty of a violation of this Article and shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 891,  1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Occupational Tax 

Sec. 4-5-10. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
    Considering the nature of the business of selling products, commodities or services, the sale of which is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State, and the relation of such business to the municipal welfare, as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required of the City and a proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City, and all other matters proper to be considered thereto, the City Council finds that the classification of the business as separate occupations is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
(Prior code,  3.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-20. - Levy and schedule. 
    There is hereby levied on and against any and all businesses selling products, commodities or services, the sale of which is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, operating in the City without a franchise an occupation tax equal to three percent of the gross revenue arising from the sale of which is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission within the corporate limits of the City as now or hereafter fixed. 
(Prior code,  3.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-30. - Filing statement and payment of tax. 
    Within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, there shall be filed with the City Clerk a statement showing the total gross revenue as prescribed in Section 4-5-20 above during the preceding calendar quarter. Such statement shall be accompanied by payment to the City of the tax due for the period covered by the statement. 
(Prior code,  3.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-40. - Failure to pay. 
    If any of said businesses fails to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof, with an addition of ten percent, shall be due and collected from such business, and the same shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a debt due and owing from such businesses to the City. The City Attorney shall commence to prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect said debt in the name of the City. 
(Prior code,  3.10.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-50. - Penalty clause. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article fails, neglects or refuses to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-5-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00; provided that each day after said statement becomes delinquent, during which said officer, agent, manager or person fails, neglects or refuses to make and file such statement, shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code,  3.10.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-60. - Inspection of records. 
    The City and its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right, after notice, at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of such businesses and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. Said books and records shall be made available in the City. The notice required by this Section shall be in writing, directed to the owners, officers, managers or agents of the business having general control, management or supervision of the business within the State or the City, and shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, which receipt shall be conclusive evidence of the receipt of said notice by the addressee. 
(Prior code,  3.10.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-70. - Franchised businesses not liable. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any business selling products or commodities, the sale of which is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, with a franchise granted by the City, requiring the payment of a franchise tax in the City. The liability of any business selling products or commodities, the sale of which is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission within the City, to pay the tax hereby levied shall cease during the effective period of any franchise granted by the City to such business which requires the payment of a franchise tax. 
(Prior code,  3.10.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-80. - Successors. 
    The provision of this Article shall apply to the successors and assigns of any and all businesses as set out in Section 4-5-20 of this Article and to any and all corporations, partnerships, persons or others furnishing and supplying, operating, engaging in or carrying on any business of the same nature as set out in Section 4-5-20. 
(Prior code,  3.10.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-90. - Single purpose not diverted. 
    The purpose of this Section being to raise revenue for the City and to secure a proper distribution of the moneys to be raised under this Article, this Article shall be void in case the Supreme Court of the State shall hold that any part of the moneys to be raised under this Article must be used for any other purpose. 
(Prior code,  3.10.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-5-100. - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in their performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. 
(Prior code,  3.10.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Telephone Utility Occupation Tax 

Sec. 4-6-10. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the City a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the City, and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the City. The annual amount of tax levied shall be equal to $5.50 per telephone account for which local exchange service is provided within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  3.12.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-20. - Payment schedule. 
    The tax levied by this Article shall be due and payable quarterly in four equal installments, which shall be paid 30 days after the due date. 
(Prior code,  3.12.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-30. - Filing statement. 
    Each telephone utility company subject to this Article shall file with the City Clerk, in such form as the City Clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the City. Such statement shall be filed within 30 days after June 15 of each year, showing such accounts existing on June 15. 
(Prior code,  3.12.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-40. - Failure to pay. 
    If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this Article fails to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the City. The City Attorney, upon direction of the City Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the debt in the name of the People of the City. 
(Prior code,  3.12.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-50. - Penalty clause. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article fails, neglects or refuses to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-6-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00; provided that each time the officer, agent, manager or person fails, neglects or refuses to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code,  3.12.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-60. - Inspection of records. 
    The City and its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility company which are subject to the provisions of this Article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Prior code,  3.12.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-70. - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Article shall be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the City. 
(Prior code,  3.12.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-6-80. - Tax in lieu of other taxes. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other payments by or fees and taxes on any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this Article, other than ad valorem taxes, and in addition shall be in lieu of any free service furnished to the City by said telephone utility. 
(Prior code,  3.12.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Liquor Regulation and Occupational Tax 

Sec. 4-7-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    3.2 beer means malt liquor as herein defined containing not more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight. 
    Malt liquor shall include beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any fusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar products, or any combination thereof, in water, containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight. 
    Medicinal liquors means any liquor sold by a duly licensed pharmacist or drug store solely on a doctor's bona fide prescription. 
    Operator means a person licensed by law to sell malt, vinous and spirituous liquors, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes at retail and who is engaged at any time during the calendar year in such operation within the City. 
    Person shall include persons, partnerships, associations, organizations or corporations. 
    Spirituous liquors shall be construed to mean any alcohol beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquor or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with other liquor, except as above provided, shall not be construed to be malt or vinous liquors, but shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Vinous liquors shall include wine and fortified wines not exceeding 21 percent of alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural produce containing sugar. 
(Prior code,  3.13.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-20. - Classification of businesses. 
    The business of selling at retail any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes is hereby defined and separately classified as such occupation for the purpose of this Article, as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" operators are all operators who are licensed to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises, either as hotel or restaurants. 
(2)  Class "B" operators are all operators licensed to sell malt or vinous liquors only by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  Class "C" operators are all operators licensed as retail liquor stores to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in original containers for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  Class "D" operators are all operators licensed as drug stores to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in original containers for consumption off the premises. 
(5)  Class "E" operators are all operators licensed to sell only 3.2% beer and who sell the same for consumption on the premises. 
(6)  Class "F" operators are all operators licensed to sell only 3.2% beer and who sell the same solely in the original package or container for consumption off the premises. 
(7)  Class "G" operators are all operators licensed to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors as clubs. This Class shall not include clubs which are classified and identified as fraternal clubs and benevolent organizations which operate the same as a wholly nonprofit organization. 
(8)  Class "H" operators are all operators licensed to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors as fraternal and benevolent organizations on a nonprofit basis. 
(Prior code,  3.13.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-30. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
    Considering the nature of the business of selling at retail 3.2% beer, malt, vinous and spirituous liquors for beverage purposes, and the relation of such business to the municipal welfare, as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required of the City and a proper, just and equitable distribution of tax burdens within the City, and all other matters proper to be considered in relation thereto, the City Council finds, determines and declares that the classification of said business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
(Prior code,  3.13.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-40. - Amount of tax assessed. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed for the calendar year an annual occupational tax upon the business of selling 3.2% beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, except medicinal liquors, in the City, as said occupation has been herein classified as follows: 
Operator Tax Class "A" $200.00 Class "B" 200.00 Class "C" 200.00 Class "D" 200.00 Class "E" 200.00 Class "F" 200.00 Class "G" 200.00 Class "H" 200.00  
(Prior code,  3.13.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-50. - Due date of taxes. 
(a)  The occupational tax shall be due and payable to the City Clerk on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent on February 1 of the same year. Prepayment of said tax may be made in the month of December preceding the due date. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such tax, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to execute and deliver to the operator paying the tax a receipt showing the name of the operator paying the tax, the date of payment, the annual period for which said tax is paid and the place at which the operator conducts business. 
(c)  The operator shall, at all times, keep the receipt posted in a conspicuous place in his or her place of business. 
(Prior code,  3.13.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-60. - Proration for new businesses. 
    If any operator begins business subsequent to January 1 of any year, the tax required shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the remaining portion of the year, but no refund shall be made to any person who discontinues said business during the year. All prorated taxes provided for in this Section shall be due and payable upon the beginning of business and shall be delinquent ten days thereafter. 
(Prior code,  3.13.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-70. - Delinquent taxes; interest due. 
    Interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes from the date of delinquency until paid or collected, at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(Prior code,  3.13.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-80. - Delinquency not grounds for license suspension. 
    No delinquency in payment of the tax herein provided for shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license granted to an operator by any licensing authority pursuant to state statutes. In the performance of any duties imposed upon the City Council as a licensing authority by state statutes, the City Council shall exclude from consideration any delinquency in payment of the tax herein provided for. 
(Prior code,  3.13.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-7-90. - City may sue for sums due. 
    The City shall have the right to recover all sums due under the terms of this Article by judgment and execution thereon in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such remedy shall be cumulative with all other remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this Article. 
(Prior code,  3.13.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Disposition of Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 4-8-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the City. 
(Prior code,  2.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-8-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    City Manager means the City Manager of the City or any designee. 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association or governmental entity other than the City, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of the same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City. 
    Unclaimed property means, except as provided by any other provision of this Code or ordinance of the City, any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than one year after it became payable or distributable. 
(Prior code,  2.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 4-8-30. - Procedure for disposition of property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of $50.00 or more, the City Manager shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the City department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount of estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that, if the owner fails provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than $50.00 or having no last known address of the owner, the City Manager shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount of estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall also state that, if the owner fails to provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(c)  If the City Manager receives no written claim within the above 60-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(d)  If the City Manager receives a written claim within the 60-day claim period, the City Manager shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within 90 days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The City Manager may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(e)  In the event that there is more than one claimant for the same property, the City Manager, in the City Manager's sole discretion, may resolve said claims or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
(f)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(g)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the City Manager shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within 30 days of such decision, or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the City Manager pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(h)  The City Manager is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this Article, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Prior code,  2.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9. - Retail Marijuana and Marijuana Products Tax 

Sec. 4-9-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to impose a separate and additional sales tax on the lawful sale of marijuana and marijuana products within the City. 
( Ord. No. 931,  1, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 4-9-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Consumer shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(b) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; 
    Lawful retail sale of marijuana and marijuana products shall mean the sale of marijuana and marijuana products by a licensed retail marijuana store to a consumer in compliance with Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and Section 12-43.4-101, et seq., C.R.S.; 
    Marijuana shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(f) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; 
    Marijuana establishment shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(k) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; 
    Marijuana products shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(k) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; and 
    Retail marijuana store shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(n) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution 
( Ord. No. 931,  2, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 4-9-30. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Effective April 1, 2018, there is hereby levied and shall be collected upon the lawful retail sale of marijuana and marijuana products within the City at a rate of six percent of the price paid by the consumer thereof rounded off to the nearest penny. 
(b)  The sales tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the sales tax imposed on the retail sale of tangible personal property pursuant to Article 3 of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 931,  3, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 4-9-40. - Collections, administration and enforcement. 
    The collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this Article shall be performed by the City of Rocky Ford. 
( Ord. No. 931,  4, 3-13-2018 ) 
CHAPTER 5 - Franchises and Communication Systems 
ARTICLE 1 - Emergency Telephone Service 

Sec. 5-1-10. - Intent and applicability. 
    The City Council finds, determines and declares that it is necessary to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, and that a continuous and adequate emergency telephone service be made available to the citizens of the City through the construction, installation and use of a 911-enhanced emergency telephone service. 
(Prior code,  2.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-1-20. - Assessments. 
    The City Council is hereby authorized to impose a charge as set forth and designated in Section 29-11-102, C.R.S., and the proceeds of said charge shall be utilized to pay for emergency telephone service at set forth in Section 29-11-104(2), C.R.S. Said charge shall be imposed on each telephone user within the corporate limits of the City; however, said charge shall not be imposed upon any state or local government entity. 
(Prior code,  2.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-1-30. - Imposition of charge. 
    The City Council is hereby authorized to impose said charge by resolution, as amended from time to time; however, said charge shall not exceed the limits imposed by statutes or laws of the State. 
(Prior code,  2.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-1-40. - Representative to authority board. 
    The City Council is hereby authorized to appoint by resolution, from time to time as necessary, two representatives to sit on the authority board, said appointments to be made at least annually. 
(Prior code,  2.22.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-1-50. - Severability. 
    If any of the various provisions of this Article are determined by a court of law to be invalid, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code,  2.22.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Railroads 

Sec. 5-2-10. - Rights granted to BNSF Railway Company. 
    There is hereby granted to the BNSF Railway Company, and its successors and assigns, the right, privilege and license to locate, construct and operate, by steam or other motive power, and to maintain a single or double track railway with the necessary switches in the City, over and across that portion of Fourth Street lying between the North line of the right-of-way of the BNSF Railway and the North line of Lot 8 in Block 15A in the second filing of the City, if the said North line of Lot 8 were extended across Fourth Street; and likewise crossing Elm Avenue between Fourth Street and the alley extending North and South through Blocks 15 and 15A and likewise crossing Swink Avenue between Fourth Street and the alley extending North and South through Blocks 15 and 75 and likewise crossing Chestnut Avenue between Fourth Street and the alley extending North and South in Block 75. 
(Prior code,  10.18.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-2-20. - Rights subject to conditions. 
    The rights and privileges hereby granted shall be subject to all reasonable ordinances and police regulations of the City now in force or that may hereafter be adopted, and the Railway Company shall keep the crossing at Fourth Street planked and in condition for travel, to a width of 16 feet in the center of the street, shall keep the crossing over Elm Avenue, Swink Avenue and Chestnut Avenue planked in a similar way to a width of 32 feet, and shall likewise maintain such drains or ditches as may be necessary at said crossings and maintain such culverts or other waterways as may be necessary for the City irrigation ditches, including a syphon under the tracks where they may intersect or cross Fourth Street. 
(Prior code,  10.18.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Gas Franchise 

Sec. 5-3-10. - Franchise granted. 
(a)  There be and hereby is granted to SourceGas Distribution LLC, its successors and assigns, hereinafter collectively referred to as "Grantee," the sole and exclusive right, authority, privilege and franchise to construct, erect, build, operate and maintain within the City of Rocky Ford, as the same now exists or may hereafter be extended, hereinafter referred to as "Municipality," such mechanical or other appliances and equipment as may be necessary for the manufacture and distribution of manufactured, mixed-manufactured or natural gas, or for the distribution of natural gas, for lighting, power, heating, industrial or other purposes to which gas may be applied, whether manufactured, mixed-manufactured or natural, with the sole and exclusive right and privilege for the period and upon the terms and conditions hereinafter specified, to construct, maintain and operate a transmission line or lines for the purpose of conducting into, from or to the Municipality gas generated there or elsewhere, and to sell or furnish natural or manufactured or mixed gas to the Municipality and the inhabitants thereof, and to distribute the same by means of mains, conduits or pipes laid over, upon, along, under and/or across the streets, alleys, bridges, public ways and public places within the present and future boundaries of the Municipality and upon the extension or continuation of any such streets, alleys, bridges and public ways and places or upon any new streets, alleys, bridges and public ways and places that may hereafter be laid out, opened or constructed. 
(b)  For the purposes aforesaid, the Grantee may enter upon, through or under any street, avenue, alley, viaduct, subway or public place or grounds and take up any pavement or sidewalk then existing therein or thereon and make excavations necessary for the laying of such conduits, mains, pipes and appurtenances, provided that any such use of said streets, avenues, alleys, viaducts, subways and public grounds shall be conducted in accordance with all excavation permit requirements or other regulations of the Municipality and shall be made with the least possible inconvenience to the inhabitants of the Municipality. Such excavations shall be barricaded when necessary and lighted at night, and such sidewalks, pavements or excavations shall be refilled and replaced without unnecessary delay, by and at the expense of the Grantee, in as good condition as they were before said work was commenced. 
(c)  The Grantee shall not have the absolute right to cut into or remove any permanent sidewalks, but shall be required, wherever practicable in laying mains, conduits or pipes, to tunnel under said sidewalks. 
(d)  The Grantee shall not have the right to enter into any public property other than streets, alleys and designated utility rights-of-way in the Municipality for the purpose of laying conduits, pipes or mains until it has first obtained the consent of the Municipality so to do. 
(Ord. No. 880,  1, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-20. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
(a)  All conduits, pipes and mains shall be placed in alleys wherever practicable, and in any event in such manner as will not unnecessarily interfere with the use of said streets and alleys, and public highways, places and grounds nor with the established grade of streets or gutters, nor with water pipes or sewers or any character of drain pipes which are now installed in said streets or alleys by the Municipality. 
(b)  If at any time it becomes necessary to change the position of any gas main or service connection of the Grantee to permit the Municipality to lay, make or change the grade of a street, alley or public grade, sanitary or storm sewers, water mains or other municipal works, such changes shall be made by the Grantee at its own expense; provided, however, that the Municipality shall provide the Grantee with a notice of any proposed development and seek the Grantee's input during the initial phase of planning and engineering of any municipal project which may require the Grantee to relocate its facilities, in order to explore means of reducing the costs to the Grantee. The Municipality shall make reasonable efforts to mitigate the financial impact of any such project on the Grantee. If the Municipality does not provide said notice to the Grantee during the initial phase of planning and engineering of any municipal project which may require the Grantee to relocate its facilities, the Grantee's relocation expenses shall be paid by the Municipality. 
(c)  If the Municipality and Grantee confer and do not agree on a facilities relocation plan, the Grantee may request and the Municipality's representatives shall participate in good faith mediation before a mutually agreeable third party in an effort to resolve their differences. 
(d)  The Municipality will not oppose in proceedings before the Colorado Public Utilities Commission just and reasonable recovery of costs which the Grantee incurs in complying herewith. 
(Ord. No. 880,  2, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-30. - Grantee responsibilities. 
    The Grantee shall be and remain solely and exclusively responsible for all damage to persons or property that may arise by reason of any negligence of the Grantee or any of its agents, servants or employees in exercising any of the privileges, rights or franchises herein granted. The Grantee shall hold and save harmless the Municipality from and against any and all loss and damage of any kind or description whatever by reason of the Grantee's negligent exercise of any rights, privilege or franchise hereby granted. 
(Ord. No. 880,  3, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-40. - Responsibilities. 
    This franchise and the rights, privileges and franchises hereby granted hereunder shall be and remain in full force and effect for the period of 25 years from the final passage date of the ordinance codified herein. Within 60 days from and after final passage of said ordinance, the Grantee shall have filed with the City Clerk its written acceptance of this Article. In case of the failure of the Grantee to file such acceptance within the time so limited, this Article, and the rights, privileges and franchises hereby granted, shall be and become null and void, but the rights and franchises granted by this Article are granted upon the express condition that the Municipality shall have the right and power to purchase or to condemn at the time and under the conditions and in the manner provided by the laws of the State at such time in full force and effect, all works and plants erected hereunder and all property of the Grantee actually used or useful for the convenience of the Municipality. 
(Ord. No. 880,  4, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-50. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the Grantee shall assess, effective the first billing cycle after this franchise becomes effective, to residential and commercial customers of the Grantee within the Municipality a franchise tax or fee equivalent to three percent of annual gross revenue derived from gas service within the corporate limits of the Municipality that is billed by the Grantee, including the revenue received from the sale of industrial gas and excluding the amount received from the Municipality itself for gas service furnished it and after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectable amounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered. The Grantee shall pay to the Finance Director an annual payment for each year of the duration of this franchise, in an amount equal to the franchise fee or tax funds collected by the Grantee hereunder. Payment shall be made on or before April 1 of each year for the preceding year, and each such payment shall be accompanied by a statement supporting the payment. 
(b)  The Municipality reserves the right to renegotiate the franchise fee leasing up to each five-year anniversary of this franchise. In order to exercise the rights to renegotiate the franchise fee, the Municipality must provide to the Grantee written notice of such exercise by a duly authorized representative, no sooner than 180 days and no later than 60 days prior to the applicable annual anniversary date of this franchise. Upon the Grantee receiving a duly authorized notice from the Municipality that complies with the above-stated limitations, the Grantee and the Municipality shall negotiate in good faith, and the Municipality shall select, no later than 30 days prior to the applicable annual anniversary date of this franchise, a reasonable franchise fee to replace the franchise fee then in effect. The replacement franchise fee shall become effective upon the annual anniversary date that immediately follows the year in which the Municipality exercised this right. For illustrative purposes only, if the Municipality were to exercise this right 90 days prior to the fifth annual anniversary date of this Article, the reasonable replacement franchise fee that the Municipality selected would become effective on the fifth annual anniversary date of this franchise. Unless and until the franchise fee is replaced pursuant to this Subsection, the then-current franchise fee shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  Such payment shall be in lieu of any and all other fees, charges, licenses, taxes or assessments which the Municipality may impose for the rights and privileges herein granted or for the privilege of doing such business within the Municipality and for the use of the rights-of-way. In the event any such fee, charge, license, tax or assessment is imposed by the Municipality, the payment to be made in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be refunded in an amount equal to the annual burden of such fee, charge, license, tax or assessment imposed upon the Grantee. Ad valorem property taxes imposed generally upon all real and personal property within the Municipality shall not be deemed to affect the obligation of the Grantee under this Section. 
(d)  If, at any time during the term of this franchise, the manner in which the franchise fee is calculated, collected or paid is changed, whether by action of the Grantee, the PUC or any entity having jurisdiction thereof, the Grantee agrees to cooperate with the Municipality in modifying the franchise to assure that the Grantee collects and the Municipality receives an amount in franchise fees or some other form that is the same amount of franchise fees collected by the Grantee and paid to the Municipality as of the date of such change and required modification, to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 880,  5, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-60. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence or section of this Article shall be held void by any court, the same shall not affect the remainder of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 880,  6, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-3-70. - Successors and assigns. 
    The rights, privileges, franchises and easements hereby granted shall inure to the benefit of said Grantee, its successors and assigns, and, wherever the term Grantee is used herein, it shall be held to mean and include SourceGas Distribution, LLC, its successors and assigns, and wherever the word Municipality is used herein, it shall be held to mean the City of Rocky Ford, County of Otero, State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 880,  7, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Electric Franchise 

Sec. 5-4-10. - Franchise granted. 
    The City (hereinafter referred to as "Grantor") hereby grants a nonexclusive franchise to Black Hills/Colorado Electric Utility Company, LP, d/b/a Black Hills Energy, a Delaware corporation (hereinafter called "Grantee"), its lessees, successors and assigns. The Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, permission and authority to construct, install, maintain, operate and extend in, along and across the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public easements as are now within the present or future limits of the Grantor, an electric distribution system and all facilities necessary for the production, transmission and distribution of electrical power and energy for the purpose of carrying on a general power and light business and other operations connected therewith or incident thereto for all purposes to the inhabitants of the Grantor and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of electric power and energy from or through the Grantor to points beyond the limits thereof. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, poles, transmission lines, distribution lines, anchors, guy wires, cables, conduits, street lighting poles, transformers and all other apparatus and appliances necessary or incident thereto for all purposes for which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing electric service to the inhabitants of the Grantor and in carrying on such business. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-20. - Term. 
    The rights and privileges granted hereunder shall remain in effect for a period of 25 years from the effective date of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-30. - Franchise fees or taxes. 
(a)  The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor three percent of all collected gross earnings derived by the Grantee from all electricity sold by it during the term of this franchise to inhabitants of the Grantor for light, heat and power purposes and any other purposes to which the same may be applicable. Payment shall be made to the Finance Director on or before the first day of February of each year for the percentage due the Grantor; provided always that the income derived from the sale of electricity to the Grantor for street lighting or other purposes shall not be considered part of said earnings or included therein. 
(b)  Said payment shall be in lieu of all pole, wire, meter, occupation, privilege, franchise, license or other similar tax now or hereafter assessed or levied against the Grantee by the Grantor for any purpose whatever; and should the Grantor at any time impose any such tax, then, and in that event, the obligation hereby imposed upon the Grantee to pay the amount of three percent provided in this Section shall cease without affecting the remainder of this franchise. 
(c)  The Grantee shall list the franchise fee collected from customers as a separate item on bills for utility service issued to its customers. If at any time the Colorado Public Utilities Commission or other authority having proper jurisdiction prohibits such recovery, the Grantee will no longer be obligated to collect and pay the franchise fee until an alternate lawful franchise fee can be negotiated and implemented. In addition, with prior approval of the Grantor, the Grantee may reduce the franchise fee payable for electricity delivered to a specific customer when such reduction is required to attract or retain the business of that customer. 
(d)  Within ten days of the effective date of this franchise, the Grantor shall provide the Grantee with a map of its corporate limits (the "Map"). The Map shall be of sufficient detail to assist the Grantee in determining whether its customers reside within the Grantor's corporate limits. The Map shall serve as the sole basis for determining the Grantee's obligation hereunder to collect and pay the franchise fee from customers; provided, however, that, if the Grantor's corporate limits are changed by annexation or otherwise, it shall be the Grantor's sole responsibility to: (1) update the Map so that such changes are included therein; and (2) provide the updated Map to the Grantee. The Grantee's obligation to collect and pay the franchise fee from customers within an annexed area shall not commence until the later of: (1) 60 days after the Grantee's receipt from the Grantor of an updated Map including such annexed area; or (2) such time after the Grantee's receipt from the Grantor of any updated Map including such annexed area as is reasonably necessary for the Grantee to identify the customers in an annexed area obligated to pay the franchise fee. 
(e)  The Grantor shall provide copies of annexation ordinances to the Grantee on a timely basis to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from customers within the corporate limits of the Grantor as set forth in Subsection (d) above. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-40. - Governing rules and regulations. 
(a)  The franchise granted hereunder is subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided for or as hereafter amended and applicable to the operations of a public utility by state or federal law. The rates to be charged by the Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of the Grantor, and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by the Grantee, shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by the Grantee. However, should any judicial, regulatory or legislative body having proper jurisdiction take any action that precludes the Grantee from recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder, then the Grantee and the Grantor shall renegotiate the terms of this franchise in accordance with the action taken. In determining the rights and duties of the Grantee, the terms of this franchise shall take precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other ordinance enacted by the Grantor. 
(b)  The right is hereby reserved to the Grantor to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such ordinances as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power, provided that such regulations shall be reasonable and not destructive of the rights herein granted and not in conflict with the laws of the State or with orders of other authorities having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-50. - Provision for inadequate energy supplies. 
    If an energy supplier is unable to furnish an adequate supply of energy due to an emergency, an order or decision of a public regulatory body or other acts beyond the control of the Grantee, then the Grantee shall have the right and authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations limiting, curtailing or allocating extensions of service or supply of energy to any customers or prospective customers and withholding the supply of energy to new customers, provided that such rules and regulations shall be uniform as applied to each class of customers or prospective customers and shall be nondiscriminatory as between communities receiving service from the Grantee. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-60. - Construction and maintenance of Grantee's facilities. 
(a)  Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of the Grantor and the general public as is reasonably necessary, and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by the Grantee, leaving such properties in as good a condition as existed immediately prior to excavation. 
(b)  The Grantee agrees that, for the term of this franchise, it will use its best efforts to maintain its facilities and equipment in a condition sufficient to meet the current and future energy requirements of the Grantor, its inhabitants and industries. While maintaining its facilities and equipment, the Grantee shall obtain permits as required by ordinance and will fix its excavations within a commercially reasonable time period; except that, in emergency situations, the Grantee shall take such immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare; in which case, the Grantee shall notify the Grantor as soon as reasonably possible. Within a reasonable time thereafter, the Grantee shall request and the Grantor shall issue any permits or authorizations required by the Grantor for the actions conducted by the Grantee during the emergency situation. 
(c)  The Grantor will give the Grantee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved that affects the Grantee's facilities. The notice shall contain the nature and character of the improvements and the time when the Grantor will start the work, and, if more than one right-of-way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The notice shall be given to the Grantee as soon as practical in advance of the actual commencement of the work, considering seasonable working conditions, to permit the Grantee to make any additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-70. - Tree trimming. 
    The Grantor grants the Grantee the right, permission and authority to trim and remove trees upon, over, across and along all of the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places of the Grantor. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-80. - Street lighting. 
(a)  The Grantee will furnish, erect, maintain, clean, repair and operate, in accordance with the street lighting tariffs as approved from time to time by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission, street lights within the corporate limits of the Grantor. The Grantor will pay for the street light service at the rates stipulated in the tariff. 
(b)  The Grantor may, from time to time, cause the number of street lights to be increased by making a written request to the Grantee, stating the number, capacity and location desired. Such request shall be made at least 90 days prior to the time additional street lights are required by the Grantor. 
(c)  Nothing in this franchise shall prohibit the Grantor from constructing and owning all or part of its street lighting equipment and other facilities, nor limit how the Grantor shall accomplish the same. In the event the Grantor elects to purchase, construct, install or operate its street lighting equipment or facilities, the Grantee agrees, at the Grantor's request, to provide electricity to energize these facilities and, if requested by the Grantor, the Grantee will maintain these facilities in accordance with rates, terms and conditions submitted to and approved by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-90. - Extension of Grantee's facilities. 
    Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, the Grantee shall, subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate limits of the Grantor; provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall require the Grantee to install new facilities underground. In the event that the Grantor orders or requests the Grantee to install facilities underground along any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place, the Grantee shall have the right to recover from the Grantor the difference in cost between placing facilities overhead and placing new facilities underground. No obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon, the Grantee to install new facilities underground unless the Grantee is able to obtain an easement for such facilities on adjoining private property adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-100. - Relocation of Grantee's facilities. 
(a)  If the Grantor elects to change the grade or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place for a public purpose unless otherwise reimbursed by federal, state or local legislative act or governmental agency, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice from the Grantor, shall remove and relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way at the cost and expense of the Grantee, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference. 
(b)  If the Grantor orders or requests the Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other nonpublic entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent interference, then the Grantee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment. 
(c)  The Grantor shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects and exercising its authority under this Section so as to not arbitrarily cause the Grantee unreasonable additional expense. If alternative public right-of-way space is available, the Grantor shall also provide a reasonable alternative location from the Grantee's facilities. The Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of an order or request to vacate a public right-of-way; provided, however, that its receipt of such notice shall not deprive the Grantee of its right to operate and maintain its existing facilities in such public right-of-way until it: (1) if applicable, receives the reasonable cost of relocating the same; and (2) obtains a reasonable public right-of-way, dedicated utility easement or private easement alternative location for such facilities. 
(d)  Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure along, or to make any unusual use of, any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place which shall interfere with the facilities or equipment of the Grantee, shall first give notice to the Grantor and the Grantee and pay a sum sufficient to cover the expense of moving the Grantee's facilities and equipment in such location, and any damages incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-110. - Confidential information. 
    The Grantor acknowledges that certain information it might request from the Grantee pursuant to this franchise may be of a proprietary and confidential nature, and that such requests may be subject to the Homeland Security Act or other confidentiality protections under state or federal law. If the Grantee requests that any information provided by the Grantee to the Grantor be kept confidential due to its proprietary or commercial value, the Grantor and its employees, agents and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of such information, to the extent allowed by law. If the Grantor is requested or required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such proprietary or confidential information, the Grantor shall promptly notify the Grantee of such request or requirement so that the Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-120. - Force majeure. 
(a)  It shall not be a breach or default under this Article if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to force majeure. Force majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Physical events, such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident, or necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 
(2)  Acts of others, such as strikes, workforce stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 
(3)  Governmental actions, such as necessity for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and 
(4)  Any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. 
(b)  Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid force majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance of its obligations hereunder; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-130. - Hold harmless. 
    The Grantee, during the term of this franchise, agrees to save the Grantor harmless from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising directly out of the negligence of the Grantee, its employees or agents, in constructing, operating and maintaining its distribution and transmission facilities or equipment; provided, however, that the Grantee need not save the Grantor harmless from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of the Grantor, its employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-140. - Successors and assigns. 
    All rights, privileges and authority granted to the Grantee hereunder shall inure to the benefit of the Grantee's lessees, successors and assigns, subject to the terms, provisions and conditions herein contained, and all obligations imposed upon the Grantee hereunder shall be binding upon the Grantee's lessees, successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-150. - No third party beneficiaries. 
    The ordinance codified herein constitutes a franchise agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee. No provision of this franchise shall inure to the benefit of any third person, including the public at large, so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the franchise agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action from any person a party hereto. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-160. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence or section of this franchise is deemed invalid by any judicial, regulatory or legislative body having proper jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-170. - Nonwaiver. 
    Any waiver of obligation or default under this franchise shall not be construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-180. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    The ordinance codified herein, when accepted by the Grantee as provided below, shall constitute the entire agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee relating to the franchise granted by the Grantor hereunder, and the same shall supersede all prior ordinances relating thereto, and any terms and conditions of such prior ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-4-190. - Effect and interpretation of ordinance. 
    The captions that precede each section of this Article are for convenience and/or reference only and shall not be taken into consideration in the interpretation of any of the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 875, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Cable Television Franchise 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 5-5-10. - Grant of franchise. 
    A nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Bresnan Communications, LLC ("BCI"), its successors and assigns, to establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, renew, reconstruct and remove a cable television system across public property in the City limits for a term of 20 years, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State and the ordinances and regulations of the City, including the nonexclusive right, privilege and authority: 
(1)  To sell and supply audio and video communication service to persons within the City; 
(2)  To use public property within the City; and 
(3)  To engage in such further activities within the City as may now or hereinafter be consistent with the generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system. 
(Prior code,  10.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-20. - Effective date of franchise. 
    The franchise shall become effective from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein and compliance by BCI with Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations. 
(Prior code,  10.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-30. - Assignment. 
    BCI shall not assign or transfer any right granted under this franchise to any other person, company or corporation without prior consent to the City Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided that BCI shall have the right to assign this franchise to a corporation wholly owned by BCI or to a limited partnership of which BCI or other wholly owned subsidiary of BCI is a general partner without prior consent of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-40. - Conflicting provisions repealed. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the terms of this franchise are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such conflict. 
(Prior code,  10.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words or phrases, when used in this Article, have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Cable television system means any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services. 
    Channel means the segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to which a source of television transmission is assigned. 
    City means the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado. When the context so requires, the term City shall mean and include the City, its officers, agents, employees, servants and independent contractors. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Franchise means the rights, privileges and authority granted by the City to the Grantee hereunder and shall include all of the terms and conditions of this franchise. 
    Grantee means Bresnan Communications, LLC, its successors and assigns. When the context so requires, the term Grantee shall include the Grantee, its officers, agents, employees and independent contractors. 
    Person means any individual or any corporation, business or mix thereof owned by a private person, including property owned by a public utility not owned or operated by the City. 
    Property of the Grantee means all property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used by the Grantee however arising from or related to or connected with the franchise. 
    Public property shall mean all property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used by the City, including property owned or used by a public utility owned or operated by the City. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-60. - Use of property. 
    The Grantee may use public property within the City and, with the written consent of the owner thereof, private property within the City, in furtherance of such activities within the City as may now or hereinafter be consistent with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system, subject, however, to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The Grantee shall comply with all governmental laws, ordinance, rules or regulations as may now or hereinafter be applicable thereto. 
(2)  The Grantee shall not use or occupy or permit public property or private property to be used or occupied or do or permit anything to be done on or about public property or private property which will in any manner: 
a.  Impair the owner's interest in or title thereto; 
b.  Impair the mortgage or lease as may now or hereinafter be applicable thereto; 
c.  Adversely affect the then value or character thereof; 
d.  Cause or be likely to cause structural damage thereto, or any part thereof; 
e.  Cause or be likely to cause any damage or injury to any utility service available thereto; 
f.  Create a public or private nuisance, cause any offensive or obnoxious vibration, noise, odor or undesirable effect or interfere with the safety, comfort or convenience of the owner thereof and persons lawfully on or about the same; 
g.  Violate the rules, regulations and requirements of any person furnishing utilities or services thereto; 
h.  Violate the rules, regulations and requirements of any person furnishing utilities or services thereto; or 
i.  Make void or voidable any insurance then in force affecting the same, or cause an increase in the rates applicable thereto. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-70. - Taxes. 
    The Grantee shall pay all real estate taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes, license fees, permit fees and other charges of a like nature which may be taxed, charged, assessed, levied or imposed upon the property of the Grantee and upon any services rendered by the Grantee. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-80. - Insurance. 
    The Grantee shall, at all times during the term of this franchise, carry and require its contractors to carry: 
(1)  Insurance in such forms and with such companies as shall be approved by the City to protect the City and the Grantee from and against any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation and maintenance of any structure, equipment or appliance in connection with the cable television system. The amount of such insurance shall be not less than $100,000.00 as to any one person, $300,000.00 as to any one occurrence for injury or death to persons, and $100,000.00 for damages to property with, as to Grantee, so-called umbrella coverage of at least $5,000,000.00. 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the State. 
(3)  Automobile insurance with limits of not less than $100,000.00/$300,000.00 of public liability coverage and automobile property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $100,000.00 covering all automotive equipment, with, as to the Grantee, so-called umbrella coverage of at least $5,000,000.00. 
(4)  All of said insurance coverage shall provide a ten-day notice to the City in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies prior to the date said material alteration or cancellation becomes effective. 
(5)  Copies of certificates of insurance showing evidence of all insurance coverage required hereunder shall be furnished and filed with the City prior to the commencement of operations or the expirations of prior policies, as the case may be. 
(6)  The Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to all damages, penalties or other claims resulting from the acts of the Grantee, its assigns, employees, agents, invitees or other persons. Said expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney's fees, and shall include the value of any service rendered by the City Attorney or any other officers or employees of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-90. - Repairs. 
(a)  During the terms of the franchise, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, make all necessary repairs and replacements to the property of the Grantee. 
(b)  Such repairs and replacements, interior and exterior, ordinary as well as extraordinary, and structural as well as nonstructural, shall be made promptly as and when needed. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-100. - Hold harmless. 
    During the term of the franchise, the Grantee absolutely assumes and agrees to pay the City for, and the Grantee forever indemnifies the City against and agrees to hold and save the City harmless from, any and all damage, injury, costs, expenses, liability, claims, settlements, judgments, decrees and awards of every kind or nature whatsoever, including attorney's fees, costs and disbursements, that may never be claimed against the City by any person whatsoever, or on account of any actual or alleged loss, damage or injury to any property whatsoever, however arising from or related to or connected with, directly or indirectly, injury to or death of any person or loss, damage or injury to any property of the Grantee and/or the nonobservance by the Grantee of the provisions of any laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules duly promulgated by any governmental entity which may be applicable, directly or indirectly, to rights, privileges and authority, and the obligations and liabilities assumed by the Grantee under the franchise and/or the nonobservance by the Grantee of any of the terms and conditions of the franchise, and/or the granting of the franchise. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-110. - Insolvency of Grantee. 
    In the event that the Grantee becomes insolvent or declares a bankruptcy or the priority of the Grantee comes into the possession of any receiver, assignee or other officer acting under an order of court, any such receiver, assignee or other such officer shall not be discharged within 60 days after taking possession of such property, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the Grantee. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-120. - Default of Grantee. 
    In the event the Grantee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise within 60 days after receipt of notice in writing from the City specifying the failure or default, the City may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the Grantee. This Section shall not apply to failures or defaults beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-130. - Termination. 
    In the event of termination or nonrenewal of the franchise, the Grantee, at its own expense, may remove all coaxial cable, amplifiers and any other items of equipment which may have been installed from time to time; provided, however, that, in the event that the Grantee is successful in concluding a sale or transfer, the Grantee shall be precluded from removing said equipment under the terms of this Section. 
(Prior code,  10.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Construction, Maintenance and Service 

Sec. 5-5-210. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall comply with all governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may now be hereinafter applicable to the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, renewal, reconstruction and removal of a cable television system, the sale and supply of audio and video communications services, the use of public property and private property and the engagement in such further activities as may now or hereinafter be consistent with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable television system. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-220. - Installation and maintenance of property of Grantee. 
    During the term of the franchise, the property of the Grantee shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, replaced, renewed, reconstructed and removed in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with improvements which the City may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of public property or private property. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-230. - Interference. 
    The Grantee's cable television system shall be designed, engineered and maintained so as not to interfere with the radio and television reception of persons who are not subscribers of the Grantee. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-240. - Installation of cables. 
    The Grantee shall have the right, privilege and authority to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the use of wooden poles with overhead lines, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the City and to use such poles, conduits, trenches, ducts, lines and cables in the course of its business. The Grantee shall install its cable on the existing poles owned by other holders of public licenses and franchises with the City whenever possible for the installation of its cable. When installation of cable on poles is insufficient or when holders of all other public licenses or franchises have installed or have been required to install underground cable, then the cable used by the Grantee shall be installed underground. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-250. - Restoration of ground surface. 
    In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good a condition as before said work was commenced. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-260. - Temporary removal of cables. 
    The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its cables to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given no less than five days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary cable changes. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-270. - Tree trimming. 
    The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon any overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cables of the Grantee. All trimming shall be done by an approved licensed tree trimmer at the expense of the Grantee. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-280. - Line extensions. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of the Grantee to serve all residents of the City except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or other factors render providing service impracticable, technically unfeasible or economically noncompensatory. For purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this Section and to provide for a reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the City, the Grantee shall extend service to new subscribers at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification where there are an average of 40 homes per each linear mile of new cable construction. 
(b)  In the event the requirements of Subsection (a) above are not met, extensions of service shall be required only on a basis which is reasonably compensatory. 
(c)  The Grantee shall supply at no charge basic cable service to the Rocky Ford School District, which encompasses all schools within said school district and the school administration building, Pioneer Memorial Hospital, Rocky Ford Public Safety Building and Rocky Ford Golf Course. 
(Prior code,  10.22.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-290. - Service. 
(a)  During the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall furnish reasonable, adequate and efficient cable television service to subscriber terminals. 
(b)  The foregoing requirement may be temporarily suspended due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee. 
(c)  During the term of the franchise, the cable television system of the Grantee shall conform to the channel capacity and performance requirements contained in the then-current regulations of the FCC. 
(d)  The Grantee shall not cablecast, tape, reproduce or otherwise convey to its subscribers the activities of any recognized educational authority, public or private, without the written consent of the governing body of such authority. 
(Prior code,  10.22.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 5-5-310. - Subscriber rates and service agreements. 
(a)  Subscriber rates and charges. The Grantee shall have the right, privilege and authority to establish and change the rates and charges to its subscribers for its services from time to time; provided, however, that, for the calendar years 1985 and 1986, the Grantee shall not increase the rate for basic cable television service by an amount in excess of five percent of the existing rate for said basic service per year without prior approval by the City Council. Effective January 1, 1987, the Grantee in its discretion may establish and change the rate for said basic service from time to time. 
(b)  Service rules and regulations. The Grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable service rules and regulations and operating rules for the conduct of its business. 
(1)  Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(2)  The Grantee shall file such rules and regulations and all amendments thereto with the City. 
(c)  Service agreements. The Grantee shall have the right to prescribe a reasonable form of service agreement for use between the Grantee and its subscribers. Such service agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Prior code,  10.22.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-320. - Payments to City. 
(a)  The Grantee shall pay to the City five percent of its annual gross receipts, less the Grantee's installation fees, for all cable programming services rendered to subscribers under this franchise. 
(b)  All payments as required by the Grantee to the City shall be made annually and shall be due 45 days after the close of the calendar year. 
(c)  Should the Grantee fail to make payment to the City of the franchise fee within the 45 days herein provided, the Grantee shall pay to the City interest on the amount due to the City under the provisions hereof an additional amount, to be calculated at the rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid in full. Such interest charge shall start to accrue on January first of each year during the term of this franchise agreement should the Grantee fail to make payments to the City as herein required. 
(Prior code,  10.22.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-330. - Crimes and penalties. 
(a)  Injury to property of Grantee. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully injure the property of the Grantee. 
(b)  Intercepting signals of Grantee. No person shall wrongfully or unlawfully intercept the signals of the Grantee. If a wire, apparatus or other equipment of a cable television system has been altered or tampered with, a rebuttable presumption is created that the person lacking authorization of the cable system operator has created the condition as existing. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. 
(Prior code,  10.22.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-340. - Access. 
    The Grantee shall and does hereby grant to the City the right to enter upon the property of the Grantee, upon reasonable notice, at any and all reasonable times to inspect the same for purposes pertaining to the right of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.22.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-350. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    The Grantee shall not grant any undue preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage with respect to rates, charges, services, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect. 
(Prior code,  10.22.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 5-5-360. - Severability. 
    If any section, provision or part of this Article is adjudged to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Article as a whole, or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or inapplicable to any person or circumstances. 
(Prior code,  10.22.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Licenses and Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - Business Licenses 

Sec. 6-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is the regulation and registration of businesses operating within the City for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and to enable the City to enforce the obligation of businesses to remit sales, use and additional taxes to support the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-20. - License required. 
    When required by the City, every person must obtain a license from the City before operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business within the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-30. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nonprofit state corporations, excluding federal, state or municipal corporations, are hereby exempt from the license requirements set forth in this Article. 
(b)  No exclusive religious, benevolent, charitable or educational society or association shall be required to obtain a license or pay a license fee for any theatrical performance show or exhibition. 
(Prior code,  4.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-40. - License application. 
    An application for a business license shall be made to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. Every applicant shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for the granting of such license. It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement or misrepresentation in connection with any application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-50. - License fees. 
(a)  All annual license fees as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be paid in installments of one-half, payable semi-annually in advance, on May 1 and on November 1 of each year, provided that: 
(1)  Each person required by this Section to secure a license by the year may do so after the first day of May, paying for such license at the rate herein provided for the full year beginning on May 1; and 
(2)  When said license is issued after May 1, the applicant shall pay at least one-half of the annual license fee in advance. 
    For all licenses not issued by the year, the full license fee shall be paid in advance in all cases. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to or in any manner affect any license heretofore granted. 
(b)  Before granting the license, the fee required for the license shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  4.06.040, 4.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-60. - Issuance. 
    The City Clerk may issue to the applicant the license upon receipt of the required fee and compliance with Section 6-1-40 above. 
(Prior code,  4.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-70. - Carrying or posting license required. 
    The license for a particular business location shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the place of business. If the business is not operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed location, then the licensee must carry the license upon his or her person when operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when requested to do so by any police officer or by any person representing the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-80. - Separate license for each location. 
    Any person operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business within the City must obtain a separate license for each location of such trade, profession or business. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-90. - Transfer of license. 
    No license shall be transferred or assigned without the permission of the City Council, expressed by resolution to that effect, nor shall any such license authorize any person to do business or act under it except the person named therein. The license certificates shall be issued under the seal of the City and be signed by the Mayor and City Clerk. All moneys for licenses shall be paid to the Finance Director, and all bonds for licenses shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  4.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-100. - Renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal of a general business license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, all renewal applications and fees shall be due at least 30 days prior to expiration of the existing license. Any applicant who fails to submit the renewal application and fee within the required time shall be subject to the following additional fees: an additional 25 percent of the license fee for the first 15 days, and thereafter, and an additional 50 percent of such fee. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-110. - Suspension. 
    A license may be suspended: 
(1)  When any money due the City has not been paid. This includes failure to pay civil penalties, fines, taxes, impact fees or any other money owed to the City. 
(2)  When any activity conducted by the licensee or his or her employee or agent violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(3)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(4)  Upon any grounds of suspension provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-120. - Revocation. 
    Any license may be revoked at the discretion of the City Council: 
(1)  When it appears that the licensee has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter regulating his or her business or vocation. 
(2)  When it appears that the license was obtained by fraud, misrepresentation or false statements within the application. 
(3)  When it appears that the licensee has practiced fraud, misrepresentation or imposture. 
(4)  When it appears that the activity conducted pursuant to such license is a public nuisance as defined by this Code or statute or violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(5)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(6)  Upon any grounds of revocation provided by this Code. 
(Prior code,  4.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-130. - Notice and hearing prior to suspension or revocation. 
    All hearings to revoke, suspend or cancel a license shall be before the City Council. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge anyone from his or her civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-140. - Cease and desist. 
    If any business is operating without a license, the City Manager may issue an order to the business to cease and desist all further operation until a license is issued for the business. The order shall give the business three days to pay all amounts due the City, or to post a bond in the amount owing the City and to request in writing a hearing with the City Clerk. If the business does nothing, it shall cease operations on the third day. The hearing will be before the City Council. The proceedings shall not relieve or discharge anyone from the civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-150. - Refund of fees. 
    Upon refusal by the City of any license or permit, the fee therefor paid in advance shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that any license or permit is revoked by the City, all monies paid therefor shall be and remain the monies of the City and no refund shall be made to any licensee or holder of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-1-160. - Violation, penalty. 
(a)  Each day that any person carries on, pursues, conducts or manages any business avocation or calling in the City without first obtaining a license therefor shall be deemed a separate offense, and such person may be convicted accordingly. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article for which a fine or penalty is not herein specifically provided shall, on conviction, be fined in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  4.06.060, 4.06.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Alcoholic Beverages 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 6-2-10. - Intent and applicability. 
    The City Council finds, determines and declares that it is necessary to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by determining and declaring certain responsibilities, obligations and requirements of persons who hold liquor licenses issued by the City. 
(Prior code,  7.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Alcohol beverage or alcoholic beverage means fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors; except that alcohol beverage and alcoholic beverage shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product; except that fermented malt beverage shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S. 
    Licensed premises means any establishment or property for which the licensee holds any City and state license, other than a special event permit, allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises. 
    Licensee means any person holding any City and state license permitting consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises, but excludes any person holding a special event permit. 
    Minor means any natural person under the age of 21 years. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways, but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail. 
    Open alcohol beverage container means a bottle, can or other receptacle that contains any amount of alcohol beverage and: 
(1)  That is open or has a broken seal; or 
(2)  The contents of which are partially removed. 
    Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position, including but not limited to the glove compartment. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, incorporated or unincorporated association, company, corporation or organization, or a manager, agent, officer or employee thereof. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person for habitation and which is not open to the public or is open to the public on a limited basis. 
    Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, highways, streets, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds, open public stairways, parking lots utilized by the public, grounds in public places, and buildings when open and accessible to the public for public purposes. 
    Retail license means a grant to a licensee to sell fermented malt beverages pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code (Article 46 of Title 12, C.R.S.) or a grant to a licensee to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code (Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S.). 
    Retail licensee or licensee means the holder of a license to sell fermented malt beverages pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code or the holder of a license to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code. 
(b)  All other terms shall be defined as set forth in the provisions of the Colorado Beer Code, the Colorado Liquor Code and special event permits, as the definitions presently exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(Prior code,  4.02.020; Ord. No. 738, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 814, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 822,  2, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 858,  1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Application of state statutes. 
    The Colorado Beer Code, Section 12-46-101, et seq., C.R.S., the Colorado Liquor Code, Section 12-47-101, et seq., C.R.S., and special event permits, Section 12-48-101, et seq., C.R.S., as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended, shall apply to the sale of fermented malt beverages, alcoholic beverages, special malt liquors, spirituous liquors and vinous liquors in the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Liquor Licenses 

Sec. 6-2-110. - Power and purpose. 
    The City Council finds and determines that it is empowered by Section 12-47-505, C.R.S., to fix and collect certain fees in connection with the application for issuance, transfer and renewal of certain types of beer, wine and liquor licenses. The City Council further finds that the fees established in this Article are reasonable and are in amounts sufficient to cover actual and necessary expenses incurred by the City in connection with the handling of such licenses and applications therefor. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-120. - Licensing fees. 
(a)  The fees charged for liquor licenses by the City shall be set at the rate allowed by the State for statutory municipalities. 
(b)  Unless otherwise adopted in subsequent ordinances, the City shall not set fees less than the rate established by the State in its most current Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  4.02.010; Ord. No. 737,  1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 846,  1, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 886,  1, 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-130. - Prehearing conference. 
    In the event any person who is listed and designated as the licensee on a liquor license issued by the City is served with a notice of violation or notice to show cause for violation of the terms and conditions of that liquor license, the licensee or his or her representative shall be required to attend and participate in a prehearing conference with the Chief of Police and the City Attorney. The purpose of the prehearing conference is to discuss and negotiate the allegations and resolution of those allegations set forth in the order to show cause and notice of violation. In the event the parties are unable to show cause, the matter shall be set for hearing before the City Council, as provided by law, at a date which is convenient to all parties concerned. 
(Prior code,  7.08.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-140. - Suspension or revocation; fine. 
(a)  The City Council, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, shall have the authority to impose a fine in lieu of a suspension of a liquor license for all or a portion of the period of suspension under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The City Council has made a final decision to suspend the licensee's liquor license for a period of 14 days or less. 
(2)  Prior to the operative date of the suspension, the licensee petitions the City for permission to pay a fine in lieu of suspension. 
(3)  The City is satisfied that the following are met: 
a.  The public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
b.  The books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcoholic beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
c.  The retail licensee has not had his or her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license. 
(b)  The City may impose a fine of up to 20 percent of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from the sales of alcoholic beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall be not less than $200.00 nor more than $5,000.00. All fines shall be paid in cash or certified funds, made payable to the City Clerk, and deposited in the general fund of the City. 
(c)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to this Section, the City Council shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. 
(d)  In connection with any petition pursuant to this Section, the authority of the City Council is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(e)  If the City Council does not make the findings required in Subsection (a) above and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  7.12.030, 7.12.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-150. - Educational requirements. 
    Every hotel and restaurant licensee, registered manager and licensee's employee is encouraged to obtain a certificate of completion from an educational program of training for intervention procedures for servers of alcohol. Those registered managers obtaining a certificate of completion may file a copy of the certificate of completion with the Authority with an application of renewal of a liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Regulations 

Sec. 6-2-210. - Minors in licensed establishments. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to prohibit minors from having access to or being on the premises of establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises at certain times. 
(b)  Prohibition. This Section shall pertain to any licensed premises. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor to be in or remain in or on any licensed premises from 11:00 p.m. to closing of the licensed premises for business that same night. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any licensee or his or her agents or employees to permit a minor to be in or remain in or on any licensed premises from 11:00 p.m. to closing of the licensed premises for business that same night. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This Section shall not prohibit the minor children of the licensee or necessary employees of the licensee from being in or remaining in a licensed premises while the licensee or employee is actually working or performing. 
(2)  This Section shall not prohibit minors who are members of an entertainment group or the minor children of entertainment group members paid or employed by the licensee from being present in a licensed premises while the entertainment group is actually working or performing. 
(3)  This Section shall not prevent a minor from remaining on the licensed premises during a private party when the licensed premises are otherwise closed to members of the general public, provided that adequate adult supervision exists. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this Section to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that a minor at issue was required by the licensee or his or her agents or employees to produce a Colorado photo identification for viewing and that the Colorado photo identification produced by the minor was fraudulent. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00. Prosecution of a person under this Section or imposition of a penalty under this Section shall not prohibit the City from taking other action with respect to the licensee's alcoholic beverage or 3.2 beer license. 
(Ord. No. 738, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 814, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-220. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  Purpose. The City Council declares that the purpose and intent of this Section is to control and limit the consumption of alcohol beverages on property owned and controlled by the City within the City when used for private events, and that the control and limitation of such matters are in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the residents. 
(b)  Public consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume or authorize the consumption of alcohol beverages in any public place within the City, except as provided in Subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection (b) above shall not apply to the following public areas: 
(1)  Play Park Hill and the Arkansas Valley Fairgrounds, when a person complies with the conditions set forth below: 
a.  A permit is properly obtained a minimum of 72 hours prior to the commencement of the serving of any alcohol beverage. 
b.  The permittee has appropriate authority to use the facility at which the fermented malt beverage will be served. 
c.  The only alcohol beverages served are fermented malt beverages. 
d.  The fermented malt beverages may not be sold. 
e.  The fermented malt beverages may be served only during the course of a picnic or other function where food is prepared or served. 
f.  The permittee has the permit in possession or posted at the public place at all times fermented malt beverages are being served. 
(2)  Any municipally owned property or other public place where the premises are properly licensed under state law for the sale of alcohol beverages and/or consumption on the premises. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Application. The sponsoring person shall properly complete and sign a permit application. The application shall be submitted to the Police Department a minimum of 72 hours prior to the commencement of the serving of any alcohol beverage accompanied by the appropriate permit fee. 
(2)  Permit fee. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. The City Council may amend the permit fee from time to time by resolution. 
(3)  Security. The sponsoring person must arrange for private security where a permit is sought for any site at the Arkansas Valley Fairgrounds or upon request by the Police Chief where the event occurs at Play Park Hill or near the Rocky Ford Golf Club. 
(4)  Permit issuance. Permits shall be issued or the application shall be denied by the City Manager following review and consideration. The City Manager may impose any reasonable conditions precedent to the issuance of a permit and may administratively adopt reasonable standards governing the issuance of all permits. 
(Prior code,  4.02.020; Ord. No. 822,  2, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 858,  1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-230. - Keg tagging requirements. 
(a)  Any retail liquor establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City shall be required to affix to the keg, at the time of sale, a self-locking plastic identification seal. 
(b)  Any retail liquor establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City shall be required at the time of sale to fill out an identifying form with information as to the purchaser's name, address, date of birth, driver's license number and date of sale. The Police Department shall provide the form. 
(c)  At the time of sale of any keg of alcoholic beverage, the retail liquor establishment shall be obligated to affix the seal, fill out the form and maintain those identifying records for purposes of inspection by the Police Department. 
(d)  Retail liquor outlets shall keep identifying forms for a period of six months, and said records shall be kept in a place open for inspection at all reasonable times at the request of the City. 
(e)  Any retail liquor outlet which fails to affix the plastic seal as required in Subsection (c) above, or to fill out the forms as required pursuant to Subsections (b) and (c), shall be in violation of this Section, and as such shall be subject to fines and penalties as authorized herein. 
(f)  Any owner or operator of any premises who, through act of omission or commission, fails to ensure that the owner's employees properly comply with this law, shall be guilty of violation of Subsections (b) and (c). 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person who has purchased alcoholic beverages by the keg within the City to remove the self-locking plastic identification seal required pursuant to Subsection (c). It shall not be a violation of this Subsection if the person removing the tag is an employee of an owner or operator of a retail liquor establishment or a representative of a vendor of wholesale alcoholic beverages, who removes the tag after the return of the keg to the place of retail establishment and after any deposit has been returned to the consumer. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any purchaser of a keg of alcoholic beverage to allow anyone to remove the fixed seal from the keg prior to its return to the retail liquor outlet which sold the keg. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase a keg of alcoholic beverage pursuant to the terms of this Section, and to thereafter allow consumption of said alcoholic beverage by minors, unless said consumption is authorized and allowed pursuant to the laws of the State, as enumerated in Section 18-13-122, C.R.S. 
(j)  An owner, operator or employee of a retail liquor outlet who, upon receipt of a keg being returned by a consumer of the alcoholic beverage, shall inspect the returned keg, and, if the tag has been removed or tampered with in any way, the owner or operator shall immediately notify the Police Department of the same. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee to fail to notify the Police Department as required herein. 
(k)  It is unlawful for any person to be in possession of a keg of alcoholic beverage, wherein that keg was purchased within the City and the keg fails to have the appropriate self-locking plastic identification seal as required by Subsection (a) above. 
(l)  Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. 
(m)  The Police Department may use the penalty assessment procedure as provided in Section 16-2-201, C.R.S., for the enforcement of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 748,  1-13, 1-26-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-240. - Reporting of fights, disturbances or disruptions. 
    Any person listed and designated as a licensee on any liquor license issued by the City is hereby required to immediately report to the Police Department any and all fights, disturbances, disruptions or other violations of the law that take place in or about the licensed premises immediately upon the happening or such event, said report to include the names and addresses of all persons involved and all other relevant information. 
(Prior code,  7.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-250. - Telephone and alarm system. 
    Any person listed and designated as the licensee of any liquor license issued by the City shall be required to maintain on the licensed premises a telephone which is operational and can be utilized to notify the Police Department of any fight, disturbance or violation of the law on an emergency basis. For purposes of this Section, the term telephone does not include a pay phone on the premises. 
(Prior code,  7.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-260. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this Division may be subject to a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Any violation of the provisions of this Division may form the basis of a notice of violation and show cause why the licensee's license should not be revoked or suspended pursuant to proper notice and hearing. 
(Prior code,  7.08.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 4 - Optional Premises Licenses and 

Sec. 6-2-310. - Optional premises for hotel and restaurant license. 
    The following standards shall apply for the issuance of all hotel and restaurant licenses with optional premises permits for the sale of alcohol beverages within the City limits. 
(1)  Facilities for the outdoor sports of golf, rodeo and horse racing are eligible to apply for a hotel and restaurant license with optional premises permit. 
(2)  No licensee may have more than three optional premises on an outdoor sports or recreational facility. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit an addendum to the application stating the estimated maximum number of people who would be present at the sporting event at any one time. 
(4)  Where the maximum number of people estimated to be present at any one time at the sports event exceeds 100, the applicant must submit a security plan to the City stating the number of security personnel who will be present in such cases and shall provide the security personnel whenever more than 100 people are present at the sports event. 
(5)  The applicant shall file with the original optional premises permit application and with each successive renewal application a list of the optional premises locations. 
(6)  The applicant shall file with the original optional premises permit application and with each successive renewal application a diagram of each optional premises location on the list that clearly illustrates all areas where alcohol beverages will be sold and delineates the areas where sales will not occur. 
(7)  At least 48 hours prior to serving alcohol beverages on any optional premises, the licensee must provide written notice to the City and the State Division of Liquor Enforcement that the licensee will commence serving alcohol beverages on the optional premises and shall include the days and hours of said service. The licensee shall provide said notice prior to commencing service initially and prior to recommencing service following any period of time when regular service ceased. 
(Ord. No. 859,  1, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-2-320. - Special event permits. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The City Council finds that the City staff possesses the necessary resources, time and expertise to process special event permit applications and render decisions thereon in accordance with applicable law. 
(2)  The City Council finds that electing for exclusive local control over the special event permitting process will provide a more efficient review of such applications without adversely affecting the quality or thoroughness of such review. 
(3)  The City Council desires to elect to assume exclusive local control over the issuance of liquor license special event permits. 
(b)  Local control. Pursuant to Section 12-48-107(5)(a), C.R.S., the City Council, acting as the Local Licensing Authority, hereby elects to exercise exclusive local control over the issuance of liquor license special event permits for events within the City. 
(c)  Report required. The provision of this Section notwithstanding, the City Clerk shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten days after the City issues any special event permit, the name of the organization to which the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. 
(d)  Review. Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the City Clerk shall, as required by Section 12-48-107(5), C.R.S., access information made available on the website of the State Licensing Authority to determine the statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit. The City shall consider compliance with the provisions of Section 12-48-105(3), C.R.S., limiting to 15 the number of special event permits issued in any one year to any one organization, before approving any application. In addition, before approval, the City Clerk shall confirm the following when appropriate: 
(1)  Timely and proper posting of a conspicuous public notice sign as required by Article 48 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(2)  Whether the applicant satisfies the eligibility criteria set forth in Article 48 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(3)  After investigation, no sufficient grounds for denial appear to exist and no protests have been filed by affected persons. 
(4)  The applicant has not exceeded and does not propose to exceed the maximum number of special event calendar days permitted by Article 48 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(5)  Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 881,  1, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Peddlers, Solicitors and Dealers 
Division 1 - Transient Dealers, Peddlers, 

Sec. 6-3-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Canvasser or solicitor means any person, whether or not a resident of the City, traveling by any means from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has carried or exposed for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments for such sales; provided that such definition includes any person who, for himself or herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any room, structure, building, shop, lot or other real property, alley, street, road, right-of-way or any other place or temporary location within the City for the purpose of exhibiting any samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
    Peddler means any person, whether or not a resident of the City, traveling by any means from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale, making sales and delivering articles to purchasers or selling or offering to sell services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
    Person means any firm, corporation, limited liability company, association, club, partnership, limited partnership, society or other organization. 
    Temporary business means a person who establishes a business within the City with the intention and determination to remain within the City for a short period of time only, whether such period is definite or indefinite, or until disposition of a particular stock of merchandise has occurred. 
    Transient dealer means any person, whether or not a resident of the City, who engages in the temporary business of selling or selling and delivering goods and service within the City and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any tent, room, structure, building, shop, lot or other real property, alley, street, road, right-of-way or any other place or temporary location within the City. 
(1)  Transient dealer includes those persons not selling from stock but exhibiting samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this Article merely by reason of associating temporarily with a local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(2)  Excluded from the term transient dealer are manufacturers' representatives who supply wholesalers, dealers or merchants located in the City, merchants who have a permanent location within the City and who hold a current, valid Colorado sales tax license, local area farmers selling produce and persons who are invited into the City by the City. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-20. - Obstruction of street and sidewalk while conducting business. 
    It is unlawful for any person licensed or registered as specified in this Article to conduct business in such a manner as to attract a crowd which may cause the blocking or obstruction of any right-of-way, street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other pedestrian access. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-30. - Temporary food establishment. 
    No person shall operate, own or maintain a temporary food establishment without inspection by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-40. - Conducting business without license. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient dealer within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a current and valid license as provided for in this Article. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-50. - Prohibitions on calling. 
(a)  Premises with signs. It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient dealer to make an unsolicited call at a premises signed "No Solicitations" or words to that effect on or adjacent to the front door of the premises. 
(b)  Premises on no visit list. 
(1)  The City Clerk shall establish and maintain a list of addresses where the occupant or owner has requested that no peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient dealer make an unsolicited visit at that address. 
(2)  The owner or occupant of any premises within the City may request the City Clerk, in writing, to place the address on a no visit list. When the requesting owner or occupant moves, the owner or occupant has a duty to notify the City Clerk so the address may be removed from the no visit list. 
(3)  The City Clerk shall provide the no visit list of addresses to each peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient dealer who indicates an intent to solicit, peddle or canvass on a door-to-door basis. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-60. - Application for license. 
(a)  Every person desiring a City transient dealer's license, peddler's license, canvasser's license or solicitor's license shall first make written application with the City Clerk and shall submit the written application to the City Clerk, together with a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. The application fee is in addition to the license fee due when the City grants the license. 
(b)  The written application shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, residential address and telephone number. 
(2)  Whether the applicant transacts business on his or her own behalf or on behalf of another person and, if so, the name, business address, residence address and telephone number of such other person. 
(3)  The kind, class or nature of the goods, wares and merchandise that the applicant proposes to sell under the license. 
(4)  The names, residential addresses, business addresses and telephone numbers of the suppliers of goods, wares and merchandise that the applicant proposes to sell under the license when the applicant does not own the goods, wares and merchandise the applicant intends to sell. 
(c)  Where appropriate, the application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Written verification from the landowner of the property from which sales are to be made, authorizing the use of the property and said sales. 
(2)  Written verification of a sales tax license, branch sales tax license or special events license, as the case may be, certifying and verifying that sales tax will be collected and remitted to the City. 
(d)  The application shall contain such other and further information and/or request for information as deemed appropriate by the City. 
(e)  Following submission of a complete application, including all attachments and payment of the correct application fee, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Department for further investigation. The Police Department shall verify the information contained in the application and shall check all other references and/or information deemed appropriate under the circumstances. The Police Department shall give written findings of its investigation to the City Clerk. 
(f)  After the City Clerk has received the completed application, appropriate application fee and a positive report from the Police Department, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a written license authorizing the applicant to engage in business within the City. 
(g)  Appeals. In the event the City Clerk fails or refuses to issue a license hereunder, or believes that the applicant is not required to have a license, the applicant shall be entitled to an immediate appeal to the City Manager. If the City Manager affirms the decision of the City Clerk, the applicant shall have ten days to file a written appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be heard at the next regular City Council meeting that occurs at least ten days subsequent to the filing of the appeal with the City Clerk, at which time the applicant may present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be issued. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-70. - Printed license, fee and renewal. 
(a)  Every person who desires to transact any business as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor within the corporate limits of the City shall first obtain from the City Clerk, during normal working hours, a written or printed license to engage in such business within the City, and shall pay to the City Clerk the license fees set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(b)  Provided that there have been no violations of this Article and the proper amount of sales tax has been collected and remitted to the City, a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor's license may be renewed for an additional term of the same length as the original license, so long as the request for renewal is made prior to or within 30 days after the existing license expiration date. Where the correct license fee is remitted with the request for renewal, the City shall waive the application fee. 
(c)  The written licenses issued by the City Clerk shall be consecutively numbered, state the time, location and purpose for which they were issued, shall be sealed with the City seal and shall further state that the license is nontransferable. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-80. - Exemptions from fees. 
(a)  No person shall be subject to the fee requirements of Section 6-3-70 above if he or she is bringing food products to the City for sale, either in bulk or by retail, from house to house, provided that such food products were grown or raised by the person so having them for sale and are products of the State. 
(b)  Fireworks stands are exempt from this Article, but must comply with the specific fireworks license regulations. 
(c)  A person exempt from federal income taxation under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code shall be exempt from the fees required in Section 6-3-70. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-90. - Registration of nonprofit organizations. 
(a)  Any person engaged in short-term fundraising door-to-door within the City on behalf of a nonprofit or government-related organization, including but not limited to school organizations, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H and church organizations, does not require a license, but shall register with the City Clerk. 
(b)  Each person shall complete the same form as required for a license as set forth in this Article, but no fee shall be required. The registration for a nonprofit fundraising event shall be effective for a limited period of time, not to exceed 90 days. When the registration is for a youth organization and the youths participating in the fundraising are all less than 18 years of age, an adult representing the organization may register on behalf of the organization in lieu of individual registration. 
(c)  As part of the registration, the organization shall provide the City Clerk with written documentation demonstrating the nonprofit status of the organization. Acceptable documentation shall include, but not be limited to, a copy of an I.R.S. determination of nonprofit status or a letter from a governmental administrator, such as a school superintendent, stating that the organization is approved by and operates under the umbrella of that government organization. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any nonprofit organization to engage in door-to-door fundraising without registering with the City Clerk. Every person who unlawfully engages in door-to-door fundraising on behalf of a nonprofit organization without registering with the City Clerk as provided for in this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-100. - Records of application. 
    The City Clerk shall keep on file each application made for a license, a duplicate copy of each license issued and all papers filed in connection with any license issued, and shall keep a record of all license fees paid and all licenses issued that may be canceled. All such files and records shall at all times be open to public inspection. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-110. - Examination of license. 
    Every person licensed as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, whenever his or her license is demanded of him or her by any police officer of the City, shall forthwith exhibit his or her license for examination by such officer. If he or she neglects or refuses so to do, he or she shall be subject to the same penalty as if he or she had no license. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-120. - Cancellation of license. 
    The license of any person who is convicted of a violation of any provisions of this Article shall be null and void from the date of such conviction and shall be canceled on the records of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-130. - Unlawful engagement of business. 
    Every person who unlawfully engages in, or allows another to unlawfully engage in, on or about his or her property, the business of a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, and every person who transacts any business which would make him or her a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, without having a valid license as provided for in this Article, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-140. - Unlawful actions. 
    No person shall make any false or untrue statement in an application for a license as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor. No transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor; sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise by any false or short weight; measure or sell any goods, wares or merchandise as being composed or manufactured in whole or in part of a material different from which such manufactured goods, wares or merchandise are actually composed or manufactured; or sell any manufactured goods, wares or merchandise which are partly or entirely of a poisonous or injurious character or nature, for consumption by human beings, animals or fowl or for application to the body, hair or skin of any human being or animal. Every person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-150. - Number of persons engaging in business. 
    No more than one person shall engage in business or operate under the same transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor's license, whether as principal, agent or assistant to any principal or agent. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-160. - Refusing to leave. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises, after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises or his or her agent to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-170. - Hours of operation. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the City between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following morning or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-180. - Violation of license. 
    Each day that any person engages in business or operates as a transient dealer, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as defined in Section 6-3-10 of this Article, without first obtaining a license with the City Clerk, shall be deemed a separate offense, and such person may be prosecuted accordingly. 
(Prior code,  4.04.010; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Secondhand Goods Dealers 

Sec. 6-3-210. - Records required and books open for inspection. 
(a)  Any person who is or may become engaged in the business of buying, selling or otherwise handling secondhand goods, wares or merchandise shall keep a book in which shall be clearly written at the time of the receipt of any such secondhand goods, wares or merchandise an accurate account and description of such articles, goods, wares or merchandise, the amount paid therefor, the time of receipt thereof and the name and residence of the person from whom such articles or goods were purchased. 
(b)  The book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the City Manager or Chief of Police or any person who is duly authorized in writing by the City Manager or Chief of Police and who exhibits such written authority to the dealer. 
(Prior code,  4.04.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-3-220. - Penalties. 
    Any person who fails to keep the book as provided in Section 6-3-210 above, after being duly notified by the City Manager or Chief of Police of the necessity therefor, or fails to start such book immediately upon such notice, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine for each day that the person fails to keep such book. 
(Prior code,  4.04.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Tree Maintenance 

Sec. 6-4-10. - License and bond. 
    No person shall engage in, carry on or contract the business of removal, trimming, pruning or spraying of trees within the City without first having obtained a license from the City Clerk; provided, however, that no license shall be granted until the applicant has given a properly executed performance bond in the sum of $1,000.00, which bond shall run to the People of the City and shall be signed by the applicant and a corporate surety, and a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of $5,000.00. The annual license fee shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  9.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-20. - Rubbish. 
    It is unlawful for any person engaged in tree maintenance to deposit any rubbish, trimmings, branches, leaves or other residue from his or her contract obligation upon any City property, including streets and alleys, and the person so engaged shall be solely responsible for the removal and disposal thereof. In the event that the licensee fails to make such proper removal or disposal, the City may, in its discretion, remove and dispose of the same and make a direct charge to the licensee at the rate as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule per man hour for labor and as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule per hour for equipment. In addition, such failure on the part of the licensee shall constitute a violation of this Section and shall subject the licensee to the penalty provisions hereof. In addition, the annual license shall be automatically revoked. 
(Prior code,  9.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-30. - Damage from spraying. 
    All property damage caused by the spraying of trees, including such damage to surrounding buildings, automobiles and other personal property, shall be the responsibility of the licensee. Failure to compensate for such damage shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this Section and shall subject the licensee to the penalty provisions hereof. 
(Prior code,  9.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-40. - Inspection. 
    In the event of a violation of Section 6-4-20 or 6-4-30 above or an allegation that a violation hereof has occurred, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to make an inspection and file a report with the City Council setting forth the express violation. If the City Council determines that the licensee has violated the term of this Article, it shall be lawful for the City Council to instruct the City Clerk to suspend the license of the licensee and make application for forfeiture of the bond commensurate with the damages assessed. 
(Prior code,  9.08.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-50. - Suspension of license. 
    Any suspension of a license as provided herein shall continue until such time as the licensee has either: (1) obtained a signed release from the property owner upon which such violation occurred; (2) had the question of liability therefor determined in a competent court of law and filed a copy of said findings or judgment with the City Clerk; or (3) filed an additional bond in the amount of the damage claimed, said amount being necessary to maintain the level of the surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00 in excess of the claim so filed. 
(Prior code,  9.08.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-60. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined for each offense in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  9.08.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-4-70. - Forfeiture of bond. 
    In addition to the above provisions, in the event that any person is convicted of a violation of this Section in accordance with the terms hereof, the City may declare the required bond in default, or as much thereof as may be necessary for the payment of any fines levied hereunder. 
(Prior code,  9.08.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Non-Cigarette Tobacco Product Retail Licenses 

Sec. 6-5-10. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City Council hereby finds that: 
(1)  The dangers associated with youth access to tobacco products are well recognized; and 
(2)  A local licensing system for non-cigarette tobacco product retailers selling non-cigarette tobacco products is appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of young people in the City. 
(b)  It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit sales of non-cigarette tobacco products to youth, to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to reduce the impact of tobacco product use by young people in the City. 
(Ord. No. 902,  1, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings defined in this Section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Arm's length transaction means a sale for valuable consideration between two willing parties. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners will create a rebuttable presumption that an arm's length transaction did not occur. A sale for which a significant purpose is to avoid the effect of the violations of this Article is not an arm's length transaction. 
    Cigarette means any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or heated under ordinary conditions of use and consists of or contains: 
(1)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; 
(2)  Tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product, which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette; or 
(3)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco that, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in Paragraph (1) above. 
    The term cigarette includes roll-your-own; i.e., any tobacco that, because of its appearance, type, packaging or labeling, is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes. For purposes of this definition, 0.09 ounces of roll-your-own tobacco shall constitute one individual cigarette. 
    Consumer means a person who acquires or seeks to acquire non-cigarette tobacco products for personal, family or household use. 
    Department means the Finance Director for the City and any agency or person designated by the Finance Director to enforce or administer the provisions of this Article. 
    Licensed, when used in reference to a retailer, means a retailer who holds a valid current license under this Article. 
    Non-cigarette tobacco product means and includes: 
(1)  Any product, other than a cigarette, that contains tobacco or nicotine, or is made or derived from tobacco that is intended or expected to be ingested, smoked, inhaled, placed in oral or nasal cavities or applied to the skin; or 
(2)  Any electronic device that can be used to deliver nicotine or tobacco to the person using the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe. 
    The term tobacco product does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in reducing, treating or eliminating nicotine or tobacco dependence, or for other medical purposes, when such product is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Non-cigarette tobacco product retailer means a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other enterprise that sells, offers for sale or otherwise offers any form of consideration for the transfer of a non-cigarette tobacco product to another party. 
    Person means any natural person, partnership, limited liability company, cooperative, association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity that engages in for-profit or nonprofit activity. 
    Self-service display means the open display or storage of non-cigarette tobacco products in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electrical or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses product. 
    Youth-oriented facility means and includes any facility where residents, customers, visitors or inhabitants of which 50 percent or more are regularly under 18 years of age or which primarily sells, rents or offers services or products that are consumed or used primarily by persons under the age of 21. 
(Ord. No. 902,  2, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-30. - Requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  Non-cigarette tobacco product retail license required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a non-cigarette tobacco product retailer in the City without obtaining and maintaining a valid non-cigarette tobacco product retail license pursuant to this Article for each location at which non-cigarette tobacco product retailing is to occur. Non-cigarette tobacco product retailing without a valid license is a nuisance as a matter of law. 
(b)  Lawful business operation. In the course of non-cigarette tobacco product retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license is issued, it shall be a violation of this Article for a licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state or federal law applicable to non-cigarette tobacco product retailing. 
(c)  Display of license. Each non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location. 
(d)  Positive identification required. No person engaged in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing shall sell or transfer a non-cigarette tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 30 years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product. 
(e)  Minimum age for persons selling non-cigarette tobacco products. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing. 
(f)  Self-service displays prohibited. Non-cigarette tobacco product retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited. 
(g)  False and misleading advertising prohibited. A non-cigarette tobacco product retailer without a valid non-cigarette tobacco product retail license, including, for example, a person whose license has been suspended or revoked: 
(1)  Shall keep all non-cigarette tobacco products out of public view. The public display of non-cigarette tobacco products in violation of this provision shall constitute non-cigarette tobacco product retailing without a license under this Code; and 
(2)  Shall not display any advertisement relating to non-cigarette tobacco products that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the non-cigarette tobacco product retailer's location during suspension or revocation of the license that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
(Ord. No. 902,  3, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-40. - Limits on eligibility. 
(a)  A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license may only be issued to authorize non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at a fixed location. For example, non-cigarette tobacco product retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
(b)  No non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be issued to anyone under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 902,  4, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-50. - License application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be submitted in the name of each retailer proposing to conduct non-cigarette tobacco product sales and shall be signed by each retailer or an authorized agent thereof. It is the responsibility of each retailer to be informed regarding all local, state and federal laws applicable to non-cigarette tobacco product retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license. No retailer may rely on the issuance of a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license as a determination by the City that the retailer has complied with all applicable non-cigarette tobacco product retailing laws. 
(b)  A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license issued contrary to this Article, contrary to any other law or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a retailer shall be revoked pursuant to this Article. 
(c)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
(d)  Applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of each owner of the retail business seeking a license. 
(2)  The business name, address and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought. 
(3)  A single name and mailing address authorized by each retailer to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address" and "registered agent") required by, authorized by or convenient to the enforcement of this Article. 
(4)  If an authorized address is not supplied, each retailer shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in Paragraph (2) above. 
(5)  Whether or not any retailer or any agent of the retailer has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this Article; and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years. 
(6)  Such other information as the City deems necessary for the efficient administration or enforcement of this Article. 
(e)  A licensed non-cigarette tobacco product retailer shall inform the City in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license within 30 business days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 902,  5, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-60. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon the receipt of a completed non-cigarette tobacco product retail license application and receipt of the total license fee required by this Article, the City shall issue a license to the applicant unless a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists: 
(1)  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this Article. 
(2)  The application seeks authorization for non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at a location where this Article prohibits issuance of non-cigarette tobacco product retail licenses. However, this Paragraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the City with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
(3)  The application seeks authorization for a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license for a retailer to whom this Article prohibits a license to be issued. 
(4)  The application seeks authorization for non-cigarette tobacco product retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this Article, that is unlawful pursuant to this Code or that is unlawful pursuant to any local, state of federal law. 
(Ord. No. 902,  6, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-70. - License term, renewal and expiration. 
(a)  Term of license. The term of the non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is one year. A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. 
(b)  Renewal of license. A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. Each non-cigarette tobacco product retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her license and submit the license fee no later than 30 days prior to expiration of the term. 
(c)  Expiration of license. A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to Subsection (b) above, the retailer must: 
(1)  Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and 
(2)  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the retailer: 
a.  Has not sold and will not sell any non-cigarette tobacco products after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed, or 
b.  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for non-cigarette tobacco product retailing without a license as set forth in this Article, before seeking renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 902,  7, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-80. - License nontransferable. 
(a)  A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is required whenever a non-cigarette tobacco product location has a change in owners. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
(1)  The location has been fully transferred to a new owner; and 
(2)  The new owner provides the City with clear and convincing evidence that the new owner has acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 902,  8, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-90. - License conveys limited, conditional privilege. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a license to sell non-cigarette tobacco products any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a non-cigarette tobacco product retailer at the location in the City identified on the face of the license. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to any provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 902,  9, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-100. - License fee. 
    The fee to issue or to renew a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council in the City's Fee Schedule. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this Article, including, for example, issuing a license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this Article. All fees and interest upon proceeds of fees shall be used exclusively to fund the purpose of the license. Fees are nonrefundable, except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 902,  10, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-110. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Compliance with this Article shall be monitored by the City. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this Article. 
(b)  The City or other person designated to enforce the provisions of this Article shall check the compliance of each non-cigarette tobacco product retailer at least two times per 12-month period. 
(c)  The City may check the compliance of non-cigarette tobacco product retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times, so that the City may check the compliance of new licensees and non-cigarette tobacco product retailers previously found in violation of the licensing law more frequently. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall create a right of action in any licensee or other person against the City or its agents. 
(e)  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the City to determine, at a minimum, if the non-cigarette tobacco product retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with this Article. 
(f)  The City shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "minor operative") if the potential violation occurs when: 
(1)  The minor operative is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or the Code Enforcement Official; 
(2)  The minor operative is acting as an agent of a person designated by the City to monitor compliance with this Article; or 
(3)  The minor operative is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the County Health Department or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(Ord. No. 902,  11, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-120. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Suspension of license for violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be suspended if a court of competent jurisdiction determines (or the Department finds, based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard) that the licensee has violated any of the requirements, conditions or prohibitions of this Article, or has pleaded guilty, no contest or its equivalent or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 6-5-30 of this Article. A non-cigarette tobacco product retailer whose license has been suspended is deemed not to have a valid license during the suspension period for purposes of this Article. 
(1)  After suspension for a first violation of this Article at a location within any 12-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 15 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(2)  After suspension for a second violation of this Article at a location within any 24-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 30 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(3)  After suspension for a third violation of this Article at a location within any 36-month period, no person may engage in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at the location until 90 days have passed from the date of suspension. 
(b)  Revocation of license for violation. After suspension for a fourth violation of this Article within any 48-month period, the non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be revoked and the licensee shall be ineligible for one year from the date of suspension to apply for a new non-cigarette tobacco product retail license within the City. 
(c)  Appeal of suspension or revocation of license. A decision of the City or Department to suspend or revoke a non-cigarette tobacco product retail license is appealable to the City Manager and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the mailing of the Department's decision. If an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. 
(Ord. No. 902,  12, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-130. - Penalties and fines. 
(a)  Each such violation of any local, state or federal law pertaining to the sale of tobacco products to minors or any violation of any law designated above shall be subject to administrative fines as follows: 
(1)  First violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(2)  Second violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(3)  Third violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $300.00. 
(4)  Fourth violation within one year: a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Penalties and fines collected under this Article shall be paid directly to the Department and used to support education, administration or enforcement of non-cigarette tobacco product retail licenses in the City. 
(Ord. No. 902,  13, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-140. - Appeal of revocation. 
(a)  A decision of the City to revoke a license may be appealed to the City Council and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of mailing of the City's decision. 
(b)  If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the City Council is not available for a revocation made pursuant to Section 6-5-150 below. 
(Ord. No. 902,  14, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-150. - Revocation of license wrongly issued. 
    A non-cigarette tobacco product retail license shall be revoked if the City Council finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license contained in this Article existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license was issued. The decision by the City Council shall be the final decision. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application. 
(Ord. No. 902,  15, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-160. - Non-cigarette tobacco product retailing without license. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the Department finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in non-cigarette tobacco product retailing at a location without a valid non-cigarette tobacco product retail license, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a non-cigarette tobacco product retailing license as follows: 
(1)  After a first violation of this Section at a location within any 12-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction) until 14 days have passed from the date of the violation. 
(2)  After a second violation of this Section at a location within any 24-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction) until 30 days have passed from the date of the violation. 
(3)  After a third or subsequent violation of this Section at a location within any 36-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction) until one year has passed from the date of the violation. 
(b)  Non-cigarette tobacco products offered for sale or exchange in violation of this Section are subject to seizure by the Department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the non-cigarette tobacco products seized are given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the non-cigarette tobacco products were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this Article. 
(c)  The decision by the Department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(d)  Forfeited non-cigarette tobacco products shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final. 
(e)  For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this Article, the following provisions shall constitute a separate violation of this Article: 
(1)  Each day on which a non-cigarette tobacco product is offered for sale in violation of this Article; or 
(2)  Each individual non-cigarette tobacco product that is distributed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 902,  16, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-170. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The remedies provided by this Article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(b)  Whenever evidence of a violation of this Article is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this Article and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
(c)  Violations of this Article are subject to a civil action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than $200.00 and not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. 
(d)  Violations of this Article may, at the discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. 
(e)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this Article shall also constitute a violation of this Article. 
(f)  Violations of this Article are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(g)  In addition to other remedies provided by this Article or by other law, any violation of this Article may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney, including administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 902,  17, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 6-5-180. - Compliance with Section 39-22-623, C.R.S. 
    This Article is not nor shall it be construed in any way as imposing a fee, license or tax as a condition for engaging in the business of selling cigarettes or imposing a tax on cigarettes. The non-cigarette tobacco product retail license in no way applies to the sale of cigarettes. If any section of this Article is found to impose a fee, license or tax as a condition for engaging in the business of selling cigarettes, that Section shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 902,  19, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Medical Marijuana Licensing 

Sec. 6-6-10. - [Purpose.] 
    It is the purpose of this Article to: 
(1)  Require that medical marijuana businesses that are located within the City be operated in a safe manner that does not endanger the public welfare. 
(2)  Mitigate potential negative impacts that medical marijuana businesses that are located within the City might cause on surrounding properties and persons. 
(3)  Regulate the conduct of persons owning, operating, and using medical marijuana businesses that are located within the City in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(4)  Establish a nondiscriminatory mechanism by which the City can control, through appropriate regulation, the location and operation of medical marijuana businesses that are located within the City. 
( Ord. No. 916,  II, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-20. - [Adoption.] 
    The City Council hereby finds, determines, and declares that it has the power to adopt this Article pursuant to: 
(1)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S.; 
(2)  Section 16 of Article XVIII to the Colorado Constitution; 
(3)  The applicable administrative regulations; 
(4)  The local government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Part 1 of Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S.; 
(5)  Part 3 of Article 23 of Title 31, C.R.S. (concerning municipal zoning powers); 
(6)  Section 31-15-103, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police powers); 
(7)  Section 31-15-401, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police powers); 
(8)  Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. (concerning municipal authority to regulate businesses); 
(9)  The powers contained in the City of Rocky Ford Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 916,  III, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-30. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions contained in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, and the applicable administrative regulations (as defined in subsection (b) of this section), each as amended from time to time, are incorporated into this Article by reference. 
(b)  As used in this chapter the following words have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Abandon. The knowing relinquishment of a license issued by the City under this Article. Abandonment includes both an intention to abandon the license and an act by which the intention is put into effect. For the purposes of this Article, abandonment shall be presumed if the business activity authorized by a license is ceased for 90 consecutive days (not counting days when the license is ordered to be suspended pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, the applicable administrative regulations, or this Article). 
    Adjacent. Adjacent to or contiguous with the proposed location is to be determined without regard to the existence of a platted or dedicated public street or alley, and real property that would otherwise be determined to be adjacent to a proposed medical marijuana business does not lose its adjacency by virtue of the existence of a platted or dedicated public street or alley. 
    Applicable administrative regulation. Whichever of the state administrative regulations apply to the application or the license, as well as any administrative regulations issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article. 
    Applicable code. The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code as it applies to the application or the license. 
    Applicant. A person who has submitted an application for license to the Local Licensing Authority that has not been approved or denied by the Local Licensing Authority. 
    Application. An application for license submitted to the Local Licensing Authority. 
    Building official. The Chief Building Official of the City, or the Chief Building Official's designee authorized to act pursuant to this Article. 
    City. City means the City of Rocky Ford. 
    Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S., as amended from time to time. 
    Day. A calendar day, unless otherwise indicated. 
    Good cause. For the purpose of denial of an application, the denial of the renewal of a license, or the imposition of discipline of a licensee, means: 
(1)  The licensee or the applicant has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of this Article, the terms and conditions of any license issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this chapter, any applicable code, or any applicable administrative regulation; 
(2)  The licensee or the applicant has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions that were placed on the license pursuant to an order of the state licensing authority or the Local Licensing Authority; or 
(3)  The licensee's licensed premises have been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare, or the safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the establishment is located. 
    Ground floor. The floor of a structure at approximately the same elevation as the natural grade of the surrounding area. 
    Halfway house. A group care facility for adults or juveniles who have been placed on probation or parole under applicable law. 
    License. A license to operate a medical marijuana business issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article. Wherever in this Article the terms "medical marijuana business" are used, such terms include any medical marijuana business that is located in accordance with the applicable law. 
    Licensed premises. The premises that are the subject of a license. 
    Licensee. A person holding a license. 
    Local Licensing Authority. The City Council of the City authorized to act pursuant to this Article. 
    Marijuana accessories. Has the meaning provided in Section 16(2)(g) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana business. Includes medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana infused product manufacturing facilities. 
    Person. Has the meaning provided in Rocky Ford Municipal Code Section 1-2-10: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, firm, corporation, business, trust, organization or other entity, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Primary caregiver. Means a person, other than the patient and the patient's physician, who is: eighteen years of age or older and has significant responsibility for managing the well-being of a patient who has a debilitating medical condition as defined by Colorado Constitution, Art. XVIII, Section 14(1)(a). 
    Residential use. As designated in Rocky Ford Municipal Code Section 16-1-10 through 16-1-30. 
    Split level structure. A structure, or portion of a structure, that includes multiple floors with the lowest floor visible from the street front having a finished grade below the finished grade level of the street front sidewalk. 
    State administrative regulations. The administrative rules and regulations for medical marijuana businesses issued by the state licensing authority and/or the Colorado Department of Revenue, Marijuana Enforcement Division, pursuant to Sections 12-43.3-202(1)(b)(I) and 202(2), C.R.S., as amended from time to time. 
    State Licensing Authority. Has the meaning provided in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
( Ord. No. 916,  IV, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-40. - License required. 
(a)  No person may operate a medical marijuana business within the City without both a valid license issued by the Local Licensing Authority and a valid license issued by the State Licensing Authority. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each specific business or business entity and for each geographic location. 
( Ord. No. 916,  V, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-50. - Adoption of state codes and administrative regulations. 
(a)  The following laws, rules, and regulations are adopted by reference and made a part of this Article: 
(1)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code; 
(2)  The state administrative regulations that apply to medical marijuana businesses; and 
(3)  Any administrative regulations issued by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(b)  Except where the provisions of this Article are inconsistent with or differ from the laws, rules, and regulations adopted by reference in subsection (a) of this section or where, by their nature, the adopted laws, rules, and regulations cannot apply to the Local Licensing Authority, all of the provisions of the adopted laws, rules, and regulations apply to all applications received and licenses issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article. Where a provision of the adopted laws, rules, and regulations are applicable to the Local Licensing Authority the terms "state licensing authority", "department", and "division" shall mean the Local Licensing Authority, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(c)  If there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the adopted laws, rules, and regulations the provisions of this chapter shall control to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  VI, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-60. - Application for license. 
(a)  A person seeking to obtain a license from the Local Licensing Authority shall file an application with the City Clerk's office. The City Clerk's office is responsible for providing application forms to prospective applicants, and for generally supervising the application process up to the point that a completed application is submitted to the Local Licensing Authority for a decision. Once an application is determined to be complete, the application and all supporting documentation shall be forwarded to the Local Licensing Authority. The Local Licensing Authority shall make a final decision on the application in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No license shall be issued by the Local Licensing Authority to a cooperative association as defined in Article 55 of Title 7, C.R.S.; a cooperative as defined in Article 56 of Title 7, C.R.S.; or any other similar cooperatively owned business entity, association, or group. 
(c)  A license issued by the Local Licensing Authority does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required City licenses and permits related to the operation of the licensed premises, including, without limitation: 
(1)  A zoning permit if required by the terms of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code; 
(2)  A Colorado sales tax license; 
(3)  A building permit, mechanical permit, plumbing permit, or electrical permit if required by the terms of the City's building and technical codes. 
(d)  Properly completed applications shall be processed by the Local Licensing Authority in order of receipt. 
(e)  At all times during the application process the applicant has the burden of establishing it is entitled to the license that is applied for. 
( Ord. No. 916,  VII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-70. - Fees. 
    (a) An applicant for a new license shall pay to the City a nonrefundable operating fee when the application is filed. The purpose of the fee is to cover the direct and indirect costs of administering the local licensing mechanism established by this Article. The operating fees are as follows and may be adjusted by a percentage equal to the rate of inflation for the prior year as shown by the Denver-Boulder-Greeley Consumer Price Index by ordinance: 
New medical marijuana business license: 
Type of License Local Operating Fee Medical marijuana center $2,500.00 Optional premises cultivations license $2.500.00 Medical marijuana infused products manufacturers' license $2,500.00 Annual Application Fee $2,500.00  
(c)  Fees for the annual renewal of any license issued by the City shall be 50 percent of the fee for the issuance of a new license as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The following administrative service/operating fees shall be paid to City at the time the service is requested: 
Service Requested Fee Transfer of ownership of business license or application $2500.00 Corporation or LLC structure change (per person) $100.00 Change of location $1000.00 Modification of premises $150.00  
Note: The Local Licensing Authority is not authorized to issue a local retail marijuana testing facility license. 
(d)  At least annually, the amount of fees charged by the City pursuant to this section shall be reviewed and, if necessary, adjusted as provided in subsection (a) of this section to reflect the direct and indirect costs incurred by the City in connection with the adoption, administration, and enforcement of this Article. 
(e)  Beginning with the fiscal 2016 budget, the amount of the fees charged by the City pursuant to this Article shall be fixed by the City Council as part of its annual budget process. If, for any reason, such fees are not fixed by the City Council as part of its annual budget process, the fees for the preceding year shall continue in full force and effect until changed by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 916,  VIII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-80. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a properly completed application, together with all information required in connection therewith, and the payment of the applicable fee as required in this Article, the Local Licensing Authority shall transmit copies of the application to: 
(1)  The Police Department; and 
(2)  Any other person or agency which the Local Licensing Authority or the City Clerk's office determines should properly investigate and comment upon the application. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application the Police Department shall promptly obtain and review a criminal background records search on the applicant. 
(c)  Within 20 days of receipt of a completed application those City departments and other referral agencies described in this section shall provide the Local Licensing Authority with comments concerning the application. 
(d)  An applicant shall cooperate with the Local Licensing Authority with respect to the review and investigation of the application. 
( Ord. No. 916,  IX, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-90. - Authority to impose conditions on license. 
    The Local Licensing Authority may impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and obtain compliance with the requirements of Rocky Ford Municipal Code, the applicable administrative regulations, and other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  X, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-100. - Decision by Local Licensing Authority. 
(a)  The Local Licensing Authority shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve an application within 90 days of the date of the approval of the applicant's state license; provided, however, the deadline for deciding an application may be extended by the Local Licensing Authority for up to an additional 60 days if the Local Licensing Authority reasonably determines that it is necessary for the applicant to submit additional information in order for the Local Licensing Authority to complete the investigation and review of the application. The applicant shall provide any additional information requested by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(b)  A public hearing is not required to be held in connection with an application, unless requested by the applicant. 
(c)  The Local Licensing Authority shall issue a license under this Article when, from a consideration of the application, the investigation, and such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the Local Licensing Authority determines that: 
(1)  The application (including any required attachments and submissions) is complete and signed by the applicant, and the applicant has provided any additional information concerning the application requested by the Local Licensing Authority; 
(2)  The applicant has paid the applicable operating fee and any other fees required by this Article; 
(3)  The application does not contain a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(4)  The application complies with all of the requirements of this Article, the Rocky Ford Municipal Code, and the applicable administrative regulations; and 
(5)  The applicant holds a valid state license for the licensed premises of the same class as has been applied for under this Article. 
(d)  The Local Licensing Authority shall deny an application for a license under this Article if it determines that: 
(1)  The application is incomplete, or the applicant has failed to provide any additional information about the application requested by the Local Licensing Authority; 
(2)  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(3)  The application does not comply with all of the requirements of this Article, the Rocky Ford Municipal Code, and the applicable administrative regulations; or 
(4)  The applicant does not hold a valid state license for the licensed premises of the same class as has been applied for under this chapter. 
(e)  If an application is denied, the Local Licensing Authority shall clearly set forth in writing the grounds for denial. 
(f)  If the application is conditionally approved, the Local Licensing Authority shall clearly set forth in writing the conditions of approval. 
(g)  If an application is denied the operating fee paid to the City at the time of the filing of the application shall not be refunded. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XI, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-110. - Appeal of denial or conditional approval of license. 
    Any decision made by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article is a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules Of Civil Procedure. The applicant's failure to timely appeal the decision is a waiver of the applicant's right to contest the denial or conditional approval of the application. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-120. - Inspection of premises. 
    In addition to the inspection required by the applicable code or other applicable law, prior to the issuance of a license the premises proposed to be licensed shall be inspected by the designated building official to determine compliance with the City's building and technical codes. No license shall be issued if the proposed licensed premises does not comply with the City's building and technical codes. Throughout the term of the license the designated building official may inspect the licensed premises to determine continuing compliance with the City's building and technical codes. Access to such premises shall be obtained by the designated building official in accordance with the applicable provisions of such codes or other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XIII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-130. - Term of license; renewal. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this Article shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed as provided in the applicable code, the applicable administrative regulations, and this Article; provided, however, that a license shall not be renewed if the Local Licensing Authority determines that the licensed premises have been inactive, without good cause, for at least one year. 
(b)  The Local Licensing Authority may refuse to renew a license for good cause. 
(c)  No license for a medical marijuana business shall be renewed by the Local Licensing Authority until the licensee provides verification that a license was issued and granted by the state licensing authority pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code for the previous license term. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article to the contrary, a licensee has no vested right to the renewal of a license, and no property right in the renewal of a license. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XIV, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-140. - Notice of issuance of license. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a license, the Local Licensing Authority shall send a copy of the license to: 
(1)  The Police Department; 
(2)  The City Clerk; 
(3)  The City Manager; and 
(4)  Any other person as determined by the Local Licensing Authority. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XV, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-150. - Duties of licensee. 
    It is the duty and obligation of each licensee to: 
(1)  Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the license, and any special conditions on the license imposed by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article; 
(2)  Comply with all of the requirements of this Article; 
(3)  Comply with all other applicable City ordinances; 
(4)  Comply with all applicable state laws and administrative regulations pertaining to the category of business for which the license was issued, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The applicable code; 
b.  The applicable administrative regulations; 
c.  Sections 18-18-406.3 and 25-1.5-106, C.R.S., to the extent applicable; and 
d.  The administrative regulations issued by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment found at 5 CCR 1006-2, to the extent applicable, all as amended from time to time. 
(5)  Comply with all applicable laws, rules, or regulations. 
(6)  Compliance with the requirements of this Article is a standard condition of each license issued by the Local Licensing Authority. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XVI, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-160. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license issued by the Local Licensing Authority may be suspended or revoked by the Local Licensing Authority in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in the applicable code, the applicable administrative regulations, and this Article. 
(b)  In addition to the standards set forth in the applicable code and the applicable administrative regulations, a violation of this Article, or of the terms and conditions of a license issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article, may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license issued by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(c)  In connection with the suspension of a license, the Local Licensing Authority may impose reasonable conditions. 
(d)  In deciding whether a license should be suspended or revoked, and in deciding what conditions to impose in the event of a suspension, if any, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider: 
(1)  The nature and seriousness of the violation; 
(2)  Corrective action, if any, taken by the licensee; 
(3)  Prior violation(s), if any, by the licensee; 
(4)  The likelihood of recurrence; 
(5)  All circumstances surrounding the violation; 
(6)  Whether the violation was willful or deliberate; 
(7)  The number of previous violations by the licensee; 
(8)  Previous sanctions, if any, imposed against the licensee; and 
(9)  Whether the owner or manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
(e)  If an offense is described in the applicable administrative regulations, the licensing authority shall follow the provisions of such regulation in deciding the appropriate sanction to be imposed upon the licensee. 
(f)  A license issued by the Local Licensing Authority may be revoked if the Local Licensing Authority determines that the licensed premises have been inactive, without good cause, for at least one year. 
(g)  If the Local Licensing Authority suspends or revokes a license the licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation to the district court pursuant to rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. The licensee's failure to timely appeal the decision is a waiver of the licensee's right to contest the denial or conditional approval of the application. 
(h)  No fee previously paid by a licensee in connection with the application shall be refunded if the licensee's license is suspended or revoked. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XVII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-170. - Transfer of ownership; change of location; modification of premises. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the ownership of a license may be transferred, the permanent location of a licensed premises may be changed, and the licensed premises may be modified in accordance with the applicable code, the applicable administrative regulations, and this Article. 
(b)  No change of location of a licensed premises shall be approved by the Local Licensing Authority if the proposed new location of the licensed premises is not a location that is permitted by this Article. 
(c)  No change of location for a medical marijuana business shall be approved by the Local Licensing Authority until the licensee provides verification that a license was issued and granted by the state licensing authority pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code for the previous license term. 
(d)  The licensed premises may be modified in accordance with the applicable code, the applicable administrative regulations, and this Article. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XVIII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-180. - Consideration of number of existing licenses. 
    Before entering a decision approving or denying an application the Local Licensing Authority shall consider, among the other relevant factors described in the applicable codes, the number, type, and availability of medical marijuana businesses located in or near the premises for which the application has been submitted. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XIX, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-190. - Location of licensed premises. 
(a)  No medical marijuana business shall be located at a location that does not conform to the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  No medical marijuana business shall be located within the city except within areas zoned as a Highway Commercial District (C-2) and as a Light Industrial District, except described as an area bounded on the North Northerly Side by Railroad Avenue, on the Southerly side by Front Street, on the Westerly Side by Ninth Street, and on the Easterly Side by Tenth Street. 
(c)  In addition to the restriction imposed by subsection (b) of this section, no medical marijuana business or grow center shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of a licensed childcare facility; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any educational institution or school, college or university, either public or private; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any halfway house; 
(4)  Within any building or structure that contains a residential unit. 
(d)  The distances described in subsection (c) of this section shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the existing land use described in subsection c1, c2, or c3 of this section, to the nearest portion of the building for which the license is requested, using a route of direct pedestrian access. 
(e)  The distance limitations established by subsection (c) of this section shall control over the distance limitations set forth in any applicable code or applicable administrative regulation. 
(f)  Nothing in this Article prevents a licensee from physically delivering medical marijuana to a homebound patient when done in compliance with the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the applicable administrative regulations. 
(g)  No licensed premises shall be operated as a "home occupation" as described in zoning section of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XX, 4-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 924,  1, 9-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 6-6-200. - Hours of operation. 
    A licensed premises may open no earlier than eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall close no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. the same day, Monday through Sunday. No marijuana shall be sold or dispensed at a licensed premises when the licensed premises is required to be closed pursuant to this Article. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXI, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-210. - Signage. 
    All signage for a licensed premises shall comply with the requirements of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. In addition, no licensee shall display a sign for a licensed premises that contains the word "marijuana" or a graphic/image of any portion of a marijuana plant, except as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-220. - Marijuana accessories. 
    Marijuana accessories may lawfully be sold only at a licensed medical marijuana center. Such items shall be sold at a medical marijuana center only to persons authorized to purchase medical marijuana. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXIII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-230. - Site cultivation, growing and processing. 
    The growing, cultivation, or processing of marijuana on or within a licensed premises is prohibited unless allowed by the applicable codes and applicable administrative regulations, and the licensed premises is equipped with a proper ventilation system that filters out the odor of marijuana so that the odor is not capable of being detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXIV, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-240. - Display of marijuana. 
    No marijuana shall be displayed within a licensed premises so as to be visible through a glass, a window, or a door by a person of normal visual acuity standing at the outside perimeter of the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXV, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-250. - Taxes. 
    Each licensee shall collect and remit to the appropriate taxing authority all sales and excise taxes that are lawfully due in accordance with applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXVI, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-260. - Violations; penalties; injunctive relief. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a civil infraction for any person to violate any provision of this Article. Any person found to be in violation of this Article, or against whom a default judgment has been entered for a violation of this Article, shall be punished as provided in the Rocky Ford Municipal code. 
(b)  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor offense for any person to violate any of the misdemeanor offenses described in Part 9 of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. The person or entity in violation may face confiscation of goods, immediate closure of the medical marijuana business and an assessed fine. 
(c)  The operation of a medical marijuana business in violation of this Article, the applicable code, or the applicable administrative regulations may be enjoined by the City in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  If any action is brought in a court of law by any person concerning the enforcement, interpretation, or construction of this Article, or any license issued by the Local Licensing Authority, the City shall recover its reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and court costs if it is the prevailing party. 
(e)  The remedies provided in this section are in addition to any other remedy provided by applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXVII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-270. - No City liability. 
    By operating a business pursuant to a license issued by the Local Licensing Authority a licensee releases the city, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys, and agents from any liability for injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of the licensee, or the licensee's owners, operators, employees, clients, or customers, for a violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation related to medical marijuana, or from the forced closure of the licensed premises because of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, any applicable administrative regulation, and/or this Article, are found to be invalid under any superior law. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXVIII, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-280. - Other laws remain applicable. 
    Before issuing a license the Local Licensing Authority shall obtain written confirmation from the licensee that the licensee understands and agrees to the following: 
(1)  Neither this Article, nor the act of obtaining a license from the Local Licensing Authority, protects licensees, or the owners, operators, employees, customers, and clients of a licensed premises, from criminal prosecution pursuant to any superior law that prohibits the cultivation, sale, use, or possession of controlled substances, including, but not limited to, medical marijuana. 
(2)  As of the date of the adoption of this Article the cultivation, sale, possession, distribution, and use of marijuana remains a violation of federal law, and this chapter affords licensees, and licensee's owners, operators, employees, customers, and clients, with no protection from criminal prosecution under such law. Licensees, and their owners, operators, employees, customers, and clients assume any and all risk and liability arising or resulting from the operation of the licensed premises under federal law. 
(3)  The City has no liability to a licensee or any other person for injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind, under any legal theory of liability, arising from the forced closure of the licensed premises if the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, the applicable administrative regulations, and/or this chapter are found to be invalid or illegal under any superior law. 
(4)  To the greatest extent permitted by law, any action taken under the provisions of this Article by any public officer or officers, elected or appointed officials, employees, attorneys, and agents of the City of Rocky Ford, is not a personal liability of such person or of the City. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXIX, 4-26-2016 ) 
Sec. 6-6-290. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Local Licensing Authority may from time to time adopt, amend, alter, and repeal administrative rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration of this Article. Such regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the procedures established by the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 916,  XXX, 4-26-2016 ) 
ARTICLE 7 - Rocky Ford Retail Marijuana Code 

Sec. 6-7-10. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this Chapter 6 is to exercise the authority of the City of Rocky Ford to allow state-licensed marijuana establishments to exist in Rocky Ford in accordance with the applicable state laws and regulations as well as the additional local licensing requirements and other restrictions set forth herein. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the aforesaid constitutional and statutory authority, as well as the City's plenary authority as a statutory city to adopt and enforce ordinances under its police power in order to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare and its authority to regulate businesses. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-20. - Defined terms. 
    The definitions set forth in Subsection 16 (2) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution as well as the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code,  12-43.4-103, C.R.S., as amended, shall apply equally to this Chapter 6. In addition, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them: 
    Alcohol or drug treatment facility means any facility located within a medical office or hospital that has as its primary purpose the counseling of and/or the providing of medical services to patients who suffer from addictions to alcohol or drugs. 
    Child care center means a facility maintained for the care of children under the age of 16, including, but not limited to, day camps, nursery schools, day care, preschools and playschools. Such facility shall be licensed by the Colorado Department of Human Services. 
    Colorado Retail Marijuana Code means Article 43.4 of Title 12 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, including all Rules promulgated pursuant to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code as set forth in the Colorado Code of Regulations Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division 1 CCR 212.2. 
    Retail marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package retail marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
    Retail marijuana establishment means a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana testing facility. 
    Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package retail marijuana product; and sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana product only to other retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and retail marijuana stores. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana from a retail marijuana cultivation facility and to purchase retail marijuana product from a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility and to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana product to consumers. 
    School means a public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school. 
    Zoning Ordinance means Chapter 16 - Zoning of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code, referring to the land development regulations as adopted and updated periodically by the City of Rocky Ford. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-30. - Effective date; applicability. 
    This Article 7 shall be effective after midnight on April 1, 2018, and shall govern all applications submitted to the state licensing authority for licensing of any retail marijuana establishment in the City under the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code on and after that date. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-40. - Local licensing authority. 
(a)  The City Council is hereby designated to act as the local licensing authority for the City in regard to retail marijuana establishments. Under any and all circumstances in which state law requires communication to the City by the state licensing authority or any other state agency in regard to the licensing of retail marijuana establishments by the state, or in which state law requires any review or approval by the City of any action taken by the state licensing authority, the exclusive authority for receiving such communications and granting such approvals shall be exercised by the Council. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall the City Council receive or act upon any application for local licensing of a retail marijuana establishment in circumstances where the state has failed to act in accordance with Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, it being the intent of this Article that no retail marijuana establishment may lawfully exist in the City of Rocky Ford absent the issuance of a state license and full regulatory oversight of the retail marijuana establishment by the state, as well as the City. Accordingly, the Council shall not receive or act upon any application for licensing submitted independently and in lieu of state licensing if the state fails to act within ninety (90) days on any specific application for licensing of a retail marijuana establishment in accordance with paragraph 16(5)(g)(III) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution. 
(c)  Any decision made by the local licensing authority to grant or deny a license, to revoke or suspend a license, or to renew or not renew a license shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-50. - Eligibility. 
(a)  No retail marijuana license shall be issued by the local licensing authority to any establishment who did not: 
(1)  Possess a valid medical marijuana license, issued by the local licensing authority, on or before June 15, 2017; or 
(2)  Submit an application for a medical marijuana license to the local licensing authority on or before June 15, 2017. 
(b)  The local licensing authority shall not act upon any application for a retail marijuana license unless the application is to: 
(1)  Co-locate a retail marijuana establishment with an existing medical marijuana business or retail marijuana business of the same type; or 
(2)  Convert an existing medical marijuana establishment to a retail marijuana business of the same type. 
(c)  Only medical marijuana centers licensed in Rocky Ford as of June 15, 2017, or that submitted application materials to the City of Rocky Ford before June 15, 2017, qualify for a retail marijuana store license. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-60. - Relationship to Colorado Retail Marijuana Code; other laws. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Article 7 incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Article 7 and the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control, except that the location requirements and restrictions set forth in Section 6-7-100 shall apply in all situations of conflict between such provisions and the provisions of state law or regulation regarding matters where the exercise of discretion by local jurisdictions is granted by the constitution or laws of the State of Colorado. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-70. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any retail marijuana establishment in the City without a license duly issued therefor by the state licensing authority under the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and compliance with any and all applicable state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any retail marijuana establishment in the City without a license duly issued therefor by the City Council under this Article 4 and compliance with any and all applicable City laws. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale, distribution or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of businesses and commerce that are expressly contemplated by Sections 14 and 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and/or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed retail marijuana establishment to sell, serve, distribute or initiate the transport of retail marijuana or retail marijuana products at any time other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed retail marijuana establishment to cultivate or process marijuana on or within a licensed premise unless allowed by the applicable codes and/or applicable administrative regulations and the license premises is equipped with a proper ventilation system that filters out the odor of marijuana. 
(f)  In shall be unlawful to display marijuana products within a licensed premises so as to be visible through a glass, a window or door by a person of normal visual acuity standing at the outside perimeter of the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-80. - Classes of licensing authorized. 
    For the purpose of regulating the cultivation, manufacture, testing, distribution, offering for sale, and sale of retail marijuana, the City Council, at the Council's discretion, upon application in the prescribed form made to the Council, may issue and grant to the applicant a local license from any of the following classes, and the City hereby authorizes the issuance of the licenses of the following classes by the state licensing authority within the City, subject to the provisions, limitations and restrictions set forth in this Article 7: 
(1)  Retail marijuana store; 
(2)  Retail marijuana cultivation facility; and 
(3)  Retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-90. - Screening and response to state license applications. 
(a)  Upon receipt of notice from the state licensing authority of any application for a license under the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, the City Clerk shall: 
(1)  Determine, in consultation with the City Manager, or his/her designee, whether or not the location proposed for licensing complies with any and all applicable zoning and land use laws of the City, and any and all restrictions on location of retail marijuana establishments set forth in this Article 7. If the City makes an initial determination that the proposed license would be in violation of any zoning law or other restriction on location set forth in the City's laws, the City shall, no later than 45 days from the date the application was originally received by the state licensing authority, notify the state licensing authority and the applicant for state licensing in writing that the application is disapproved by the City. The failure of the City to make such a determination upon the initial review of a state license application shall not preclude the City from later determining that proposed license is in violation of City's zoning laws or any other restriction on location set forth in City laws, and disapprove the issuance of a state or City license on this basis. 
(2)  For any application that is not disapproved as provided in paragraph 1 of this Subsection A, the City shall notify the state licensing authority and the applicant for state licensing in writing that the City's further consideration of the application is subject to a local licensing process, and that the City's ultimate decision to approve or disapprove the issuance of the state license for a retail marijuana establishment proposed to be located in the City of Rocky Ford will be subject to the completion of the local licensing process, as set forth in this Article 7, after which the City will notify the state licensing authority in writing of whether or not the retail marijuana establishment proposed in the application has or has not been approved by the City. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-100. - Licensing requirements-provisions applicable to all licenses. 
(a)  Criteria for licensing. The City Council shall consider and act upon all local license applications in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Article 7. The Council may deny any application for a license that is not in full compliance with the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, this Article 7, and any other applicable state or City law or regulation. The Council also shall deny any application that contains any false or incomplete information. 
(b)  Application forms and supplemental materials. All applications for local licensing shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall include such supplemental materials as required by the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and rules adopted pursuant thereto, including by way of example: proof of possession of the licensed premises, disclosures related to ownership of the proposed business, fingerprints of the applicants, building plans, and security plans. To the extent any of the foregoing supplemental materials have been included with the applicant's state license application and forwarded to the City by the state licensing authority, the City Clerk may rely upon the information forwarded from the state without requiring re-submittal of the same materials in conjunction with the local license application. The City may, at the City's discretion, require additional documentation associated with the application as may be necessary to enforce the requirements of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and this Article 7. 
(c)  Area maps. All applications for retail marijuana establishment licensing submitted pursuant to this Article 7 shall include an area map drawn to scale indicating land uses of other properties within 500 feet of each boundary of the lot or parcel upon which the applicant proposes a licensed premises. The map shall depict the proximity of the property to be used as the licensed premises to any school or child care facility of the type referenced in Section 6-7-100. 
(d)  Notice of applications to departments and agencies. Upon receipt of an application for any class of local retail marijuana establishment license, the City Clerk shall give notice of the application to the City Manager, the Finance Officer, the Chief of the Rocky Ford Police Department, the Chief of the Rocky Ford Fire Department and appropriate county or local health officials. Any applicant for a license under this Article 7 shall obtain any and all necessary permits, licenses and other regulatory approvals from the other affected City departments and agencies prior to the issuance of a license under this Article 7. 
(e)  Background checks and determination of good character and state residency. Prior to the issuance of any local license, the City Council shall make a finding as to the good moral character of the applicant and compliance with state residency requirements in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. In so doing, the Council may incorporate into its findings any findings as to good character and residency previously made by the state licensing authority and rely upon such findings in making its determination. The Council shall not be required to perform a criminal background check if the state licensing authority has already performed a criminal background check on the applicant. 
(f)  A license pursuant to this article does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other City licenses and permits, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any land use approval, if applicable; 
(2)  State sales tax license; or 
(3)  Building, mechanical, plumbing, electrical or fire permit(s). 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-110. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Permitted locations for sales. All retail marijuana establishment licenses shall be issued for a specific fixed location which shall be designated the licensed premises. Except as provided in Subsection (d), all sales, deliveries and other transfers of marijuana and marijuana products by a licensee shall be made at or from the licensed premises. 
(b)  Distance from schools. No retail marijuana establishment license shall be granted with respect to a proposed licensed premises that would be located within 500 feet of any school that existed at the time of the filing of a complete application for a retail marijuana establishment license with the City Clerk. 
(c)  Distance from certain child care facilities. No retail marijuana establishment license shall be granted with respect to a proposed licensed premises that would be located within 500 feet of any licensed residential child care facility, as defined in Title 26 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, that existed at the time of the filing of a complete application for a retail marijuana establishment license with the City. 
(d)  No mobile facilities and restrictions regarding deliveries. 
(1)  No retail marijuana establishment shall be located in a movable or mobile vehicle or structure. 
(2)  No retail marijuana or marijuana product shall be delivered in the City unless such delivery is by a retail marijuana establishment licensed by the state to another retail marijuana establishment licensed by the state and the City and such delivery is specifically permitted by the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
(3)  All sales and distribution of retail marijuana and marijuana products by a licensed retail marijuana store shall occur only upon the licensed premises, and the licensee shall be strictly prohibited from delivering retail marijuana or marijuana products to any person at any other location. 
(e)  Measurement of distance. Any distance specified in Subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the lot or parcel upon which a school or child care facility referenced in Subsection (b) or (c) is situated to the nearest portion of the building used or proposed for use as a licensed retail marijuana establishment, using a route of direct pedestrian access. 
(f)  Places where retail marijuana establishments are prohibited. No licensed retail marijuana establishment shall be operated within the boundaries of any residential zone district of the City as those boundaries exist at the time any complete application for any class of retail marijuana establishment license is filed with the City Clerk. Retail marijuana stores shall only be operated within the boundaries of a C-2 commercial zone district of the as those boundaries exist at the time any complete application is filed with the City Clerk. All other retail marijuana establishments may be allowed only in an I-2 industrial zone district on a property that specifically has been permitted for such use through the City's special review process, as provided for in Chapter 16, Article 4 of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. Such special review use must be conducted in accordance with any and all conditions imposed in the ordinance permitting the special review use, in addition to being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Title 7 and applicable state law and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-120. - Signs and advertising. 
(a)  Any person or premises licensed as a retail marijuana store shall comply with all City ordinances regulating signs and advertising. In addition, no licensed retail marijuana store shall use any advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, or false, or that, as evidenced either by the content of the advertising material or by the medium or the manner in which the advertising is disseminated, is designed to appeal to minors. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the terms "advertise," "advertising" or "advertisement" mean the act of drawing the public's attention to a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana products manufacturer in order to promote the sale of retail marijuana by the store or the manufacturer. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this Title or any other person to advertise any retail marijuana or retail marijuana product anywhere in the City where the advertisement is visible to members of the public from any street, sidewalk, park or other public place, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: any billboard or other outdoor general advertising device as defined by the zoning code; any sign mounted on a vehicle, any hand-held or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet or flier directly handed to any person in a public place, left upon a motor vehicle, or posted upon any public or private property without the consent of the property owner. The prohibition set forth in this paragraph shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any sign located on the same zone lot as a retail marijuana store which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the retail marijuana store and which otherwise complies with the City's sign code, Chapter 16, Article 7 of the City Municipal Code, and any other applicable City laws and regulations; or 
(2)  Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the City; 
(3)  Advertising which is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable event by a retail marijuana store or a retail marijuana products manufacturer. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-130. - Denial for good cause. 
(a)  The City Council shall have authority to refuse to issue or renew any retail marijuana establishment license for good cause, subject to judicial review. For purposes of this section, the term "good cause" means: 
(1)  The applicant has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or this Title 7 or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this Title; 
(2)  Evidence that the issuance or renewal of the license will adversely impact the health, welfare or public safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the retail marijuana establishment is located or is proposed to be located; or 
(3)  Evidence that the licensee or applicant has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions that were placed upon the license pursuant to an order of the State Licensing Authority or an order of the Local Licensing Authority. 
(b)  Any decision of the City Council to approve or deny any license application shall be in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-140. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Transfer of ownership of any local license issued pursuant to this Article 7 shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the City Council shall administer transfers of local licenses in the same manner as the state licensing authority administers transfers of state licenses. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-150. - Change of location; modification of premises. 
    Change of location of any license or any modification of the licensed premises shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the City Council shall administer applications to change location or modify premises in the same manner as the state licensing authority administers changes of location and modification of premises for state licenses. Any proposed modification and any new location to which an existing licensed business is transferred shall fully comply with the location requirements and the requirements for conformance with current zoning as set forth this Title 7. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-160. - Term of licenses; renewals. 
    Any local license issued pursuant to this Title shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Any renewal of the license shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the City Council shall administer license renewals in the same manner as the state licensing authority administers renewals of state licenses. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-170. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license issued by the Local Licensing Authority may be suspended or revoked by the Local Licensing Authority in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in the applicable code, the applicable administrative regulations and this Article. 
(b)  In addition to the standards set forth in the applicable code and applicable administrative regulations, a violation of this Article, or the terms and conditions of a license issued by the Local Licensing Authority pursuant to this Article, may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license issued by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(c)  In connection with the suspension of a license, the Local Licensing Authority may impose reasonable conditions. 
(d)  In deciding whether a license should be suspended or revoked, and in deciding what conditions to impose in the event of a suspension, if any, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider: 
(1)  The nature and seriousness of the violation; 
(2)  Corrective action, if any, taken by the licensee; 
(3)  Prior violation(s), if any, by the licensee; 
(4)  The likelihood of reoccurrence; 
(5)  All circumstances surrounding the violation; 
(6)  Whether the violation was willful or deliberate; 
(7)  The number of previous violations by the licensee; 
(8)  Previous sanctions, if any, imposed against the licensee; and 
(9)  Whether the owner or manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. 
(e)  If an offense is described in the application administrative regulations, the licensing authority shall follow the provisions of such regulation in deciding the appropriate sanction to be imposed upon the licensee. 
(f)  A license issued by the Local Licensing Authority may be revoked if the Local Licensing Authority determines that the licensed premises has been inactive, without good cause, for at least one year. 
(g)  If the local Licensing Authority suspends or revokes a license, the licensee may appeal the suspension to rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. The licensee's failure to timely appeal the decision is a waiver of the licensee's right to contest the denial or conditional approval of the application. 
(h)  No fee previously paid by the licensee in connection with the application shall be refunded if the licensee's license is suspended or revoked. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-180. - Operating fees and number of licenses. 
    Operating fees, all of which shall be non-refundable, and the number of licenses for retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturers, and retail marijuana testing facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Annual operating fee, per year: $2,500.00 for all classes of licenses, payable in advance on or before the date the license is issued or renewed, as the case may be. 
(2)  Annual application fee, per year: $2,500.00 for all classes of license, payable in advance on or before the date the license is issued or renewed, as the case may be. 
(3)  Criminal background check fee, per person checked: Actual costs. 
(4)  Transfer of ownership: $2,500.00, plus cost of background check. 
(5)  Transfer of location: $1,000.00. 
(6)  Modification of premises: $150.00. 
(7)  Corporate or LLC structure change (per person): $100.00. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 6-7-190. - Public nuisance. 
    The unlawful cultivation, manufacturing, sale, offer for sale, or distribution of retail marijuana without a license is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may be abated or otherwise dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Rocky Ford Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 930, 3-13-2018 ) 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE 1 - Administration and Abatement of Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1-10. - Policy. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the City, pursuant to Section 31-15-401(c), C.R.S., that every public nuisance shall be restrained, prevented, abated and perpetually enjoined. It is the duty of the City Attorney to bring and maintain an action, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, to restrain, prevent, abate and perpetually enjoin any such public nuisance. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as an amendment or repeal of any of the other criminal laws of the State, but the provisions of this Chapter, insofar as they relate to those laws, shall be considered a cumulative right of the People in the enforcement of such laws. 
(b)  Exclusions. It is not the policy of purpose of this Chapter to repeal or preempt any zoning ordinance or other ordinance of the City which regulates the use of property, and all other ordinances shall be construed along with this Chapter and read together with this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  6.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Chapter, the following words shall be interpreted as follows unless the context indicates otherwise: 
    Action to abate a public nuisance means any action authorized by this Chapter to declare and then restrain, remove, terminate, prevent, abate or perpetually enjoin a public nuisance. 
    Brush means voluntary growth of bushes and such as are growing out of place at the location where growing, and includes all cuttings from trees and bushes and high and rank shrubbery growth which may conceal filthy deposits. 
    Building means any dwelling, office building, store, warehouse or structure of any kind, whether or not the building is permanently affixed to the ground upon which it is located, and any trailer, semitrailer, coach, manufactured home, mobile home or any other vehicle designed or used for occupancy by persons for any purpose. 
    City official means the City Manager, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her authorized representative. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, truck or self-propelled vehicle incapable of moving under its own power or which does not comply with the minimum safety requirements of the Colorado Motor Vehicle Law. 
    Litter means the scattering or dropping of rubbish, trash or other matter, organic or mineral. 
    Nuisance means any substance, act, occupation, condition or use of property declared a nuisance by this Chapter, by the State or by any court or agency thereof, or known as a nuisance at common law, or which is of such a nature and duration as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public. 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(3)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway or other public way. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other type of organization, or an agent or employee thereof. 
    Refuse means and includes any grass clippings, leaves, hay, straw, manure, shavings, excelsior, paper, ashes, rubbish containers, boxes, glass, cans, bottles, garbage, waste and discarded building and construction materials, including but not limited to plaster, broken concrete, bricks, cinder blocks, stones, wood, roofing material, wire or metal binding, sacks or loose discarded or unused material; all rubbish of any kind or nature whatsoever; and any other materials commonly known as rubbish or refuse of any kind or character or by any means known. 
    Rubbish means any type of debris, trash, waste or rejected matter. 
    Trash means any worn out, broken up or used refuse, rubbish, toppings, twigs, leaves of trees or worthless matter or material. 
    Weed means an unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious growing herbaceous plant, and includes all rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious odors and high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits. 
(Prior code,  6.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-30. - Common law nuisances. 
    Any nuisance which has been declared to be such by state courts or statutes or known as such by common law shall constitute a nuisance when the same exists within the City limits or within one mile thereof. Any person causing or permitting any such nuisance shall be in violation of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  6.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Author of nuisances. 
(a)  Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the owner, tenant or his or her agent and all other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists shall be deemed to be authors thereof and shall be jointly and equally liable and responsible. 
(b)  Where any such nuisance arises from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business conducted thereon, the occupants and all other persons contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors. 
(Prior code,  6.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-50. - Prohibition of nuisances. 
    No person, being the owner, agent or occupant of or having under his or her control any building, lot, premises or unimproved real estate within the limits of the City, shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain therein. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-60. - Ascertaining nuisances. 
    Whenever the pursuit of any trade, business or the manufacturing or maintenance of any substance or condition of things is, upon investigation, considered by the City Manager to be dangerous to the health of any of the inhabitants of the City, the same shall be considered a nuisance and shall be abated. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-70. - Authority of City to declare nuisance. 
    Any act, condition, substance, occupation or use of property which substantially meets the criteria of a nuisance as defined in this Chapter may be so declared by the Code Enforcement Officer, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit the power of the City to make such declaration. 
(Prior code,  6.06.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-80. - Filing complaint. 
    In addition to or in lieu of any procedure for abatement, a direct complaint may be filed by any person or police officer against any person who violates any provision of this Chapter with the Code Enforcement Officer. Such complaint shall include, whenever possible, the nature of the public nuisance, the location, including the address, the name of the owner, occupant or manager of the property, the duration of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. 
(Prior code,  6.06.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-90. - Inspection; right of entry; emergencies. 
(a)  Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a public nuisance exists and that such public nuisance constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, the Chief of Police may immediately enter into any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City for purposes of inspection or abatement. 
(b)  Whenever an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Article, the Chief of Police, upon a presentation of proper credentials or identification in the case of an occupied building or premises, may enter into the building or go upon the premises within the jurisdiction of the City. In said emergency situation, the Chief of Police may use such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry into said building or upon such premises. 
(c)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter, or whenever the Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition which constitutes a nuisance therein, the Chief of Police may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed on him or her. If such building or premises are occupied, the Chief of Police shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, occupant or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and, upon locating said owner, occupant or other person, shall present proper credentials and demand entry. If entry is refused, the Chief of Police shall give the owner or occupant or, if the owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, shall leave at the building or premises, a 24-hour written notice of intention to inspect. The notice given to the owner or occupant, if left on the premises as aforesaid, shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event that such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by the Municipal Judge. 
(d)  After the expiration of said 24-hour period from the giving or leaving of notice, the Chief of Police may appear before the Municipal Judge or other state court judge and, upon a showing of probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling him or her to enter said building or go upon such premises. Upon presentation of said search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the same in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, the Chief of Police may enter into said building or go upon said premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. 
(e)  For the purposes of Subsection (d) above, a determination of probable cause will be based upon reasonableness, and, if a valid public interest justifies the intrusion contemplated, then there is probable cause to issue a search warrant. The person applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises at issue in order to obtain a search warrant. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of said building or premises to resist reasonable force used by any authorized agent acting pursuant to this Section. 
(Prior code,  6.06.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-100. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  An action to abate a public nuisance may be brought in Municipal Court or any other court where appropriate. 
(b)  Except as otherwise may be provided in this Chapter, the practice and procedure in an action to abate a public nuisance shall be governed by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure and the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure. 
(c)  An action to abate a public nuisance may be brought by the City Attorney in the name of the People of the State of Colorado and the City. 
(d)  An action to abate a public nuisance, and any action in which a temporary restraining order, temporary writ of injunction or preliminary injunction is requested, shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint, which shall be verified or supported by an affidavit. A summons shall be issued and served as in civil cases. 
(e)  The respondent or defendant shall not be entitled to a jury trial. 
(Prior code,  6.06.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-110. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Each and every nuisance declared or defined by any ordinance of the City or by this Chapter is hereby prohibited, and the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized in his or her discretion to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he or she may direct, subject to the limitations herein provided. If any nuisance is found to exist upon public property, it shall be the duty of the City to abate such nuisance immediately. 
(b)  Whenever a public nuisance exists which constitutes an emergency, imminent danger or serious injury to persons or property, the Code Enforcement Officer may order without notice or judicial action that the public nuisance be summarily abated by removal, destruction or mitigation. 
(c)  Unless a specific provision of this Chapter states otherwise, when a public nuisance does not require summary abatement, the Code Enforcement Officer may prepare and serve a notice to abate on the owner, manager, occupant or possessor of any property which constitutes the public nuisance or the person conducting or maintaining the business, occupation, operation or activity which constitutes the public nuisance. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State that, if the nuisance is not abated within seven days, an action may be brought in the Municipal Court or other state court to abate the nuisance and that all costs of abatement, plus ten percent of such costs for inspection and other additional administrative costs, including but not limited to reasonable attorney fees, may be assessed against the person found by the court to have caused, allowed to be caused or allowed to continue the public nuisance and may become a lien upon any property on which the abatement was performed. 
(2)  Be in writing, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the notice, and served, either personally or by means of posting on the premises upon which the nuisance exists. If notice is served by posting, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the property at the last known address. 
(d)  When a public nuisance has not been voluntarily abated within the time specified in the notice to abate, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  If the person notified in accordance with Subsection (c) above neglects or refuses to comply with the requirements of said notice to abate the nuisance within the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed at once, upon the expiration of the time specified in such notice, to commence appropriate legal action to cause such nuisance to be abated; provided that, if the owner is unknown or cannot be found, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed to abate such nuisance after notice has been posted for the period equal to the time specified to abate said nuisance. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the owner of the property upon which said nuisance existed. 
(2)  The City may bring action in the Municipal Court or other state court to have the nuisance declared as such by the court and for an order enjoining the public nuisance or authorizing its restraint, removal, termination or abatement by the owner or the person who allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue, or by the Code Enforcement Officer or any person under contract with the City to perform such services. 
(3)  The action to declare and abate a public nuisance shall be brought by the City in the name of the People of the City, by the filing of a complaint, which shall be verified or supported by an affidavit. A summons shall be issued and served as in civil cases, and any employee of the City who is over the age of 18 years may serve the summons and verified complaint upon the respondent. Trial shall be to the Municipal Court. 
(4)  A notice of appearance shall be served with the summons and complaint. The appearance date shall be not less than 30 days from the date of service of the summons and complaint. The trial shall be held upon the appearance date unless the court grants a continuance for good cause shown. 
(5)  The respondent shall file a response on or before the appearance date set forth in the notice of appearance. 
(6)  Upon the date and at the time set for appearance and trial, if the respondent has filed no response and fails to appear and if the City proves that proper service was made on the respondent at least 30 days prior to the appearance date, the Municipal Court may grant such orders as are requested by the City. However, the Municipal Court shall order that enforcement by the City be stayed for ten days and that a copy of the Municipal Court's order be mailed to the respondent at his or her last known address. Failure to appear on any other date set for trial shall be grounds for entering a default and judgment thereon against a non-appearing party. For good cause shown, and prior to enforcement, the Municipal Court may set aside any entry of default and the judgment entered thereon. 
(7)  Upon a judicial determination that a nuisance exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may be authorized to abate said nuisance or cause the same to be abated, employing such forces and persons as may be necessary to abate said nuisance or cause the same to be abated, including employees of the City or by contract or otherwise. All other City officials and employees are hereby authorized and directed to render such assistance to the Code Enforcement Officer as may be required for the abatement of such nuisance and in connection with the enforcement thereof. 
(8)  The judgment of the Municipal Court may be appealed. 
(e)  The remedies specified in this Section shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by law. 
(Prior code,  6.06.090; Ord. No. 786,  1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-120. - Judgment; relief. 
(a)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include a permanent injunction to restrain, abate and prevent the continuance or reoccurrence of the nuisance. The Court may grant declaratory relief, mandatory orders or any other relief deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the injunction and enforce the same, and the Court may retain jurisdiction of the case for the purpose of enforcing its order. 
(b)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include an order directing the Chief of Police to seize and close the public nuisance and to keep the same effectually closed until further order of the court, not to exceed one year. 
(c)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to other injunctive relief, an order requiring the removal, correction or other abatement of a public nuisance, in whole or in part, by the Chief of Police at the expense of the owner or operator of the public nuisance. 
(d)  The judgment in an action to abate a public nuisance may include, in addition to or in the alternative to any other relief authorized by the provisions of this Article, the imposition of a fine of not more than $300.00, conditioned upon failure or refusal of compliance with the orders of the Court within any time limits therein fixed. 
(Prior code,  6.06.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-130. - Redelivery of seized premises. 
    If the owner or operator of a building or place seized and closed as a public nuisance is not guilty of any contempt of court in the proceedings and demonstrates by evidence satisfactory to the Court that the public nuisance has been abated and will not reoccur, the Court may order the premises delivered to the owner or operator. As a condition of such order, the Court may require the posting of a bond, in an amount fixed by order of the Court, for the faithful performance of the obligation on the owner or operator thereunder to prevent recurrence or continuance of the public nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.110; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-140. - Responsibility for costs of abatement. 
    A person found by the Court to have caused a public nuisance or allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue shall be liable for the costs specified in this Section, including reasonable attorney fees. Such costs may be collected by the City in the civil action to abate the nuisance or assessed and filed as a lien against any property on which the abatement was performed as specified in this Section. 
(Prior code,  6.06.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-150. - Notice of assessment. 
    If the costs of abatement have not been otherwise collected, the Code Enforcement Officer shall prepare a statement enumerating the actual costs of abatement and collection plus ten percent of the abatement costs for inspection and other additional administrative costs. The costs enumerated in this statement shall be a first and prior lien upon the property relating back to the date upon which the abatement was performed. A copy of this statement shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such property as shown upon the tax rolls of the County, at the address of such owner as therein shown. 
(Prior code,  6.06.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-160. - Hearing on assessment. 
    The owner may request a hearing before the City Council to contest the amount of the costs. Such request must be made in writing and be filed with the City within ten days of the date of mailing or service of the first statement to the owner. The owner shall be given at least two weeks' written notice of the date, time and place of any hearing scheduled. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If the statement remains unpaid, the amount shall be certified to the County Treasurer. 
(Prior code,  6.06.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-170. - Certified assessment. 
(a)  If, after the expiration of the period of time provided for in said notice, or as extended, costs or expenses are incurred by or on behalf of the City in the abatement or in connection with the abatement of the nuisance, and said costs are not otherwise collected, the Finance Director may thereafter certify the legal description of the property upon which such work was done, together with the name of the owner thereof as shown by the tax rolls of the County, together with a statement of the work performed, the date of performance and the costs thereof. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of said premises as shown by said tax roll, at the address shown upon the tax rolls, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying such owner that work has been performed pursuant to this Chapter, stating the date of performance of the work and the nature of the work, and demanding payment of the costs thereof, together with five percent assessment for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith. Such notice shall state that, if said amount is not paid within 30 days after mailing the notice, it shall become an assessment on and a lien against the property of the owner, describing the same, and will be certified as an assessment against such property, together with the ten-percent assessment for costs of collection, and the above-mentioned assessments will be collected in the same manner as a real estate tax upon the property. 
(c)  Each such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(Prior code,  6.06.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-180. - Remedies cumulative and nonexclusive. 
(a)  No remedy provided herein shall be exclusive, but the same shall be cumulative, and the taking of any action hereunder, including charge or conviction of violation of this Chapter in the Municipal Court, shall not preclude or prevent the taking of other action hereunder to abate or enjoin any nuisance found to exist. 
(b)  Whenever a nuisance exists, no remedy provided for herein shall be exclusive of any other charge or action, and, when applicable, the abatement provisions of this Chapter shall serve as and constitute a concurrent remedy over and above any charge or conviction of any municipal offense or any other provisions of law. Any application of this Chapter that is in the nature of a civil action shall not prevent the commencement or application of any other charges brought under this Code or any other provision of law. 
(Prior code,  6.06.130; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-1-190. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the doing of any act is required, prohibited or declared to be unlawful and no definite fine or penalty is provided for a violation of this Chapter, any person who is convicted of a violation shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in Section 7-1-110 of this Article. 
(b)  Any person who has possession or control of any private ground or premises, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, in or upon which any such nuisance exists or may be found, whether such nuisance has been heretofore or is hereafter created, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense as the author of a nuisance for every period of 24 hours' continuance of such nuisance after due notice has been given to abate the same. 
(c)  Any violation or disobedience of any injunction or order issued by the Court in an action to abate a public nuisance shall be punished as a contempt of court by a fine of not more than $300.00 and imprisonment of not more than five days; but the Municipal Court may treat each day on which the violation or disobedience of any injunction order continues or recurs as a separate contempt. 
(d)  Fees; costs and fines; liens and collection. 
(1)  For seizing and closing any building or premises as provided in this Chapter, or for performing other duties pursuant to the direction of the Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall be entitled to a reasonable sum fixed by the Municipal Court in addition to the actual costs incurred or expended. 
(2)  All fees and costs allowed by the provisions of this Section, the costs of a court action to abate any public nuisance and all fines levied by the Municipal Court in contempt proceedings incidental to any action to abate a public nuisance shall be a first and prior lien upon any real property seized or closed under the provisions of this Chapter, and the same shall be enforceable and collectible, by execution issued by order of the Municipal Court, from the property of any person liable therefor. 
(3)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to destroy the validity of a bona fide lien upon real or personal property appearing of record prior to the recording of court orders involving real estate as authorized under this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  6.06.140; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Nuisances 

Sec. 7-2-10. - Nuisances generally. 
    Whenever there exists in or upon any lot or piece of ground within the limits of the City any damaged merchandise, litter, trash, rubbish, garbage, wrecked cars, inoperable cars or other wrecked vehicles or an accumulation of junk vehicles or junk of any type upon any private or public property, except in areas specifically zoned in Chapter 16 of this Code for said purposes or otherwise designated by the City for such purposes, the existence of any such material or items shall constitute a nuisance and shall be a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-20. - Posting handbills, posters and placards. 
    Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which is stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private residence or other building or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the residence shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-30. - Open wells, cisterns or excavations. 
    Excavations exceeding five feet in depth, cisterns and wells or an excavation used for storage of water are public nuisances unless the same are adequately covered with a locked lid or other covering weighing at least 60 pounds, or are securely fenced with a solid fence to a height of at least five feet. It is unlawful for any person to permit such nuisance to remain on premises owned or occupied by him or her. Whenever a chemical analysis or other proper test or the location of any well or cistern on any property shows that the water of the well or cistern is probably contaminated, impure or unwholesome, such well or cistern shall be deemed a nuisance. Any abandoned or unused well or cistern shall be filled with dirt and covered. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-40. - Streets, streams and water supply. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any ashes, putrid meats, decayed vegetables, offal from butcher shops, slops or offal from eating houses or saloons, kitchen offal or slops, manure or stable refuse, dead animals, carrion or any fleshy or vegetable matter subject to decay, contents of privy vaults, garbage, rubbish or any foul or nauseous substance or offensive matter upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public or private grounds. 
(b)  No person shall throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited in the City anything specified in any foregoing part of this Section, or any other substance that would tend to have a polluting effect, into the water of any stream, ditch, pond, well, cistern, trough or other body of water, whether artificially or naturally created, or so near any such place as to be liable to pollute the water. 
(Prior code,  6.10.020, 6.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-50. - Discharge of offensive materials. 
    It is a nuisance for any person to discharge or place any offensive water, liquid waste or refuse of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch, canal or any vacant lot which, as the result of continued discharge, will render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-60. - Maintenance of water systems. 
    The maintenance of any drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or artificial, in a manner so as to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and overflow therefrom or to become unsanitary, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-70. - Stagnant ponds. 
(a)  Any cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place, property or premises within the City which is damp, unwholesome, nauseous, offensive or filthy, which is covered for any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, which is in such condition so as to produce unwholesome or offensive odors or which is injurious to the public health, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  The permitting or maintaining of stagnant water on any lot or piece of ground within the City limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Every owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground within the City is hereby required to drain or fill up said lot or piece of ground whenever the same is necessary so as to prevent stagnant water or other nuisances from accumulating thereon. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-80. - Sewer inlet. 
    No person shall deposit in or throw into any sewer (sanitary or storm), sewer inlet or privy vault that has a sewer connection any article that might cause such sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault to become nauseous or offensive to others or injurious to public health. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-90. - Polluted water. 
(a)  A swimming pool, pond or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise maintained, resulting in water becoming polluted, is hereby declared a nuisance. For the purposes of this Section, the term polluted water means water contained in a swimming pool, pond or other body of water which contains one or more of the following: bacterial growth, including algae; remains of insects; remains of deceased animals; reptiles; rubbish; feces; refuse; debris; papers; and any other foreign matter or material which, because of its nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition. 
(b)  Any unlawful pollution or contamination of any surface or subsurface waters in the City, of the air or of any water, substance or material intended for human consumption is declared a nuisance; however, no action shall be brought under this Section if the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment or any other agency of the State charged by and acting pursuant to state statute or duly adopted regulation has assumed jurisdiction by the institution of proceedings regarding the pollution or contamination. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-100. - Nauseous liquids. 
    No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged out of or from or permit to flow from any house or property any foul or nauseous liquid or substance of any kind into or upon any adjacent ground or lot or into any street, alley or public place. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-110. - Stale matter. 
    No person shall keep, collect or use, or cause to be kept, collected or used, in the City any stale, putrid or stinking fat or grease or other stale matter, other than normal weekly trash accumulation. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-120. - Transporting garbage, manure. 
    Every vehicle or trailer used to transport manure, garbage, swill or offal on any street in the City shall be fitted with a substantially tight enclosed box thereon, so that no portion of such filth will be scattered or thrown into such street. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-130. - Dead animal removal. 
    When any animal dies in the City, it shall be the duty of the owner or keeper thereof to promptly remove the body of such animal beyond the City limits If such body is not removed, the same shall be deemed a nuisance, and such owner or keeper will be the author of the nuisance. When the body of any such dead animal is in any street, highway or public grounds in the City, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause such body to be removed beyond the limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  6.10.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-140. - Unwholesome business. 
    Any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment, or any business or establishment carried on in a manner dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within the City or within one mile beyond the outer limits of the City, is declared a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-150. - Storage of equipment. 
    The unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery, implements or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the City, is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-160. - Junkyards and dumping grounds. 
    All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked, inoperable or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, boats and house trailers or machinery of any kind, or any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, are deemed a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-170. - Refuse, waste and junk. 
(a)  Refuse, waste matter and junk which, by reason of its location and character, is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare, is unsightly or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood community, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, is hereby declared a nuisance. Refuse, waste and junk include, but are not limited to: rubbish, refuse, debris, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, inoperable machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, whether ferrous or nonferrous, dead plants and trees, trimmings from plants and trees, cans, bottles, barrels, bones, rags, used rubber or used rope. 
(b)  Junk shall also include any material or object, used or new, which is not presently usable, including but not limited to: scrap metals and their alloys, bones, rags, cloth, rubber pieces, rope, tinfoil, bottles, tools, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, automobile or airplane tires, machinery and appliances. Objects or material shall be considered junk if they are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, if they are not capable of being used in their present location on the property or if they cannot legally be used due to the absence of legal prerequisites to use. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to store, keep or allow to be stored or kept any articles or materials which may be classified as junk according to the provisions contained in this Section adjacent to or in close proximity to any schoolhouse, church, public park or residence or in a zoning district prohibiting outdoor storage or processing of junk, unless such junk is kept in a proper enclosure. 
(d)  An enclosure will be considered proper for the storage of junk if it totally and completely encloses its contents on all sides and it effectively shields its contents from view of the public. Junk stored or kept in violation of this Section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-180. - Noisemaking devices. 
(a)  Noisemaking devices on streets. The use of music, noisemakers or loudspeakers on the streets of the City for the sale or vending of products, advertising or other commercial purposes is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited by the terms of this Chapter. 
(b)  Noisemaking devices to attract children. The use of bells, whistles, sirens, music, horns or any other noisemaking devices for the purpose of attracting children or minors to any vehicle upon the streets, highways, rights-of-way, alleys or public ways of the City for the purpose of selling, distributing or giving away any product whatsoever to such minors is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and hazard, is expressly prohibited and shall be unlawful, except such activities carried on as part of duly authorized public parades or processions. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-190. - Barking dogs. 
    Any dog which, by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, causes a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to persons passing to and fro upon the streets or sidewalks is declared a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-200. - Junk vehicles on property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to store, keep or permit to be stored or kept any junk vehicle, or parts thereof, on public or private property, unless in a fully enclosed structure. A fully enclosed structure will be considered proper for the storage of junk vehicles if it totally and completely shields its contents from view of the public, adjacent walkways, alleys or roadways. An example of a fully enclosed structure would be a garage or a privacy fence made of wood or other material approved by the City. For purposes of this Section, the term person means the owner of the vehicle or parts thereof, or the owner, manager, lessee or possessor of the property where the vehicle or parts are stored. 
(b)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Section: 
    Antique vehicle means any vehicle, at least 25 years old, which is valued principally because of its early date of manufacture, design or historical interest or as a collector's item, and licensed as a collector's series or horseless carriage by the State or another state with similar license provisions. 
    Junk or derelict vehicle means any vehicle which is not capable of travel in its existing mechanical condition; any dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished or partially demolished vehicle; any vehicle designed for highway travel not bearing a current registration plate; or any automobile, truck or self-propelled vehicle which does not comply with the minimum safety requirements of the Colorado Motor Vehicle Law. 
    Private property means real property which is owned by a private person or entity. 
    Vehicle means a machine pushed, pulled or propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground, in the air, through water or on roads or paths by use of wheels, treads, runners, slides, wings or hulls, and to transport persons or property or pull non-self-propelled vehicles or machinery, and includes, without limitation, automobile, airplane, boat, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, moped, tractor, buggy or wagon. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 766,  A, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-210. - Dangerous structures. 
    Any building, fence, structure or land within the City, the condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to public health and safety, is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-220. - Broken windows in vacant dwellings. 
    It is declared a nuisance for the owner of any vacant building to fail to replace any broken window or fail to secure any other means of entry into such building within 72 hours after notice is given by the City. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-230. - Maintenance of property. 
    It is a nuisance to own, lease, occupy, manage or have possession of any premises in the City in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
(1)  The premises are a detriment to public health, safety or general welfare. 
(2)  The premises are so defective, unsightly or in such condition of disrepair that they substantially diminish the value of surrounding property or are otherwise substantially detrimental to surrounding properties. Manifestation of this condition shall include, but not be limited to, the keeping on, the disposing of on or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
a.  Junk, trash or debris; 
b.  Abandoned, discarded or unusable objects or equipment, such as furniture, stoves, hot water heaters, refrigerators or freezers; 
c.  Stagnant water or an excavation; and 
d.  Any device, decoration, design, fence or structure which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location. 
(3)  The premises are so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties. 
(4)  The premises are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left unreasonable in a state of partial construction. 
(5)  Buildings have dry rot, warping or termite infestation. 
(6)  The premises have a substantial number of broken windows which cause hazardous conditions and invite trespassers and malicious mischief. 
(7)  The landscaping on the premises has not been maintained as follows: 
a.  The majority of plant materials have not been adequately irrigated and/or maintained and are dead or dying; 
b.  Lawns have grown over six inches or shrubs have not been trimmed and are overhanging public rights-of-way; 
c.  Noxious weeds have grown over six inches and have not been removed; or 
d.  Dead or diseased plantings have not been removed or replaced. 
(8)  The exterior of commercial establishments or multifamily buildings has not been maintained so as to present a neat and orderly appearance which is compatible with the area as follows: 
a.  A substantial number of windows are cracked or broken; 
b.  Painted surfaces are substantially cracked or peeling, or the paint has deteriorated to the point where the bare surface is substantially exposed; or 
c.  The building has otherwise not been substantially maintained. 
(9)  Parking lots have not been repaired or cracks, potholes or other breaks in the parking lot surface have not been filled. 
(10)  Any dilapidated building of whatever kind which is unused by the owner, or uninhabited because of a deterioration or decay, which condition constitutes a fire hazard or subjects adjoining property to danger of damage by storm, soil erosion or rodent infestation, or which becomes a place frequented by trespassers and transients seeking a temporary hideout or shelter. 
(11)  Permitting any garbage container to remain on a premises when it has become unclean, offensive or is injurious to the public health. 
(12)  Allowing vegetable or animal waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal. 
(13)  Permitting the accumulation of manure or feces in any stable, stall, corral, feed yard or any other building or area in which any animals are kept, including but not limited to domesticated animals. This provision does not apply to a light spread of manure upon lawns or gardens or which is plowed under the surface of the ground. 
(14)  Permitting any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, stable, feed yard or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents breed. 
(15)  Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease of other offensive matter. 
(16)  Having or permitting upon any premises any fly-producing or mosquito-producing condition. 
(17)  Keeping any drinking vessels for public use without providing a method of decontamination between uses. 
(18)  Any toilet or sanitary sewer facilities not constructed and maintained in accordance with the ordinances of the City. 
(19)  Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean out, disinfect and fill up all privy vaults, septic tanks and cesspools or other individual wastewater disposal systems within 20 days after notice from the Code Enforcement Officer or any official of the City. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-240. - Hazardous obstructions. 
    An obstacle, landscaping or thing installed or maintained in the sight triangle reaching a height of more than three feet above the adjoining top of curb at the applicable corner of the street intersection, or three feet above the nearest pavement surface where there is no curb, or the existing traveled roadway at the corner in question where there is no curb or pavement, is hereby declared a nuisance. Hazardous obstructions do not include existing or future permanent buildings otherwise constructed or maintained in accordance with applicable zoning and building regulations, public utility poles and trees trimmed at the trunk at least eight feet above the level of the ground surface, provided that such trees are spaced so that trunks do not obstruct the vision of motorists. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-250. - Fire hazards. 
    Dry or dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible refuse and waste or any material growing on a street, sidewalk or upon private property within the City which, by reason of its size, manner of growth and location, constitutes a fire hazard to a building, improvement, crop or other property or, when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard, is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-260. - Public burning. 
(a)  No person shall set on fire or burn any garbage, rubbish or waste material or any hay, grass clippings or other combustible materials in any ash pit or other receptacle or upon the ground without a permit from the Fire Chief. 
(b)  Any smoke and odor resulting from the burning of refuse, trash or other materials, including but not limited to those materials outlined in this Subsection, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-2-270. - Continuing nuisance. 
    It is a nuisance for any building, land, premises, business, occupation or activity, operation or condition which, after being ordered abated, corrected or discontinued by lawful order of the City or any officer thereof, continues to be conducted or continues to exist in violation of: 
(1)  Any ordinance of this City; 
(2)  Any regulation enacted pursuant to the authority of an ordinance of this City. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Junk Vehicles 

Sec. 7-3-10. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle left within the limits of any street, road, highway or alley or upon property of another without the consent of the owner of such property for a period of 24 hours or longer. A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if its owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance; thus, a properly licensed operable vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if the vehicle is parked in a legal manner within a designated parking space. 
    Costs means the expenses of removing, storing or selling a junked vehicle. 
    Fully enclosed structure means an enclosure which is totally and completely enclosed on all sides and which effectively shields its contents from view of the public, adjacent walkways, roadways and alleys. An example of a fully enclosed structure would be a garage, a privacy fence (made of wood or another material approved by the City) or an opaque, commercially fitted vehicle cover that covers the vehicle from bumper to bumper. 
    Hobby means the repairing, reconditioning or rebuilding of vehicles that is done for personal enjoyment or entertainment, with no profits, compensation or reimbursement of any kind involved. 
    Hobby-type vehicle includes, but is not limited to, a vehicle which has been modified for off-road use or is made for off-road use, such as a stock car racer, dune buggy or ATV. 
    Junk vehicle means any vehicle which is not capable of travel in its existing mechanical condition; any dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished or partially demolished vehicle; or any vehicle designed for highway travel not bearing a current license plate or license certificate. 
    Major recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings (motor homes), tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
    Vehicle means a machine that is pushed, pulled or propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground, in the air, through water or on roads or paths by use of wheels, treads, runners, slides, wings or hulls, and which is used to transport persons or property or pull non-self-propelled vehicles of machinery. The term vehicle includes, without limitation, automobile, airplane, boat, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, moped, tractor, buggy or wagon. 
(Prior code,  6.04.010; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-20. - Junk, abandoned and/or unlicensed vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to leave any junk, derelict, abandoned and/or unlicensed vehicle, or any parts thereof, on any public street, alley or highway within the City. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to store, keep or place any junk, derelict, abandoned and/or unlicensed vehicle, or any parts thereof, upon any public or private property within the City. It is also unlawful, as owner, occupant, landlord, tenant or party in control of any real property within the City, to permit or allow any junk, derelict, abandoned and/or unlicensed vehicle, or any parts thereof, to be placed or kept on any private property within the City, except and unless it is in a fully enclosed structure, completely concealed behind a privacy fence and/or completely covered bumper-to-bumper with a fitted opaque cover. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Any vehicle registered as a collector's item by the State under the provisions of Sections 42-15-101 and 42-15-102, C.R.S., provided that such vehicles are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard, a safety hazard or a fire hazard and are contained in a fully enclosed structure, completely concealed behind a privacy fence and/or covered bumper-to-bumper with a fitted opaque cover. No more than two collector vehicles shall be maintained on private property. 
(2)  Vehicles stored or kept on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and in a lawful zoning district and in a lawful manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, provided that any dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished or partially demolished vehicles are stored in a fully enclosed structure. 
(Prior code,  6.04.030; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-30. - Parking and storage of major recreational vehicles and hobby type vehicles. 
(a)  No major recreational vehicle and/or equipment shall be parked or stored for more than seven consecutive days on any public street or property that is not designated for that specific use. 
(b)  Visitors may use their motor homes and campers for no more than three weeks if the units are parked on private property. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
(c)  All hobby-type vehicles shall be stored in a fully enclosed structure, totally concealed behind a privacy fence and/or completely covered with a fitted opaque cover. 
(Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-40. - Hobby repair work. 
    It is unlawful for any person to repair, keep or work on any junk vehicle as a hobby unless such hobby is conducted in and totally contained within a fully enclosed structure and conducted in such a manner so as not to create a safety, health or fire hazard; except that this shall not apply to minor repair and maintenance activities, such as, by way of illustration, the changing of oil, sparkplugs or tires, so long as said minor work does not exceed a period of 24 hours. Repair of vehicles purchased for repair and resale or vehicles repaired for any compensation received shall be considered an auto repair business, not a hobby. 
(Prior code,  6.04.040; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-50. - Auto repair business. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in a vehicle repair business on residential premises or premises zoned for residential use under Chapter 16 of this Code. A person shall be deemed to be in the vehicle repair business if he or she undertakes the repair of any vehicles belonging to other persons, or if he or she has purchased any vehicles for repair and resale or any other vehicles other than those used regularly by himself or herself or his or her family. The presence of any vehicles on residential property which are undergoing repairs and which are not owned by and registered in the name of the occupant of the premises shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this Section. As used in this Section, the word person shall include any person actually engaged in such automobile repair and the occupant of the premises upon which the repair has occurred. 
(Prior code,  6.04.050; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-60. - Investigation. 
    The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to investigate any matter at any place within the City which reasonably appears to be in violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code,  6.04.060; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-70. - Notice. 
    If, after an investigation, there is probable cause for believing a violation of this Chapter exists, a written warning shall be placed on the vehicle or property. Such written warning shall include the violation involved, the date and time of violation, the signature of the issuing officer and a time limit in accordance with the following Paragraphs: 
(1)  Junk vehicles: 24 hours if the violation is on the street; 90 days if the violation is on private property. 
(2)  Abandoned vehicles: seven days to correct or remove the cause of the violation. 
    For the purpose of this Section, the tenant, occupant or lessee shall be deemed the agent of the owner of the premises. 
(Prior code,  6.04.070; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-80. - Issuance of summons and complaint. 
    If, after the time prescribed from the time of issuance of the warning of the violation, the cause of such violation has not been removed or corrected as set forth in Section 7-3-20 or 7-3-30 above, a summons and complaint shall be issued to the person named on the written warning unless satisfactory arrangements for an extension of the time have been made with the Code Enforcement Officer. The summons shall contain at a minimum the following information: the vehicle, by make, year and model, if possible, and location. In the event that the owner of the vehicle or his or her agent, manager, tenant, resident, lessee, renter or occupant of the premises on which such vehicle is located cannot be located in order to serve such notice of violation, then a summons and complaint shall be issued against the vehicle. Said summons and complaint shall be firmly attached to the vehicle, or parts thereof, in plain sight. 
(Prior code,  6.04.080; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-90. - Effecting removal. 
    The Code Enforcement Officer or the Police Department is hereby empowered and authorized to remove and impound vehicles, or parts thereof, from any public street, alley or other public place or from private property in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person notified pursuant to Section 7-3-70 above to properly remove the cause of said violation from the City, to place it in a fully enclosed structure or to correct the violation within the time limits stated hereinabove. 
(2)  When any abandoned vehicle is found on public or private property. 
(3)  When any vehicle is parked in such a position that it constitutes an obstruction to traffic or is unlawfully parked in any prohibited or restricted area; is parked or so used as to endanger or be likely to endanger any user or potential user of any public highway; or is in violation of the traffic ordinances of the City or of any rule or regulation promulgated in connection therewith by the Chief of Police, acting in conjunction with the City Council. 
(Prior code,  6.04.090; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-100. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any portion of this Article shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  6.04.100; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-110. - Costs. 
(a)  All costs incurred by the City for the removal and storage of a vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be assessed to the owner and become a lien on the vehicle. Such costs shall include a sum as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for the administrative expenses of the City plus the costs charged by the company for towing and storing the vehicle. 
(b)  In case the owner or agent of the owner of such property fails to pay such costs within 30 days after a statement therefor has been rendered, the Chief of Police shall order the vehicle disposed of as an abandoned vehicle under Section 42-4-1801, et seq., C.R.S. 
(c)  The City Council is hereby authorized to modify by resolution any costs, fees or fines set forth in this Article. 
(Prior code,  6.04.110; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-3-120. - No remedy exclusive. 
(a)  No remedy provided herein shall be exclusive, but the same shall be cumulative. 
(b)  It is not the policy or purpose of this Article to repeal or preempt any other provision of this Code. 
(Prior code,  6.04.120; Ord. No. 765,  1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Garbage and Refuse 

Sec. 7-4-10. - Accumulation of refuse prohibited. 
    Any accumulation of refuse or other material on any premises, improved or unimproved, in the City is prohibited and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Responsibility for refuse on premises. 
    It is the duty of every person, whether owner, lessee or renter of any vacant lot, building or premises, including any place of business, hotel, restaurant, dwelling house, apartment, tenement or any other establishment, at all times to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of refuse or materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the use for which such premises are legally intended. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-30. - Disposal of rubbish upon public places prohibited. 
    Any person who throws into any street, alley or vacant lot in the City any wrapping paper, waste paper, old clothes, shoes, hats, bottles, broken glassware or pieces of board, or anyone who sweeps from his or her place of business any straw, paper, filth or litter, shall be deemed the author of a nuisance and, upon conviction, shall be fined. 
(Prior code,  6.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-40. - Removal of refuse from business. 
    Discarded refuse, including automobile parts, stoves, furniture and junkyard refuse, shall be removed periodically by the proprietor so that the premises are clean and orderly at all times. Silt and similar deposits from automobile wash racks shall be removed by the establishment creating such deposit. Any accumulation of refuse that is highly explosive or flammable which might endanger life or property shall be removed to such places as approved by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief. Such removal shall be handled by the establishment responsible therefor. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-50. - Recovery of costs for removal of nuisances by City. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Article, City officials shall have power to proceed in all cases as prescribed in this Code and by law, whenever any nuisance is abated at the expense of the City after notice to the owner of such premises upon which such nuisance is found or of the author of such nuisance, by suit as in actions of debt. 
(Prior code,  6.10.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-60. - Disposal of harmful materials in streets, alleys, etc., prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to throw or otherwise deposit ashes, garbage, cans, glass, papers or any other offensive matter or any matter which would cause injury to any street, alley, avenue or public ground in the City. 
(Prior code,  6.10.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-4-70. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-1-190 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  6.10.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Weeds and Brush 

Sec. 7-5-10. - Noxious Weed Management Advisory Board. 
(a)  A Noxious Weed Local Advisory Board is hereby established and shall be known as the "Rocky Ford Noxious Weed Local Advisory Board" (the "Board"). 
(b)  Membership of the Board shall be the same as the membership of the City Council and Mayor. 
(c)  Whenever the City Council meets, it shall also be in session as the Rocky Ford Noxious Weed Local Advisory Board. 
(d)  The Mayor shall serve as the Chairperson of the Board. 
(e)  The City Clerk shall serve as the Secretary of the Board but shall not be a member of the Board. 
(f)  The duties and responsibilities of the Board are: 
(1)  The Board shall develop a management plan for the integrated management of designated noxious weeds and recommended management criteria for noxious weeds within the area governed by the City. 
(2)  The Board shall review the management plan at regular intervals but not less often than once every three years. 
(3)  The Board shall have the power to declare noxious weeds and any state noxious weeds designated by rule to be subject to integrated management. 
(4)  The Board may require identified landowners to submit an individual integrated management plan to manage noxious weeds on their property and shall have the sole and final authority to approve, modify or reject the submitted management plan. 
(Ord. No. 817, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-20. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or using any lot or property to allow weeds, brush or rubbish to accumulate on said lot or property, including the sidewalk area in front of or alley behind said lot or property. 
(Prior code,  6.12.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-30. - Duty of property owner to cut. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying or using any lot or property, including the sidewalk area in front of or any alley behind such lot or property, to remove all weeds, brush and rubbish therefrom. 
(Prior code,  6.12.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-40. - Yearly removal required. 
    Every person, as mentioned in Section 7-5-30 above, shall remove all weeds, brush and rubbish from the lot or property, sidewalk area in front of and the alley behind the lot or property, and shall keep such lot or property free from such weeds, brush and rubbish at all times during the year. 
(Prior code,  6.12.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-50. - Notice of failure to remove weeds and rubbish. 
    If such weeds, brush and rubbish are not removed from the lot or property, the Fire Chief, City Manager, Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer may serve notice of such failure. Such notice shall be complete upon personal service of it upon any resident or person at the premises, by handing the same to any resident 15 years of age or over at the premises, by affixing the same to the door of any improvement or building on the premises or, if the property is unimproved, by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the property. Such notice shall be dated, shall state that, if such weeds, brush and rubbish are not removed within five days after the notice, the City may remove the same at the expense of the property, property owner, possessor or user. 
(Prior code,  6.12.030; Ord. No. 740,  1, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-60. - Removal by City and recording of removal costs. 
    After such five-day period, the City may proceed to remove such weeds, brush or rubbish from the premises. The City shall assess the entire cost of removal to the person who owns, possesses or occupies such property. The costs shall include the following: 
(1)  The amount as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule per man-hour for removal; 
(2)  An administrative fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule; 
(3)  Equipment costs at standard billed rates; and 
(4)  An inspection fee of five percent of the costs listed in Paragraphs (1) through (3) above. 
(Prior code,  6.12.040; Ord. No. 740,  2, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-70. - Assessment of lien on property; publication of notice. 
    The amount of such assessments shall be a lien on the property, and notice thereof shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Said notice shall contain a description of the property upon which the lien is claimed, the name of the owner and the amount of the lien. 
(Prior code,  6.12.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-80. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
    If said assessment is not paid within 60 days, the same may be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection, together with a ten-percent penalty, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(Prior code,  6.12.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-5-90. - Violation. 
    In addition to the notice and penalty provisions set forth above, any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Article is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  6.12.080; Ord. No. 740,  3, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Trees 

Sec. 7-6-10. - Prohibited trees. 
(a)  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance to sell or import into the City or plant or cause to be planted within the City limits any female box-elder tree ( Acer negundo ), female cottonwood trees ( Populus spices ), Siberian elm ( Ulmus pumila ) or other undesirable plants as designated by ordinance upon any property within the City, and the planting or setting out of these certain plants is declared to be a menace to public health, safety and welfare and a public nuisance. 
(b)  The owner of any property within the City, upon which any tree listed in Subsection (a) above has been planted after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, shall cut and remove such tree from his or her property after being given two days' written notice to do so by the City. 
(c)  In case of the failure of any owner of such property to cut and remove such tree as required in Subsection (b) above, the City shall cut and remove such tree. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-6-20. - Trees and limbs in public right-of-way. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any property adjacent to the public right-of-way to remove any trees or limbs located in or above the public right-of-way when such trees or limbs constitute a danger to public safety. Such trees and limbs shall constitute a nuisance. For the purposes of this Section, a danger to public safety shall include all trees and limbs which hinder visibility or which may otherwise affect public health, safety and welfare, and trees and limbs which present a structural defect which may cause the tree or limb to fall on a person or on property of value. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-6-30. - Control of trees and shrubs. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power to promulgate, amend and repeal rules, regulations and specifications for the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges and other plants within the City limits. 
(b)  The City Council shall have the responsibility to cause to be inspected all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges or other plants upon any property within the City limits. 
(c)  The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares that the existence within the City of Dutch elm disease and other tree diseases, together with other insect pests or disease, constitutes a threat to the forestry of the City and endangers the health, safety and welfare of all inhabitants of the City. In order to control or eradicate said threat, the City Manager shall make investigation and determination as the City Council deems necessary for the protection of all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges or other plants upon any property within the City limits, and shall further spray or cause to be sprayed all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges or other plants located upon any premises owned, controlled or occupied by any person within the City, including premises owned, controlled or occupied by the City or any other governmental agency, with such materials in such manner or at such time, at least annually, in the control of elm beetles or any other pest or disease which may exist in or be a threat to the forestry of the City. 
(d)  The City Council shall have the power to require the owner of any property or the owner of any property abutting on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place to: 
(1)  Remove any dead or diseased tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other plant. 
(2)  Remove any dead overhanging boughs determined to be dangerous to life, limb or property located on the premises of the owner or upon any public or private property abutting the premises of the owner. 
(3)  Trim, spray, prune or remove any tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other plant which may be determined to be a nuisance or to be dangerous to life, limb or property located on the premises of the owner or upon any public or private property abutting the premises of the owner; or which may be determined to interfere with or obstruct the movement or traffic or pedestrians, or construction and maintenance of utility lines, or obstruct the lights from any street lamp. 
(e)  The City Council shall cause notice to be given to the owner of any property, which notice shall state the date of investigation, the person conducting the investigation, the results thereof and the mandatory action required to abate the nuisance or alleviate the danger. Such notice shall be sent in writing, addressed to the owner if known, and, if not known, then to the occupant, and if there is no occupant, then to the last known address of the last reported owner as shown by the records of the County Treasurer. Notice shall be sent by certified U.S. mail and shall be effective upon the date of mailing. Such notice shall grant a period of 20 days to accomplish the remedial action required. 
(f)  In the event the owner or occupant of any premises fails or neglects to comply with the notice provided herein, the City Council is authorized to take the action required by such notice at the expense of the owner, agent or occupant of such property, which expense shall be collected as hereinafter provided. 
(g)  The costs of spraying and insect control incurred pursuant to this Section shall be defrayed by the assessment of a monthly fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, to be billed monthly in advance as part of the water bill of each water recipient within the City limits. 
(h)  The costs of other tree care incurred pursuant to this Section shall be and are hereby assessed upon the lots and tracts of land where the trees are located. After completion of such other tree care, the City Engineer shall prepare and send to the City Clerk a schedule showing the description of the lots and tracts of land upon which the trees are located and cared for, the costs thereof and the names of the owners thereof. Upon receipt of the schedule, the City Clerk shall assess costs of such tree care to the owner of the tract of land. The amount so assessed shall be a lien in the amounts assessed against each lot or tract of land until the same is paid, and the same shall have priority over other liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments. Such assessment must be paid within 30 days from the time the assessment is made. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 767,  1, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 790,  1, 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-6-40. - Penalty. 
(a)  In case any assessment due and payable under this Article, except that set forth in Subsection 7-6-30(g) above, is not paid within 30 days from the date the assessment is made, the City Clerk shall certify the same to the County Treasurer, to be placed by him or her upon the tax rolls of the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection. 
(b)  The maintenance of untreated elm trees and bushes upon any premises on or after May 15 of any calendar year is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person owning, controlling or occupying any premises upon which such untreated elm trees or elm bushes are in existence shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined. 
(Prior code,  2.06.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Animals 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-7-10. - Purpose. 
    The City Council declares that the purpose of this Article is to provide for the control of rabies for the protection and control of animals within the City, and that those matters are in the interest of the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.01.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-20. - Title. 
    This Article is known and may be cited as the "Rocky Ford Animal Care and Control Ordinance." When citing the provisions of this Article in any summons, subpoena, pleading, summons and complaint or other document, it shall be sufficient to make reference to the Rocky Ford Animal Care and Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.01.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-30. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall keep accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody of the Police Department or animal shelter, and of all reports of animal bites reported to the Police Department. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall keep a complete and accurate record of all registrations and City rabies tags issued by the City pursuant to Division 2 of this Article and may designate a place at which duplicate originals of those records shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.01.030, 5.04.070, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-40. - Authorization to enforce. 
    The provisions of this Article shall be enforceable by the Code Enforcement Officer or a member of the Police Department. If an animal is impounded, the Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer may institute proceedings in the Municipal Court on behalf of the City against the owner, charging the owner with a violation of the appropriate section of this Article or other applicable law. The Code Enforcement Officer and a police officer shall be authorized to issue, sign and serve summonses and complaints and to make all determinations within their discretion in compliance with the provisions of this Article. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing the Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer from instituting a proceeding in the Municipal Court for violations of this Article or other applicable law where there has been no impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.01.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-50. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms are defined as set forth in this Section. 
    Animal means any living creature, domesticated or wild, other than a human being. 
    Animal owner means any person who has attained the age of eight years who owns, keeps, harbors, allows to remain about his or her premises or otherwise has custody or control of any animal in the City, whether individually or in conjunction with others, for any length or duration of time, whether such person is a resident or nonresident of the City. The parent, guardian or custodian of any child under the age of eight years who owns, keeps, harbors or has custody of any animal shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal. This definition shall not include the Code Enforcement Officer, animal control officers and police officers while acting in accordance with their official duties under this Article. 
    Cat means any domesticated animal of the species Felis catus or Felis domesticus . 
    Code Enforcement Officer means any officer or employee of the City designated by the City to enforce the provisions of this Article, whether or not that person is a certified law enforcement official, including but not limited to animal control officers and police officers. 
    Commercial kennel means any establishment or other place where one or more animals, either temporarily or permanently, are bred, born, raised, boarded, trained, kept or fed for money or any other consideration, or for sale. 
    Dog means any domesticated animal of the species Canis familaris . 
    Guard dog means any dog disciplined to protect persons and/or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area authorized to be patrolled by such dog. 
    Harbor means the act of keeping or caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. 
    Leash means a substantial chain, cord, rope or similar device sufficient to hold in restraint the animal to which it is attached. 
    Pet means any domesticated animal intended for human company and enjoyment. 
    Pet kennel means any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species. 
    Pet shop means any commercial establishment engaged in the buying and selling of a variety of pets. 
    Police officer means any member of the Rocky Ford Police Department and any certified law enforcement officer present in the City. 
    Rabies inoculation means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, and administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Running at large means any animal, unless specifically excepted by this Article, off the premises of the owner and not under the direct and competent control of the owner or the owner's authorized agent by means of a leash, except an animal within the automobile or other vehicle of its owner. An animal shall also be deemed to be running at large when it is on an unfenced portion of the premises of the owner or keeper and the owner or keeper is not physically present and able to control the actions of said animal. 
(1)  For the purposes of this definition, the term premises of the owner shall not include common areas of condominiums, townhouses and apartment buildings; and any animal not in the effective control of its owner by means of a lease within the common area of a condominium, townhouse or apartment building, or the grounds thereof, shall be deemed to be running at large. 
(2)  For purposes of this definition, the term direct or competent control does not include leashes anchored to the real property of the animal's owner, keeper or his or her authorized agent if such leash extends beyond the property line of the owner, keeper or authorized agent. 
    Stray animal means any animal, with or without a registration and rabies inoculation tag, found loose anywhere in the City. 
    Veterinarian means a person licensed by the State to practice veterinary medicine. 
    Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the boarding of animals or for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.02, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-60. - Right of entry for inspection. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Article or other applicable law, or to perform any duty imposed by this Article or other applicable law, or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of this Article or other applicable law, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter such building or premises at any reasonable time to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this Article or other applicable law; provided that: 
(1)  If such building or premises are occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his or her reasons therefor. 
(2)  If entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give the owner or occupant or, if the owner or occupant cannot be located after reasonable effort, the Code Enforcement Officer shall leave at the building or premises, 24 hours' written notice of his or her intention to inspect. The notice given to the owner or occupant or left on the premises shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a search warrant by a Municipal Judge or by a judge of any other court having jurisdiction. 
(3)  After expiration of the 24-hour period from the giving of such notice, the Code Enforcement Officer may appear before the Municipal Court and, upon a showing of probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling the Code Enforcement Officer to enter the building or upon the premises to be inspected. Upon presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the same in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, the Code Enforcement Officer may enter into the building or upon the premises, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry therein. 
(4)  For the purposes of this Section, a determination of probable cause will be based upon reasonableness, and, if a valid public interest justifies the intrusion contemplated, then there is probable cause to issue a search warrant. The Code Enforcement Officer, when applying for such search warrant, shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises in order to obtain a search warrant. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of a building or premises to resist such reasonable force used by the Code Enforcement Officer acting pursuant to this Subsection. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) above, if the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to enter and inspect such property immediately and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether the property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first present proper credentials to the owner or occupant and demand entry, explaining his or her reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) above, the Code Enforcement Officer may enter upon private property for the purpose of seizing an animal to be impounded if the Code Enforcement Officer is in pursuit of an animal which the Code Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe to be in violation of any of the provisions of this Article and which has strayed to or taken refuge on such private property in the course of such pursuit. However, the Code Enforcement Officer may not enter the interior of a dwelling to remove such an animal without a court order or the consent of an occupant of the dwelling who is 18 years of age or older. 
(d)  No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made upon him or her as provided in Subsection (b) above, to permit the Code Enforcement Officer to make any inspection provided for by Subsection (b). Any person violating this Subsection shall be guilty of an unlawful act. 
(e)  The licensee or permittee of any license or permit issued pursuant to this Article hereby consents and agrees to the entry upon the premises described in the license or permit by the Code Enforcement Officer for the purpose of conducting such inspections as are required by this Article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.03.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-70. - Sanitation; responsibility of owner. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner, keeper or controller of any animal to refuse or fail to remove promptly any excrement deposited by said animal upon any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, play area, park, other public property or any private property when permission of the owner or tenant of said property has not been obtained. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any animal owner, keeper or controller to fail to remove promptly all fecal wastes from private premises as necessary to prevent diseases, hazards and odors. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.08.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Rabies Control 

Sec. 7-7-110. - Rabies inoculation and registration required; applicability. 
(a)  The requirement for rabies inoculation as set forth herein is intended primarily to apply to dogs and ferrets; provided, however, that, whenever it is deemed advisable in the interest of the public health, welfare and safety, the City Manager may order that all animals, or certain specified animals within the City which are susceptible to the rabies virus, shall be vaccinated against rabies, such vaccination to be performed by a licensed veterinarian. Cat owners are encouraged to vaccinate and monitor their pets in accordance with this Article, and, in the event a cat is discovered to be a problem, this Article shall fully apply to that animal. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of any dog or ferret kept within the City shall, within 14 days of acquiring possession of said dog or ferret, register said dog or ferret with the City and secure from the City a rabies tag for the keeping of the same, which rabies tag shall at all times be kept current by said owner or keeper. It is a defense to a charge of violating this Section that: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of the dog or ferret had not yet lived in the City for 14 days; or 
(2)  The dog or ferret was six months of age or less. 
(c)  If ownership or possession of a dog or ferret licensed under this Article changes, the new owner or keeper shall, before taking possession of the dog or ferret, obtain a new rabies tag upon presenting the old rabies tag, if available, demonstrating compliance with the vaccination requirement and paying the appropriate prescribed fee. 
(d)  This Section shall not apply to pet animal facilities licensed by the State under Sections 35-80-101 through 35-80-117, C.R.S. 
(e)  Application for registration shall be made upon forms provided by the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a certificate of vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal has been inoculated against rabies for the subsequent 12 calendar months. 
(f)  Upon receipt of the application and certificate of vaccination, the City Clerk shall issue to the animal owner a certificate of registration of the animal so registered, and a rabies vaccination tag for a dog or ferret so registered. The City certificate of registration shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the animal so registered; 
(2)  The name of the veterinarian who administered the rabies inoculation; 
(3)  The breed, sex, color and name of the animal so registered; 
(4)  The date of inoculation; 
(5)  The type of vaccine used; 
(6)  Where applicable, the tag number of the rabies vaccination tag issued; 
(7)  Where applicable, the implanted microchip identification number; and 
(8)  The signature of the City Clerk. 
(g)  The tag number, microchip identification number where applicable and serial number of the rabies vaccination tag shall correspond with and shall be identical to the numbers entered upon said certificate of registration. The owner shall then attach said rabies vaccination tag to the animal's collar. 
(h)  The issuance of the certificate of registration, as signed by the City Clerk, and the issuance of the rabies vaccination tag, where applicable, shall then constitute the City registration of the animal for which the certificate and tag (for dogs) have been issued. 
(i)  In no event shall a certificate of registration be issued for any animal if the animal owner fails to submit the certificate of vaccination as required by this Section. 
(j)  The initial registration and rabies tag issued under this Division shall be valid for one year from the last business day of the month of purchase. A renewal rabies tag shall validate the rabies tag for one year from the previous date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.010, 5.04.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-120. - Collars and tags required; transferability. 
(a)  The owner, keeper or possessor of any dog or ferret shall place upon his or her animal a collar, harness or similar device of durable materials to which the rabies tag provided for in this Division shall be attached. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner, possessor or keeper of any dog or ferret to keep the animal within the City without the current rabies vaccination tag securely affixed to the animal's collar, which tag shall be worn by the animal at all times when off the owner's property. 
(c)  If a dog or ferret within the City is of such age that it is not required by this Division to have a rabies vaccination tag, the owner, possessor or keeper of such animal shall obtain an identification tag for the animal setting forth the name and address of the owner, and the identification tag shall be attached to the animal's collar. 
(d)  City rabies tags are not transferable, and it is unlawful for any person to affix any rabies tag to any animal other than the animal for which the tag has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.030, 5.04.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-130. - Possession of false or stolen tags or certificates prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make use of, or have in his or her possession or under his or her control, any stolen, counterfeit or forged City registration, rabies tag, rabies vaccination certificate or other form provided for by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.050, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-140. - Replacement of lost or destroyed tags. 
    Lost or destroyed rabies vaccination tags may be replaced upon application therefor to the City Clerk, verification of the certificate of vaccination and a payment of the appropriate fee. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.060, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-150. - Registration and rabies tags exemptions. 
    The requirements for registration and rabies tags, as set forth in this Article, shall not apply to animals whose owners are nonresidents or temporarily within the City, nor to animal temporarily brought into the City for temporary exhibition purposes. However, if an animal whose owner is a nonresident of the City remains in the City for more than 30 days, then the owner shall register said animal and obtain rabies tags for said animal as provided by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.080, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-160. - Rabies tag fees; waiver. 
(a)  A rabies tag shall be issued after payment of the applicable fees. Owners may obtain a multi-year tag where proof of inoculation has been shown, and the tag shall be valid for the duration of the inoculation period. 
(b)  The rabies tag fee shall be waived when the application is for a guide dog or service dog for a totally or partially blind, totally or partially deaf or otherwise physically disabled person. 
(c)  Rabies tag fees are set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.090, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-170. - Harboring unvaccinated or untagged animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to harbor any animal which is required by this Article to be vaccinated against rabies and to be registered with City which has not been so vaccinated with a rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the State or so registered with the City. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.100, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-180. - Refusal to provide proof of vaccination prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person who owns or harbors any animal which is required by this Article to be vaccinated against rabies to fail or refuse to exhibit his or her copy of a certificate of vaccination for said animal provided by a veterinarian licensed by the State upon demand of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.110, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-190. - Failure to register. 
    The minimum penalty for failing to register an animal in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be a fine of $200.00, and the maximum penalty shall be a fine of $500.00. The amount of $100.00 of the penalty shall not be waived or suspended. 
(1)  All of the penalty may be waived when the owner provides proof that the owner properly registered the animal with the City subsequent to the issuance of the summons and complaint. 
(2)  When a portion of the penalty was waived pursuant to Paragraph (1) above, an additional portion or all of the penalty may be waived if the owner also provides proof from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.120, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-200. - Reporting animal bites; confinement. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge that an animal other than a rodent, rabbit, bird or reptile has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(b)  If any animal is suspected of having rabies or if any animal has bitten a person and such animal does not have a current vaccination, such animal shall be confined for a period of at least ten days from the date of the bite at the animal shelter or at a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice, at the expense of the owner of the animal. During the ten-day observation period, no rabies vaccine shall be administered to the animal. The owner may elect to have the animal destroyed in lieu of confinement. 
(c)  No animal held for observation on suspicion of rabies shall be released until the observation period is over, except as follows: 
(1)  If the owner shows proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal may be released into rabies confinement at the owner's residence, at the discretion of the Chief of Police; or 
(2)  If the victim of the bite and the owner request that the rabies confinement be at the owner's residence and the victim agrees in writing to hold the City harmless from liability for releasing the animal to the owner, the animal may be released into rabies confinement at the owner's residence, at the discretion of the Chief of Police. 
(d)  For the purposes of this Section, rabies confinement at the owner's residence shall mean that the animal is kept inside a secure building where no contact with animals or persons outside the owner's family can occur for a ten-day period. During such period of confinement, the animal must not be let out to relieve itself without being on a leash and handled by a person capable of physically restraining the animal. If such animal is otherwise found outside the owner's residence during the confinement period, it shall be taken and confined at the animal shelter or at a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice, at the expense of the owner, for the remainder of the confinement period. 
(e)  If any animal has been bitten by another animal suspected to have rabies, the owner of such animal exposed to rabies shall report such fact to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power, in his or her discretion, to have the animal suspected of having rabies or of being exposed to rabies removed from the owner's residence to a veterinary office or hospital and placed under observation for a period of up to ten days at the expense of the owner. The owner may elect to have the animal destroyed in lieu of confinement. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the above, if a standard incubation period has not been established by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for the particular species of animal which was bitten, it shall be summarily destroyed. If the animal has been in contact with another animal or human, a necropsy shall be performed by a certified laboratory to determine rabies contamination, at the expense of the owner. 
(g)  Any owner or keeper whose animal is confined pursuant to this Section shall pay a confinement and daily boarding fee as established by the City Council, plus all actual veterinary costs incurred on behalf of the animal. Said fees and costs may be collected through court-ordered restitution or in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.130, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-210. - Refusal to surrender suspected animal prohibited. 
    The owner or harborer of any animal that has been reported to have bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person shall, on the demand of the Code Enforcement Officer or any City officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Article, produce and surrender the animal for examination and quarantine, as prescribed in this Article. If there is probable cause to believe that the animal has inflicted a bite upon a person and the owner or harborer is keeping the animal and willfully refuses to produce the animal upon demand, the owner or harborer shall be subject to immediate arrest. In such event, the owner shall be taken by an officer of the Police Department before the Municipal Judge, who may order the immediate production of the animal. If the owner or harborer of any such animal willfully and knowingly secretes or refuses to produce the animal, each day of such secretion or refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.140, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-220. - Emergency confinement; destruction of rabies-infected animals. 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager has reason to believe or has been notified by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment that there is imminent danger that rabies may spread within the City, the City Manager may require every owner, keeper or possessor of any dog, cat, ferret or other specified animal to confine such animal for such periods as may be necessary to prevent the spread of rabies within the City. 
(b)  If rabies has been detected in any animal, such animal shall be summarily destroyed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.04.150, 5.04.160, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Impoundment and Reclamation 

Sec. 7-7-310. - Animal shelter established. 
    The City shall provide for a City animal shelter for use in the enforcement of this Article. The animal shelter shall be any premises designated by the Chief of Police for the humane boarding and caring of any animals impounded under the provisions of this Article or any other ordinance or law. The animal shelter shall comply with any and all regulations concerning cleanliness and safety for the operators and the animals. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-320. - Authorization for capture and impoundment; notice. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Officer and police officers are hereby authorized to take or capture animals deemed by them to be included in the categories listed below and impound them at an animal shelter or other appropriate location where the animals will be confined in a humane manner. Such officers may utilize a tranquilizer dart if necessary in order to capture an animal which appears to be vicious or destroy such animal if necessary to avoid a physical threat to human beings. Animals subject to capture include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Animals at large, vicious animals, animals creating a disturbance, maltreated animals and nuisance animals. 
(2)  Wild or exotic animals kept in violation of this Code. 
(3)  Animals which were being transported by a person involved in a vehicular accident when such person becomes unable to care for or maintain control over the animal as a result of the accident and there is no responsible person present to take possession of the animal. 
(4)  Animals which will apparently be or have been left uncared for as a result of the death, injury, arrest, detention or other incapacitation of the owner or keeper. 
(5)  Any animal in violation of or not in compliance with any provision of this Article. 
(b)  If, by microchip, tags or other identification attached to the animal or any other information given to the animal shelter, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, immediately upon impoundment, notify the owner of such impoundment by telephone, electronic mail, U.S. mail or written notice posted conspicuously upon the owner's last known residence as shown by the City's animal registration records. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.020, 5.05.030, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-330. - Minimum time for impoundment of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  Unclaimed animals shall be kept at an animal shelter or other appropriate location for not less than five days unless euthanasia prior to that time is deemed necessary or appropriate by the veterinarian advising the animal shelter personnel. 
(b)  A pet animal without identification, including but not limited to a microchip or collar, may be held for only three days if the animal shelter supervisor determines that the shelter has no additional resources for such pet animal or determines that such pet animal is dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-340. - Reclamation of certain animals restricted or prohibited. 
    The following restrictions or prohibitions shall apply to the reclamation of the following impounded animals: 
(1)  Animals which are or appear to be vicious may not be reclaimed unless and until a determination that the animal is not vicious has occurred or, in the case of a dog, that the dog is vicious and the owner has complied with all existing ordinances regulating vicious dogs, or upon a judgment of guilty or no contest, where the court orders that the animal be released for the purpose of immediately transporting the animal outside of the City. 
(2)  Wild or exotic animals kept in violation of this Code shall not be released to the owner or any other person; provided, however, that the animal shelter may release such animals to the appropriate authorities or to a zoo. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.050, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-350. - Refusal to retrieve impounded animal; owner liable for fees. 
    The refusal or failure to retrieve any impounded animal by the owner of the animal shall not relieve the owner of the duty to pay the impoundment fee and other charges which have been assessed. The owner of any animal who fails or refuses to pay such fees and charges shall be in violation of this Section and may be cited into the Municipal Court and fined or imprisoned, or be subject to both such fine and imprisonment, as provided by this Article, upon conviction of violation of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.060, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-360. - Impound fees. 
(a)  An owner or keeper reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay an impound fee and a daily boarding fee, as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, plus all actual and necessary veterinary costs incurred on behalf of the animal. The amount of the impound fee may depend upon the type of animal involved, its age, its licensing status and whether it has been impounded more than once in a 12-month period. No owner or keeper may reclaim an impounded animal until he or she has paid the impoundment fee, boarding fees and veterinary costs. 
(b)  It is unlawful for an owner or keeper of any impounded animal to fail to pay all fees and charges incurred as a result of the impoundment. Failure to reclaim an animal prior to a determination that the animal has become the property of the City or the designated animal shelter as set forth in this Article shall not relieve the owner or keeper of the impounded animal of the responsibility to pay all impound fees and costs incurred prior to said determination. The owner of any animal who fails or refuses to pay such fees and charges shall be in violation of this Section, and may be cited into the Municipal Court and fined upon conviction of a violation of this Section. 
(c)  An owner or keeper reclaiming an impounded animal must present satisfactory proof of vaccination for rabies and a valid City registration or City rabies tags to the animal shelter prior to reclaiming the animal. An owner or keeper reclaiming an impounded animal which is not validly registered must register the animal. 
(d)  The animal shelter may waive any and all fees and costs other than veterinarian costs and registering which are required under the provisions of this Article if the animal shelter supervisor determines that the payment of such fees would create an undue hardship. A record of such determinations must be given to the Chief of Police in writing. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.070, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-370. - Adoption or disposal of unclaimed animals. 
    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within the period of time set forth in this Article shall become the property of the City and may be placed for adoption in a suitable home, placed with an animal rescue organization for future adoption or humanely euthanized. In disposing of such unclaimed animals, it shall be unlawful for the City to surrender live animals to any hospital or institution of learning for use in research. It shall, however, be lawful for the City to donate euthanized unclaimed animals to any hospital or institution of learning for use in research or education. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.080, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-380. - Sterilization of adopted animals required. 
    No animal shall be released for adoption without being sterilized or without a written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that such animal will be sterilized within a certain period of time after the date of release. It shall be unlawful for the adopter to violate the terms of such written agreement. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.090, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-390. - Animal disturbance of peace and quiet prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any animal owner or for any person in charge of any animal to own, keep or have in his or her possession an animal which disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood by barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting any other similar unreasonable noise. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, unreasonable noise shall mean any sound of such level and duration as to be, or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. Continuous or intermittent barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting any other similar unreasonable noise over a period of ten minutes shall constitute prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of life or property. 
(c)  No summons and complaint shall be issued nor shall there be a conviction for violation of this Section unless there is at least one complaining witness who has signed such complaint and has testified at trial. The Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer who personally observed the behavior of the animal with regard to its barking, fighting, howling, crying, whining, yowling, squawking, crowing or emitting other similar unreasonable noise shall satisfy the requirement of having at least one complaining witness and may testify as to his or her observations at trial. 
(d)  This Section shall not apply to the Code Enforcement Officer or police officers in the performance of their duties, nor to veterinary hospitals or animal shelters. 
(e)  Violations of the provisions of this Section shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Not more than 50 percent of the fine may be suspended where the owner had registered the animals with the City prior to the hearing. 
(2)  For a second violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Not more than 50 percent of the fine may be suspended where the owner permanently removed the animals from the City prior to the hearing. 
(3)  For a third and subsequent violation in a 12-month period, a minimum fine of $300.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.100, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-400. - Public nuisance prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. For the purposes of this Section, a public nuisance includes, but is not limited to, an animal which is a safety or health hazard, damages or destroys the property of another or creates offensive odors which materially interfere with or disrupt another person in the conduct of lawful activities at such person's home. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.110, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-410. - Dead animals; disposal; owner notification. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dead animal, or any premises upon which the same may be located, to permit or allow such animal to remain undisposed of for a period longer than 24 hours after death, or to deposit, bury or cause to be deposited or buried the body or any dead animal or portion thereof on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, irrigation ditch or any public grounds without authority from the City, or upon any private property without express permission of the owner. 
(b)  Any dead animal found in any public street or on any public property shall be deemed running at large and shall be removed and disposed of by the Code Enforcement Officer. The owner of such animal, if ascertainable, shall be so notified and advised by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.120, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-420. - Confinement during estrus. 
    Any unspayed female animal in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be securely confined within a house, building or other secure enclosure which is so constructed as to prevent other animals from gaining access to the confined animal, except for purposes of planned breeding. Any owner or person in charge of an animal who does not adequately so confine such animal during the state of estrus, or whose animal during estrus creates a neighborhood nuisance by attracting other animals, shall be ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer to remove the animal to a boarding kennel, to a veterinary hospital or to the City animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of such confinement shall be paid by the animal owner. Failure to comply with the Code Enforcement Officer's or a police officer's removal order shall be a violation of this Article, and the animal shall then be impounded at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.05.130, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 4 - Livestock, Horses and Prohibited Animals 

Sec. 7-7-510. - Animals prohibited within City designated; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor at his or her dwelling within the City more than a total of four animals over the age of three months. This Subsection shall not include fish or birds. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor any livestock or fowl such as, but not limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, chickens, geese, ducks or turkeys, within the City; provided, however, that this Section shall be coordinated with the City's zoning regulations contained in Chapter 16 of this Code, wherein certain animals and numbers thereof may be permitted within certain zoning districts. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain, possess, harbor, sell or in any manner deal or traffic within the City in any living exotic, wild, dangerous or unusual animals, whether domesticated or tamed, including but not necessarily limited to the following: Africanized Apis mellifera (honey bees); bats of any species; bears of any species; felines, other than ordinary domesticated house cats; gorillas, chimpanzees, orangutans, baboons or any other infra-human primate; any member of the Mustelidae family, except ferrets, including but not limited to fishers, martens, minks, otters, porcupines, raccoons, skunks, weasels and wolverines; poisonous reptiles; wolves, foxes, coyotes or other species of canines other than dogs; any animal or bird which has received state or federal government designation as an endangered species; or any other terrestrial predator or other animal determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions, procedures and means of abatement therefor established by the City. 
(d)  For purposes of this Section, any hybrid or breed mix between wild animals and domestic animals shall be considered a domesticated animal, and as such is allowed. Alleged domestication and keeping of any wild animal is not allowed. 
(e)  This Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A zoo or circus authorized by the City. 
(2)  Any entrant in a rodeo, fair or show authorized by the City. 
(3)  The temporary maintenance of an animal by a licensed veterinarian during the time necessary for treatment. 
(4)  The City animal shelter while holding an animal pending legal disposition of the animal. 
(5)  Any animal properly boarded on the Arkansas Valley Fairgrounds. 
(6)  Any person lawfully engaged in the operation of a packing house or slaughter house governed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment regulations, who keeps animals or fowl for a temporary period of time not to exceed 72 hours in connection with the operation of such business. 
(7)  Any person granted a hardship permit as set forth below so long as the hardship permit remains valid. 
(f)  The minimum penalty for failure to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be $100.00 for each animal over the stated limit of four or for each excluded animal owned unlawfully. The amount of $50.00 of each penalty shall not be waived or suspended. The owner will have 30 days to comply in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. In the event the owner refuses to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, a summons will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.07.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 904, 2-24-2015; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-520. - Hardship permits. 
(a)  Any person who considers the provisions of this Division unreasonable under the totality of that person's circumstances may submit an application to the City Clerk for a hardship permit accompanied by the appropriate fee. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall promptly provide a copy of the application to the County Health Department, the mayor and each member of the City Council. 
(c)  The City Council shall conduct a public hearing prior to issuance or renewal of any hardship permit. In determining whether such permit shall be authorized, the City Council shall be guided by the following conditions: 
(1)  The size of the premises. 
(2)  The population density of the area. 
(3)  The characteristics of any animals for which the hardship permit is sought. 
(4)  The health, peace and welfare of the neighbors of the premises. 
(d)  The City Council shall not issue a hardship permit when the County Health Department objects thereto. 
(e)  The City Council may impose express conditions as a condition of issuance of a hardship permit. 
(f)  When the City Council approves a hardship permit, the City Council shall cause to be noted on the permit each condition imposed as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
(g)  A hardship permit shall be issued for a temporary period of time not longer than a 12-month period. 
(h)  A hardship permit applicant shall submit a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule with the hardship permit application. 
(i)  The hardship permit application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant. 
(2)  The type of animal for which a permit is sought. 
(3)  The address of the premises upon which the animal will be housed. 
(4)  The total area of land upon which the animal will be allowed access. This shall not include the area of land upon which improvements lie unless the animal is to be housed in the improvement. 
(5)  A description of the type and size of shelter in which the animals will be kept. 
(6)  The zone designation of the premises. 
(7)  The number of animals for which a permit is sought. 
(8)  The reason the applicant seeks the hardship permit. 
(j)  Hardship permit revocation. 
(1)  A hardship permit shall be revoked by the Chief of Police when any violation of an express condition occurs, any violation of this Article occurs or upon the recommendation of the County Health Department. 
(2)  When a hardship permit is revoked, the permittee shall have ten days in which to file a written appeal of the revocation with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule a revocation hearing before the City Council at the earliest practicable date. At the revocation hearing, the City Council shall consider only evidence as to whether a violation of an express condition occurred or whether the County Health Department recommended the revocation and shall affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police. 
(3)  A hardship permit may be reviewed by the City Council upon seven days' written notice to the holder of the hardship permit. The City Council shall apply the same standards during a review as required for the initial issuance of a hardship permit. Following review, the City Council may affirm or revoke the hardship permit. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.07.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-530. - Horses; unauthorized presence on private property prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the owner, possessor or rider of any horse to permit the same to go upon another person's private residential property unless authorized to do so, or to proceed off the improved portions of public streets or off any designated horse trails of the City. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.07.030, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-540. - Picketing on public property, causing damage prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to picket or tether any animal in or upon the streets or other public places of the City, or upon the private property of other persons, in such a manner as to damage any property. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.07.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-550. - Unlawful to keep bees; definitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful to keep bees in any zone of the City, except agricultural zones, as a trade, profession, occupation, enterprise, operation, vocation, avocation, hobby or activity. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, bees means and includes any hymenopterous insects of the family Apidae , and the common hive or honey bee, Apis mellifera . 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, agricultural zone means any property in the City zoned as an A-1 District or zoned as a PUD District with no approved site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.07.050, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-560. - Keeping of swine. 
    Any pen or place where swine are kept so as to be offensive is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any person continuing to maintain such nuisance shall be fined for each day he or she neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance after being notified by any City officer to do so. 
(Prior code,  6.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 5 - Cruelty to Animals 

Sec. 7-7-610. - Cruel treatment prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, abandon or otherwise abuse any animal or cause or permit such animal to be abused or cruelly treated in any manner; to fail to provide an animal with adequate and wholesome food and water, protection from the elements, opportunity for exercise or adequate veterinary care; or to otherwise neglect or treat any animal in such a manner as to endanger its health or cause it to suffer. Ownership of said animal shall not be a justifiable defense for such acts or for a violation of this Section. Any animal being cruelly treated as set forth above shall be immediately confiscated by a police officer under the direction of the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.09.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-620. - Poisoning prohibited; exceptions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly poison any domestic animal, or to knowingly distribute poison or toxicants on public or private property in any manner whatsoever that causes the poisoning of any domestic animal. The poisoning of bats, rodents, pigeons and insects is permitted, so long as such poisoning conforms with the requirements of all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.09.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-630. - Animal fights for exhibition prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to train or keep any animal for the purpose of fighting, to cause, instigate or encourage any animal to fight or enter into combat in any manner, or to maintain any place where animals are allowed to fight for exhibition, wager or sport. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.09.030, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-640. - Molesting, killing song and insectivorous birds prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally frighten, shoot at, wound, kill, take, capture, ensnare, net, trap or in any other manner molest or injure any song or insectivorous bird, including but not limited to the following: a robin, lark, whippoorwill, finch, sparrow, thrush, wren, martin, swallow, songbird, bobolink, red-winged blackbird, crow, raven, oriole, kingbird, mockingbird or song sparrow; or in any manner to intentionally molest or injure the nest, eggs, young or body of any such bird; or to have in his or her possession the nest, eggs, young or body of any such bird. Pigeons shall not be considered song or insectivorous birds for the purpose of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.09.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-650. - Hunting in City limits. 
    Any person shooting birds or animals of any kind shall be considered a hunter and shall be responsible for understanding and abiding by the City and state regulations governing what is allowed to be hunted. This includes the hunting of officially designated nuisance or trash birds and wild animals of any kind. Any person engaged in hunting shall first be required to contact the Police Department to determine what type of hunting is allowed and to receive official permission to do so. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.09.050, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-7-660. - Tethering. 
    No person shall restrain or permit an animal to be improperly tethered. For purposes of this Section, improper tethering shall mean use of a fixed point chain or tether in a manner that is likely to cause bodily injury to the animal or endanger the health or safety of other animals or people. An animal control officer is empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether tethering is improper, which determination may be based upon, but is not limited to, the consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  Using a chain or tether made of rope, twine, cord or similar material that is insufficient to restrain the animal. 
(2)  Using a chain or tether that: 
a.  Is less than ten feet in length; 
b.  Does not have swivels on both ends; 
c.  Is not attached to the animal by means of a properly fitting harness or collar of at least one inch in width; and/or 
d.  Is wrapped around the animal's neck. 
(3)  Using a chain or tether that is too heavy or too big for the size and weight of the animal so that the animal is prohibited from moving about freely. 
(4)  Allowing an animal to be chained or tethered in such a manner that the animal is not confined to the owner's property or so that the chain or tether can become entangled and prevent the animal from moving about freely, lying down comfortably or having access to adequate food, water and shelter. 
(5)  Using a chain as a primary collar rather than a collar made of nylon, cotton, leather or similar material. 
(Ord. No. 904, 2-24-2015; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Dogs 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-8-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, definitions contained in Section 7-7-50 of this Chapter are incorporated as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-20. - Licensing and tags. 
    Provisions regarding rabies control, licensing and tags are contained in Article 7, Division 2 of this Chapter and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Guard Dogs 

Sec. 7-8-110. - Registration and rabies inoculation required. 
    All guard dogs within the City shall be registered with the City and inoculated against rabies as provided by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-120. - Permit; required; application; requirements. 
(a)  No person shall place or maintain any guard dog for the protection of persons or property within the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Clerk on or before March 1 of each year or prior to the placing or keeping of such dog, and in the manner prescribed in this Article. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until a written inspection certificate has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer certifying approval of the permit. The Code Enforcement Officer's determination as to the issuance or denial of any permit shall be based upon the standards and requirements for guard dogs and for the placement and keeping thereof as established by this Article. Any certificate of approval shall certify that the guard dog and the premises wherein such dog is to be placed or kept are in compliance with the standards and requirements established by this Article. Any certificate of denial shall set forth the reasons for such denial. 
(c)  All permit applications shall be filed upon forms provided by the City Clerk and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or person in charge of the dog and of the responsible person who can be reached during an emergency at times other than regular business hours; 
(2)  The location where such dog is to be placed or kept; 
(3)  The approximate length of time the dog will be patrolling the subject area; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises wherein such dog is to be placed or kept; 
(5)  The City rabies tag number for the dog; 
(6)  The Code Enforcement Officer's certificate, which shall be attached to the application; and 
(7)  Such other information as the City Clerk may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-130. - Renewal of permit. 
    All guard dog permits shall be renewed each year between January 1 and March 1. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.030, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-140. - Permit fee. 
    The annual permit fee for each guard dog shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. The City Council may amend this fee from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.040, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-150. - Issuance and contents of permit. 
    Upon finding that a permit application or renewal is in order, the City Clerk shall issue the appropriate permit. The permit issued shall specify the City rabies tag number of the dog and the location where such dog is to be placed or kept. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.050, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-160. - Transferability; refunds. 
    There shall be no permit fee refunds, and permits shall not be transferable to any other location or to any other dog. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.060, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-170. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any guard dog permit issued under this Article when such permit is found to be in violation of this Article or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.070, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-180. - Requirements generally. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a guard dog in any area of the City for the protection of persons and property unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog shall be confined within a building or an enclosed area adequate to ensure that the dog will not escape, or the dog shall be under the absolute control of a qualified handler at all times. 
(2)  Such building or enclosure shall have adequate safeguards against accidental entry by children and against accidental and unintentional entry by any person. 
(3)  Warning signs shall be conspicuously posted indicating the presence of the guard dog. Each building or enclosure shall have warning signs posted at every door, gate or entrance, and at intervals of every 100 feet on a fenced enclosure. Warning signs shall plainly show the telephone number where the person responsible for controlling the guard dog can be reached at all times. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.080, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-190. - Penalties. 
    Violation of a provision of this Division, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.12.090, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Unlawful Attacks 

Sec. 7-8-310. - Unlawful attacks prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to own an animal which: 
(1)  Causes bodily injury to a person in an unprovoked attack, whether on or off the premises of its owner; 
(2)  Causes bodily injury to a domesticated animal or livestock in an unprovoked attack while on or off the premises of its owner; or 
(3)  When unprovoked, repeatedly charges against a fence in an attempt to attack, charges to the end of its lead in an attempt to attack or acts otherwise in a manner that would reasonably cause fear of imminent bodily harm. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Article, unprovoked attack shall not include the following circumstances: 
(1)  Attacks occurring solely due to a person having attacked such animal or who engaged in conduct reasonably calculated to provoke such animal to attack or bite such person or another person; 
(2)  Attacks occurring solely due to any person engaged in provoking or stopping an animal fight involving the attacking animals; 
(3)  Attacks occurring solely due to any person engaged in attacking or molesting another person; 
(4)  Attacks occurring solely due to any person engaged in unlawful entry into or upon the fenced or enclosed portion of the premises upon which such animal is kept; 
(5)  Attacks occurring solely due to any animal engaged in unauthorized entry into or upon the fenced or enclosed portion of the premises upon which such animal is kept; 
(6)  Attacks occurring solely due to any person other than the Code Enforcement Officer engaged in capturing or attempting to capture such animal in the absence of the owner, excepting any person attempting to capture such animal on such person's own property; or 
(7)  Attacks occurring solely due to any person engaged in unlawful or unauthorized entry into any vehicle in which such animal is confined. 
(c)  It is unlawful for an owner of an animal to fail to take immediate and effective corrective action with that animal when it is in violation of any of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.06.010, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-320. - Disposition of animals involved in unlawful acts. 
(a)  Any animal violating any of the provisions of this Division may be impounded by the Code Enforcement Officer without prior notice to the animal's owner. 
(b)  In the event an animal cannot be seized by the Code Enforcement Officer without exposing the Code Enforcement Officer to danger or personal injury by such animal, it shall be lawful for the Code Enforcement Officer, after making every reasonable effort to capture such animal, including the solicitation of assistance from the owner if such owner is ascertainable and available, to forthwith destroy such animal. 
(c)  The owner of an animal seized pursuant to this Section shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court at the earliest date available to the Court and the parties to determine if the animal shall be destroyed. At said hearing, the Colorado Rules of Evidence shall not apply except as to relevance, and the Court shall ensure that evidence shall be offered and questioning shall be conducted in an orderly manner and according to basic notions of fairness. 
(1)  At the hearing, the Municipal Court shall consider, as applicable, the following: 
a.  Any evidence presented at any trial involving the animal; 
b.  The conduct of the animal during the incident charged; 
c.  Any other evidence of dangerous or violent behavior by the animal, or threats thereof; 
d.  Any prior violations by the owner, possessor, keeper or controller of the animal of this Article or similar laws of any state or political subdivision thereof; 
e.  Any prior violations by the owner, possessor, keeper or controller of the animal, involving the same animal, of any provision of this Article or similar laws of any state or political subdivisions thereof; 
f.  Any other conditions existing on the property where the animal has been or will be kept which would affect the likelihood of any danger to any person, animal or property; 
g.  Any evidence of any ameliorative action taken by the owner, possessor, keeper or controller of the animal which would affect the likelihood of any danger to any person, animal or property; 
h.  Where the animal is a dog, whether the dog is a vicious dog; and 
i.  Any other evidence relevant to the issues to be determined by the Municipal Court. 
(2)  If the defendant is not an owner of the animal, and if the name and address of an owner is known to the City or the Municipal Court, the owner shall be notified in writing, by mail or in person, of the date, time, place and purpose of said hearing at least five days before said hearing. Notice may also be given to anyone who is age 18 or over and is a relative or residing or otherwise staying at the owner's residence. 
(3)  If, at such hearing, the City establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that there is a reasonable likelihood of future injury to a person, property or animals, the Municipal Court shall order the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner. Relocation of the animal outside of the City shall not be an alternative for the Municipal Court. Upon oral motion of the defendant or an owner, said order shall be stayed for 30 days to allow the movant to appeal said order, provided that the movant pays the estimated costs of impoundment within 24 hours of the entering of the stay. 
(4)  If the Municipal Court determines that it is not appropriate to order that the animal be destroyed, the Municipal Court may order the animal to be returned to the owner and to be kept under such circumstances as will ensure the safety of persons, property or other animals in the community. 
(5)  If the animal is to be returned to its owner, the Municipal Court shall order the implantation in the animal of a unique identifying computer microchip by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense. The owner will be ordered to register the identifying microchip information with the City Clerk and the central registry for such information. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.06.020, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-330. - Penalties for violations. 
    Violations of the provisions of this Division shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For any unlawful attack, as defined in Section 7-8-310 of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order the implantation in the dog of a unique identifying computer microchip by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense, and the owner will be ordered to register the identifying microchip information with the City Clerk and the central registry for such information. 
(2)  For any unlawful attack where there is no injury to a human or other animal, a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the Municipal Court deems proper, including but not limited to evaluation and successful completion of a recommended animal owner course, mandatory kenneling, confinement, muzzling or, in the case of a dog, compliance with the requirements for vicious dogs as set forth in this Article. 
(3)  For a second attack by the same animal that was involved in the first violation, or any other animal owned by the same person or of the same household during a three-year period following the first violation, a fine of not less than $450.00 and not more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the Municipal Court deems proper. 
(4)  For unlawful attacks, as defined in Section 7-8-310 of this Article, where bodily injury to a human or other animal occurs, the penalties shall be: 
a.  For a first violation involving the biting of a human being or an animal, a fine of not less than $300.00 and not more than $1,000.00, plus any additional penalty which the Municipal Court deems proper, including the humane destruction of the animal. A portion of the penalties in this Subparagraph may be suspended upon order of the Municipal Court for compliance with any other court-ordered conditions, such as evaluation and successful completion of a recommended animal owner course, mandatory kenneling, confinement, muzzling or, in the case of a dog, compliance with the requirements for vicious dogs as set forth in this Article. 
b.  For a second violation involving the biting of or an attack upon a human being or an animal by the same animal that was involved in the first violation, or any other animal owned by the same person or of the same household occurring within a three-year period following the first violation, a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and a jail sentence of not less than five days, plus any additional penalty the Municipal Court deems proper. A portion of the penalties in this Subparagraph may be suspended upon order of the Municipal Court for compliance with any other court-ordered conditions. Additionally, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 882,  5.06.030, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 4 - Vicious Dogs 

Sec. 7-8-410. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Dog means any domesticated animal related to the fox, wolf, coyote or jackal. 
    Domestic animal means any dog, cat, potbellied pig, horse or livestock. 
    Owner means any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having a financial or property interest in or having the care or custody of a dog. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(2)  Any dog which demonstrates to a trained, experienced or knowledgeable dog handler, when placed in the presence, but not in the same pen, of another dog, a domestic animal or a person, a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, unprovoked, human beings or domestic animals. 
(3)  Any dog which, because of its size, physical nature or vicious propensity, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this Division. 
(4)  Any dog which, without provocation, attacks, bites or has attacked, bitten or caused the death of a human being or domestic animal. 
(5)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted in such a manner as to define any specific dog breed as vicious. 
(b)  A vicious dog is unconfined if the dog is not securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. This enclosure must provide protection from the elements for the dog and be adequately lighted and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  No dog may be declared vicious if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.010, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-420. - Confinement; leash and muzzle. 
(a)  The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go unconfined. 
(b)  The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, not exceeding six feet in length, and under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.020, 6.16.030, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-430. - Signs. 
    The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. Such signs shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb line or a distance of 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.040, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-440. - Insurance. 
    Owners of vicious dogs must, within ten days of the determination that the dog is a vicious dog, provide proof to the City Clerk of public liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by his or her vicious dog. Proof of a homeowner's insurance policy that provides specific coverage for damages caused by a dog owned or kept by the insured party, whether the dog is on or off the insured premises and not containing any exception for vicious dogs, shall meet this requirement where the named insured party and the owner or keeper of the dog are the same person. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.050, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-450. - Registration and identification photographs. 
    Any person having the custody, ownership or control of any vicious dog must, at the time the dog is determined to be vicious, register the vicious dog with the City on a form to be provided by the City. Said form shall require the following information: name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; the address where the dog is harbored if different from the owner's address; and the dog's sex, color, rabies certificate and tag number. At the time of the registration, said owner, keeper or harborer must provide to the City Clerk two photographs of the animal, clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.060, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-460. - Reporting requirements. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of a vicious dog must, within ten days of an incident, as described below, report the following information in writing to the City Clerk as required hereinafter: 
(1)  The removal from the City or death of a vicious dog. 
(2)  The birth of offspring of a vicious dog. 
(3)  The new address of a vicious dog owner, should the owner move within the corporate City limits. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.070, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-470. - Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, barter or in any other way dispose of a vicious dog registered with the City to any person within the City unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the registered owner of such dog; provided that the registered owner of a vicious dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a registered dog or the offspring of such dog to persons who do not reside within the City. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.080, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-480. - Offspring of registered dogs. 
    All offspring of vicious dogs determined to be vicious must be registered in accordance with the requirements of Section 7-7-460 above. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.090, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-490. - Confiscation. 
(a)  Any vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by an officer of the Police Department under the direction of the Chief of Police if: 
(1)  The dog is not validly registered as provided in this Chapter; 
(2)  The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage required; 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; or 
(4)  The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the proper enclosure and not under the physical restrain of the owner. 
    The owner of any dog so confiscated may, within five days, reclaim the dog upon providing satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officers that the violation has been corrected and upon the payment of the appropriate impoundment fees. If the owner fails to reclaim the dog within five days, the dog shall be thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(b)  If the vicious dog of an owner with a prior conviction under this Article attacks or bites a person or another domestic animal, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officers and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(c)  Any dog that aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of any human being, whether the dog has previously been declared potentially vicious or vicious, shall be immediately confiscated by the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officers, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.100, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-500. - Determination of vicious dog. 
(a)  In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer, a law enforcement officer or an animal control officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that a dog is vicious, the Chief Animal Control Officer or the Chief of Police shall convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared vicious. 
(b)  The Chief Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held, at which time the owner or keeper may have the opportunity to present evidence why the dog should not be declared vicious. During the investigation and prior to the hearing, the investigator shall cause the dog to be tested by a trained, experienced or knowledgeable dog handler, who is not the investigator, by placing the dog in the presence, but not in the same pen, of another dog or a person, to observe whether the dog demonstrates a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, while unprovoked, a human being or domestic animal. The test shall be conducted outside the presence of the person who owns or keeps the dog. Following written notification to the hearing officer that names a witness and affirms under oath that the witness has not had any association with the dog being tested, the witness may observe the test. No person who has had a previous association with the dog shall be present at the test. In this Section, an association with the dog shall mean a present or past owner, keeper or resident at the address where the dog resides or is kept from time to time, or any person who visits the dog, play with the dog, works with the dog, handles the dog or has any other regular contact with the dog. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five nor more than ten days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public. 
(d)  After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the dog is vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with the provision of this Division in accordance with a time schedule established by the Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police, but in no case more than 30 days subsequent to the date of the determination. If the owner or keeper of the dog contests the determination, he or she may, within five days of such determination, bring a petition in the Municipal Court, requesting that the Municipal Court conduct its own hearing on whether or not the dog should be declared vicious. After service of notice upon the dog owner or keeper, the Municipal Court shall conduct a hearing de novo and make its own determination as to viciousness. Said hearing shall be conducted within seven days of the service of the notice upon the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officer involved. The City must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the dog is vicious. If the Municipal Court rules the dog to be vicious, the Court shall establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this Article, but in no case more than 30 days subsequent to the date of the Municipal Court's determination. 
(e)  The Municipal Court may decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper of the dog, regardless of the fact that said owner or keeper fails to appear at said hearing. 
(f)  The determination of the Municipal Court shall be final and conclusive upon all parties thereto. However, the Code Enforcement Officer or any law enforcement officer shall have the right to declare a dog to be vicious for any subsequent actions of the dog. 
(g)  In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the dog in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the Code Enforcement Officer or law enforcement officer may seize and impound the dog pending the aforesaid hearings. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the City when the dog is impounded for the costs and expenses of keeping such dog if the dog is determined to be vicious. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.120, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-510. - Penalties. 
    Whoever violates any provisions of this Division shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The Municipal Court shall order appropriate restitution when a vicious dog caused personal or property damage. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.130, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 7-8-520. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this Division shall not apply to a K-9 or other dog owned by a Police Department or other law enforcement agency or privately owned by a law enforcement officer if said dog is regularly used in the performance of police work at the request of the law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 803,  6.16.140, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE 1 - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., and Part 4 of Article 15 of Title 30, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado , promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City. The purpose of this Article and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the Nation. 
(Prior code,  8.04.010; Ord. No. 788,  1, 8-23-2003; Ord. No. 893,  1, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-1-20. - Copy on file; certification. 
(a)  Three copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. The Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall certify to the passage of the ordinance codified herein and make not less than three copies of the adopted code available to the public as set forth in Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code,  8.04.010, 8.04.070; Ord. No. 788,  1, 8-23-2003; Ord. No. 893,   1, 7, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-1-30. - Amendments. 
    The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the following additions, amendments and deletions: none. 
(Prior code,   8.04.020, 8.04.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-1-40. - Application. 
    This Article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public way, public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, where the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate such areas. The provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 1413 and part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer and rules and regulations concerning accidents and accident reports, shall apply to all public places and any and all properties involving the adopted code throughout the City. 
(Prior code,  8.04.050; Ord. No. 788,  3, 8-23-2003; Ord. No. 893,  3, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-1-50. - Interpretation. 
    This Article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this Article and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Prior code,  8.04.080; Ord. No. 788,  6, 8-23-2003; Ord. No. 893,  6, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-1-60. - Violation; penalty. 
    The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Article: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this Article. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this Article shall be punished by a fine of $35.00 per point lost, not exceeding $300.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code,  8.04.040; Ord. No. 788,  2, 8-23-2003; Ord. No. 893,  2, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Motorized Golf Carts 

Sec. 8-2-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Golf cart means a gas or electric-powered vehicle having three or four wheels, designed and intended to transport golf equipment and people while playing golf and not designed primarily for travel on the public highways. 
    Roadway means that portion of a City highway, road, street, alley or right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the public highways. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-20. - Operation authorized. 
    The operation of motorized golf carts by permit is hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets within the City. Any person operating a motorized golf cart under a permit has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts. This provision does not authorize the use of golf carts on any state highway. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-30. - Permits. 
    Authorization to operate a motorized golf cart on City streets is by permit only. Permits shall be issued by the Chief of Police. Any person at least 16 years of age may apply for a permit. All permits shall expire annually on June 1, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. The City Council may amend the permit fee from time to time by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-40. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Each application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart on the City roadways or streets shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Such other information as the Chief of Police or City Council may require from time to time. 
(b)  The Police Department shall conduct an inspection of the golf cart prior to issuance of the permit to assure that the golf cart has all required equipment. 
(c)  In addition, each permit application, whether for an initial permit or a renewal, shall be accompanied by evidence of a liability policy. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-50. - Required equipment. 
    The following equipment is required on any motorized golf cart during operation upon the roadway of any street. 
(1)  The slow-moving vehicle emblem provided for by state statute, properly mounted on the rear of the golf cart pursuant to state regulations. 
(2)  A rear view mirror, properly mounted on the golf cart so as to reflect to the operator a view of the street for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the golf cart. 
(3)  One vertical four-foot red safety flag properly mounted on the rear of the golf cart. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-60. - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of any street within the City where: 
(1)  The operator does not have in his or her possession a valid, current and unrevoked permit issued to the operator by the Chief of Police. 
(2)  The motorized golf cart is operated at night between sunset and sunrise. 
(3)  The motorized golf cart is being operated during inclement weather, when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet. 
(4)  The motorized golf cart is not equipped with the required equipment described under Section 8-2-50 above. 
(5)  The operator does not have current insurance coverage as provided in Subsection 8-2-40(c) above. 
(6)  The operator fails to observe all traffic laws and regulations, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-70. - Revocation or modification of permit. 
    A permit issued under Section 8-2-30 above may be revoked or modified at any time by the Chief of Police if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway or streets within the City. For purposes of this Subsection, the commission of any of the violations described in Section 8-2-60 above constitutes evidence that the violator cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway or streets within the City. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-80. - Appeal. 
    Any person whose permit to operate a motorized golf cart has been revoked may appeal the revocation to the City Manager. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the City Manager within 20 days of the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-2-90. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Motorized Wheelchairs 

Sec. 8-3-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Motorized wheelchair means a motorized wheeled device designed for use by a person with a physical disability. 
    Roadway means that portion of a City highway, road, street, alley or right-of-way, improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel or parking. 
(Ord. No. 837, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Equipment. 
    Motorized wheelchairs operated on any roadway within the City limits other than crossing a roadway at an intersection shall have one vertical four-foot red safety flag properly mounted on the rear and shall display the triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem provided for by state statute, properly mounted on the rear at all times when being operated on a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 837, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-3-30. - Rules. 
    A person operating a motorized wheelchair on a roadway shall follow all rules of the road set forth in the Model Traffic Code as adopted by the City, except where those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized wheelchairs. 
(Ord. No. 837, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-3-40. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 837, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Handicap Parking 

Sec. 8-4-10. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent and purpose of this Article is to provide for handicap parking within the City and to prohibit unauthorized use of handicap parking spaces within the City. 
(Prior code,  8.07.010; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Distinguishing license plate means a license plate issue by the Colorado Motor Vehicle Division, indicating or displaying the appropriate symbol or sign, designating the car as being owned or operated by a person with a disability. 
    Identifying placard means a specific document or card issued by the Colorado Motor Vehicle Division pursuant to state statutes, which can be prominently displayed on a motor vehicle used to transport a person with a disability. 
    Person with disability means a person so severely impaired that such person is unable to move from place to place without the aid of a mechanical device or who has a physical impairment verified in writing by the Director of the Division of Rehabilitation or a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State, that such impairment substantially limits the person's ability to move from place to place. 
(Prior code,  8.07.020; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-30. - Designation of parking spaces on private property. 
    The owner of private property may designate specific parking spaces adjacent to his or her property as being reserved for persons with disabilities. Such parking spaces shall be marked with an official upright sign, which sign may either be stationary or portable, identifying and designating the parking spaces as being reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(Prior code,  8.07.030; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-40. - Designation of parking spaces on public property. 
    The City may designate specific parking spaces on public streets or rights-of-way as being reserved for persons with disabilities. The City shall be responsible for installing the appropriate signs for such spaces. 
(Prior code,  8.07.040; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-50. - Installation of signs. 
    The official sign shall be obtained and installed by the owner of the property and at the expense of the owner of the property. The owner of the property may request that the City obtain and install the appropriate official signs, and the owner of the property shall be responsible to reimburse to the City any and all costs associated with the purchase and installation of those signs. 
(Prior code,  8.07.050; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-60. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person other than a person with a disability to park in a parking space on public or private property which is clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved for persons with disability, unless and except as follows: unless the vehicle to be parked in the reserved spot displays a distinguishing license plate or identifying placard and is being driven by or for a person with a disability. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person who is not a person with a disability to use a distinguishing license plate or identifying placard to receive the benefits or privileges available to a person with a disability under this Article. 
(Prior code,  8.07.060; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-70. - Other jurisdictions. 
    Persons with disabilities from states other than Colorado shall be allowed to use the parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities in the City so long as such persons have such valid license plates or placards from their home state. 
(Prior code,  8.07.070; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4-80. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this Article, or any owner of a vehicle who authorizes or permits the violation of this Article, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  8.07.080; Ord. No. 732, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 8-5-10. - Speed limit of trains. 
    No railroad train, car or locomotive of any kind or description on the tracks of the BNSF Railroad shall be moved or run at a speed exceeding 30 miles per hour while the same is within the limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  8.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 10 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-1-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the definitions ascribed to them, unless otherwise provided: 
    Government includes any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the government of this City. 
    Governmental function includes any activity which a public servant is legally authorized to undertake on behalf of a government. 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. The term also includes the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
    Public servant means any officer or employee of the government, whether elected or appointed, and any person participating as an advisor or consultant, engaged in the service of process or otherwise performing a governmental function, but the term does not include witnesses. 
(Prior code,  7.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-20. - Penalties. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-30. - Criminal attempt. 
(a)  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he or she engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
(b)  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his or her complicity under Section 18-1-603, C.R.S., were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this Section that the defendant abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of this criminal intent. 
(d)  Criminal attempt to commit a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Criminal attempt to commit a petty offense is a crime of the same class as the offense itself. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-40. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  A person commits conspiracy to commit a crime if, with the intent to promote or facilitate its commission, he or she agrees with another person or persons that they, or one or more of them, will engage in conduct which constitutes a crime or an attempt to commit a crime, or he or she agrees to aid the other person or persons in the planning or commission of a crime or of an attempt to commit such crime. 
(b)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime unless an overt act in pursuance of that conspiracy is proved to have been done by him or her or by a person with whom he or she conspired. 
(c)  If a person knows that one with whom he or she conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person to commit the same crime, he or she is guilty of conspiring to commit a crime with the other person, whether or not he or she knows the other person's identity. 
(d)  If a person conspires to commit a number of crimes, he or she is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are part of a single criminal episode. 
(e)  Conspiracy to commit a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Conspiracy to commit a petty offense is a crime of the same class as the offense itself. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-50. - Complicity. 
    A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he or she aids, abets or advises the other person in planning or committing the offense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-60. - Accessory to crime. 
(a)  A person is an accessory to crime if, with intent to hinder, delay or prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for the commission of a crime, he or she renders assistance to such person. 
(b)  Render assistance means to: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other; 
(2)  Warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension, except that this does not apply to a warning given in an effort to bring such person into compliance with the law; 
(3)  Provide such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise or other thing to be used in avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  By force, intimidation or deception, obstruct anyone in the performance of any act which might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution or punishment of such person; or 
(5)  Conceal, destroy or alter any physical evidence that might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of such person. 
(c)  Being an accessory to crime is a Class 1 petty offense if the offender knows that the person being assisted has committed, has been convicted of or is charged by pending information, indictment or complaint with a crime, or is suspected of or wanted for a crime, and if that crime is designated by this Code as a misdemeanor of any class. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-1-70. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be in violation of the ordinances of the City, whether individually or in connection with one or more persons, as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any ordinance of the City is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Government and Public Officers 

Sec. 10-2-10. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to obstruct government operations. 
(b)  A person commits obstructing government operations if he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the performance of a governmental function by a public official, employee or servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of an unlawful action by a public servant; 
(2)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of the making of an arrest; or 
(3)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute with the government. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Impersonating public servant. 
(a)  A person commits impersonating a public servant if he or she falsely pretends to be a public servant other than a peace officer and performs any act in that pretended capacity. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the office the actor pretended to hold did not in fact exist. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-30. - Obstructing peace officer or firefighter. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a peace officer made or given in the discharge of the peace officer's duties. 
(b)  No person shall, in any way, interfere with or hinder any peace officer who is discharging or apparently discharging the duties of the position. 
(c)  It is unlawful to obstruct a peace officer or firefighter. A person commits obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle, such person knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his or her official authority. 
(d)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer or firefighter was acting in an illegal manner, if the peace officer or firefighter was acting under color of his or her official authority as defined in Subsection 10-2-50(c) below. 
(e)  This Section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-40. - False reporting to authorities. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to falsely report to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; 
(3)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false; 
(4)  Knowingly gives false information to any law enforcement officer with the purpose of implicating another; or 
(5)  Provides false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, identifying information means a person's name, address, birth date, social security number, driver's license or state identification number. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-50. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It is unlawful to resist arrest. 
(b)  A person commits resisting arrest if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from affecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
(c)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if the peace officer was acting under color of his or her official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest, the peace officer was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, the peace officer is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by the peace officer. 
(d)  The term peace officer , as used in this Section, means a peace officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting his or her credentials as such peace officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-60. - Escape. 
(a)  A person commits escape if, while being in custody or confinement following conviction of a violation of this Code, he or she knowingly escapes from said custody or confinement. 
(b)  A person commits escape if, while being in custody or confinement and held for or charged with but not convicted of a violation of this Code, he or she knowingly escapes from said custody or confinement. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-70. - Aiding escape. 
    A person who knowingly aids, abets or assists another person to escape or attempt to escape from custody or confinement commits the offense of aiding escape, if the person aided was in custody or confinement and charged with, held for or convicted of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-2-80. - Duty of citizens to aid police officers. 
    A person 18 years of age or older commits refusing to aid a peace officer when, upon command by a person known to him or her to be a peace officer, he or she unreasonably refuses or fails to aid the peace officer in effecting or securing an arrest or in preventing another from committing an offense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Streets and Public Places 

Sec. 10-3-10. - Unlawful conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property or to conduct himself or herself in or on the same in violation of any order, rule or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in this Section, limiting or prohibiting the use, activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or agency having the power of control, management or supervision of the building or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each such officer or agency may adopt such orders, rules or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection and maintenance of such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules and regulations upon the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statues, buildings, grounds and other structures, and any object of scientific, historical or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages and other individual or group usages, including the place, time and manner in which such activities may be permitted; 
(5)  Use of all vehicles as to place, time and manner of use; and 
(6)  Control and limitation of fires and designation of places where fires are permitted. 
(b)  No conviction may be obtained under this Section unless notice of such limitation or prohibition is prominently posted at all public entrances to such building or property or unless such notice is actually first given the person by the office or agency, including any agent thereof, or by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this Section. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Section is guilty of unlawful conduct on public property. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-3-20. - Trespass or interference in public buildings. 
(a)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the City as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of or to leave any such public building. 
(b)  No person shall, at or in any public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the City officer charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(e)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(f)  The term public building , as used in this Section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section commits an unlawful act. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-3-30. - Interfering with use of streets or sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or congregating on any public highway, street, alley or sidewalk in the City shall obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free, unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any peace officer of the City or other authorized peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-3-40. - Damage or removal of street signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person without proper authorization to remove, deface, damage or destroy any street sign or sign erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such street. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-3-60. - Maintenance of dangerous ground openings. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or keep open any cellar door, pit, vault or any other subterranean opening on any highway or sidewalk, or allow the same to be left or kept open or to be kept in an insecure condition, so that passersby will be in danger of falling into such cellar, pit, vault or other opening. 
(Prior code,  6.08.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Public, Private and Personal Property 
Division 1 - Generally 

Sec. 10-4-10. - Criminal mischief. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the real or personal property of one or more other persons in the course of a single criminal episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-20. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Section: 
    Premises means any public or private real property, buildings or other improvements thereon located within the City. 
    Trespass means when a person: 
(1)  Unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced. 
(2)  Knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains upon the premises of a hotel, motel, condominium or apartment building. 
(3)  Enters or remains upon premises clearly and conspicuously posted with no trespassing signs. 
(4)  In the case of a solicitor, hawker, itinerant merchant or salesman, enters or remains upon premises and knocks on doors or rings doorbells of any entrance thereto upon which are clearly posted signs prohibiting solicitation or sale. 
(5)  Refuses or fails to leave the premises when asked to do so by the owner or person in charge of the premises, whether the premises are a private residence or a building or business open to the public. 
(6)  Returns to any premises, public or private, from which he or she has been barred by the owner or person in charge of the premises after having been advised by the owner or person in charge that he or she shall no longer be permitted on the premises. 
    Unlawfully enters or remains means when a person enters or remains in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed, invited or otherwise privileged to do so. 
(b)  It is illegal and unlawful for any person to trespass, knowingly enter or remain in or upon any premises of another without the permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof. 
(c)  Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Section shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imposition of a sentence to useful public service. There is hereby imposed a minimum mandatory fine of $50.00 for a first offense hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 752,  1-4, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-30. - Littering. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or deposit on any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the City any paper, old clothes, cloth of any kind, boots, shoes, hats, leather, hair, grass, junk cars, straw, hay, trash or any other thing, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-40. - Theft. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Section: 
    Knowingly or willfully. A person acts knowingly or willfully with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by this Section when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exists. A person acts knowingly or willfully with respect to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that his or her conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
    Thing of value includes real property, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights, choses in action, services, confidential information, medical records information, and any rights of use or enjoyment connected therewith. 
    Unpurchased means that the item was not paid for in monies or consideration of payment by any other means. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft. It is the intent of this Section to define one offense of theft and to incorporate therein the offenses of larceny, stealing, embezzlement, false pretenses, confidence games and shoplifting, thereby removing distinctions and technicalities which previously existed in the pleading and proof of such offenses. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization or by threat or deception when the value of the thing is less than $1,000.00 and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value. 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit. 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
a.  If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of said store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the offense of theft. 
b.  If any person conceals upon his or her person or otherwise carries away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the store owner, merchant or any employee thereof, or any police officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause, may detain and question any person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether a person has committed the offense of theft. Such detention and questioning shall not render the store owner, merchant, employee or police officer liable civilly or criminally for slander, libel, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or unlawful detention. 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Section shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and imposition of a sentence to useful public service. There is hereby imposed a minimum mandatory fine of $50.00 for a first offense hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 752,  1-4, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-50. - Tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(a)  Any person who connects any pipe, tube, stopcock, wire, cord, socket, motor or other instrument or contrivance with any main, service pipe or other medium conducting or supplying gas, water or electricity to any building, without the knowledge and consent of the person supplying such gas, water or electricity, commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(b)  Any person who in any manner alters, obstructs or interferes with any meter pit, meter or metering device provided for measuring or registering the quantity of gas, water or electricity passing through said meter, without the knowledge and consent of the person owning said meter, commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(c)  A person who tampers with property of another with intent to cause injury, inconvenience or annoyance to that person or to another, or if he or she knowingly makes unauthorized connection with property of a utility, commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to any licensed electrical or plumbing contractor while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with recognized customs and standards. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Graffiti 

Sec. 10-4-110. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Division is to define and prohibit graffiti and to set forth procedures for the prompt eradication and abatement of graffiti within the City. 
(Prior code,  7.14.010; Ord. No. 711,  1, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-120. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Graffiti means the defacing of public or private property by any person by means of painting, drawing, writing, etching or carving with paint, spray paint, ink, a knife or other similar method without the prior consent of the property owner. 
    Owner or property owner means any person owning, leasing, occupying or having control or possession of any property within the City. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
(Prior code,  7.14.020; Ord. No. 711,  2, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-130. - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly damage, deface, destroy, injure or place graffiti on the real or personal property of another in the course of a single episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property of another is less than $400.00. 
(Prior code,  7.14.020; Ord. No. 711,  3, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-140. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    All property defaced by graffiti which is visible to the public view is declared to be a public nuisance and, in the interest of the public safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City, shall be abated as set forth in this Division. 
(Prior code,  7.14.030; Ord. No. 711,  4, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-150. - Concurrent remedies. 
    The abatement and eradication procedures set forth in this Division for property damaged by graffiti shall not be exclusive and shall not restrict the City from concurrently enforcing any and all other City ordinances or pursuing any other remedy provided by law. 
(Prior code,  7.14.040; Ord. No. 711,  5, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-160. - Notification of nuisance. 
(a)  When it has been determined that property within the City has been defaced by graffiti, the City shall first contact the owner of the property in an attempt to have the nuisance removed or eradicated without any formal action by the City. 
(b)  In the event the owner of the property fails or refuses to comply with the informal request as set forth in Subsection (a) above, the owner of any property defaced by graffiti, which property is located within the City, shall be given written notice to abate the public nuisance on his or her property by removal or eradication of the graffiti within five days after service of the notice. Such notice shall be by personal service to the owner, or by posting the notice on the defaced property, together with written notice mailed to the owner by first-class mail, postage prepaid. 
(c)  The notice to the property owner shall direct the owner to remove, abate or eradicate the graffiti from the property within five days after service of the notice. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The location of the property and a description of the violation. 
(2)  A demand that the owner remove, abate or eradicate the graffiti from the property within five days after service of the notice. 
(3)  A statement that the owner may voluntarily agree to immediate removal or eradication of the graffiti by the City with the costs assessed to the property owner. 
(4)  A statement that the owner's failure or refusal to remove or eradicate the graffiti may result in abatement by the City, in addition to any other available remedies, and the costs of such abatement, together with an additional fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for inspection and incidental costs, may be assessed as a lien against the property. 
(5)  A statement that, if the costs of abatement, together with the fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for inspection and incidental costs, is not paid to the City within 30 days after notice to the property owner of costs owed to the City, the amount owed shall be certified to the County Treasurer and an additional fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule will be assessed for administrative and other incidental costs incurred in certifying said amount to the County Treasurer and a lien placed upon the owner's property for these amounts. 
(6)  A statement that the owner may make written demand to the City Manager for an administrative abatement hearing before the City Manager, provided that the written demand is within five days after service of the notice, and provided that the written demand for a hearing contains the owner's current address and a telephone number where he or she can be reached between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Written demand for a hearing shall be mailed or delivered to the City Manager at 203 South Main Street, Rocky Ford, Colorado 81037. 
(Prior code,  7.14.050; Ord. No. 711,  6, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-170. - Abatement procedure. 
    If the owner of the property defaced by graffiti fails or refuses to remove or eradicate the graffiti as directed within the time permitted and has not made written demand for an administrative abatement hearing, the City Manager may then cause the graffiti to be removed or eradicated by City employees or a private contractor. Such persons are expressly authorized to enter upon such property for that purpose, proceeding with due care and without any unnecessary destruction of property. 
(Prior code,  7.14.060; Ord. No. 711,  7, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-180. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written demand by the property owner for an administrative abatement hearing, the City Manager shall set a hearing, to be held within seven days after receipt of the demand. Notice of the hearing date and location shall be mailed to the owner at the address listed in the written demand. 
(b)  At the administrative abatement hearing, the City Manager shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner of the property or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the violation. The property owner may be represented by legal counsel at such hearing. The City Manager shall, within three days after the hearing, make written findings of fact based upon the evidence offered at the hearing regarding the violation, issue a written order stating whether a violation exists on the property in issue and determine whether the graffiti shall be removed or eradicated. If the City Manager finds that a violation exists and the graffiti shall be removed, the order shall direct the owner of the property to remove or eradicate the graffiti. The written order shall be mailed to the property owner by first-class mail, postage prepaid. 
(c)  If an order issued by the City Manager directing an owner to remove or eradicate graffiti has not been complied with within seven days after its issuance, the City Manager may cause the graffiti to be removed or eradicated by the City employees or private contractor, and all costs associated with such removal or eradication shall be charged to the owner of the property. Persons designated by the City to remove or eradicate the graffiti are expressly authorized to enter upon the property for that purpose, proceeding with due care and without unnecessary destruction of property. 
(d)  Any property owner who fails to comply with such an order may be charged with the costs and expenses incurred in the removal or eradication of the graffiti. Costs and expenses shall include costs of removal, inspection fee, postal charges, attorney's fees to enforce or collect such costs, legal expenses and any other costs or expenses incurred by the City as a result of the enforcement of this Division. 
(e)  The order of the City Manager shall be subject to review by court action, in accordance with Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision of the City Manager. The City shall be considered to be a party to every proceeding before the City Manager. 
(f)  A record of hearings before the City Manager shall be kept, whether by electronic transcription, secretarial minutes or otherwise, and such records shall be kept in the custody of the City Clerk for a period of one year following the date of the hearing and shall be made available for transcription as may be required. The costs of any transcription shall be paid by the person requesting the transcription. 
(Prior code,  7.14.070; Ord. No. 711,  8, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-190. - Costs and charges for removal. 
(a)  The property owner shall be liable for and pay and bear all costs and expenses of the graffiti removal or eradication, including reasonable attorney's fees for costs of collection, which costs and expenses may be collected by the City in an action at law, referenced for collection by the City Attorney on a contingency basis, in his or her discretion, collected in connection with an action to abate a nuisance, or assessed against the property as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The notice required in Section 10-4-150 above shall, in addition to the requirements contained therein, state that, if the graffiti is not removed or eradicated within the time stated in the notice, the cost of such removal or eradication, together with an additional fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for inspection and incidental costs, may be assessed as a lien against the property pursuant to the terms of this Division and collected in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. The notice shall further state that, if the cost of graffiti removal or eradication plus the fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for inspection and incidental costs is not paid to the City within 30 days, the amount owed will be certified to the County Treasurer as set forth in Subsections (d) and (e) below, and an additional fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule will be assessed for administrative and other incidental costs incurred in certifying said amount to the County Treasurer. If the owner of the property is not personally served with a copy of such notice, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such property as shown upon the tax rolls of the County and the address of such owner as shown thereon. 
(c)  If, after the expiration of the period of time provided for the notice, or as extended by the City Manager for good cause, costs and expenses are incurred by or on behalf of the City in the removal or eradication of graffiti or in connection with such removal or eradication, and the costs are not otherwise collected, then the City Manager may thereafter certify to the City Clerk the legal description of the property upon which such work was done, together with the name of the owner thereof as shown by the tax rolls of the County and a statement of the work performed, the date of performance and the costs thereof. 
(d)  Upon receipt of such a statement from the City Manager, the City Clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of the premises as shown by the tax rolls at the address shown upon the tax rolls by certified mail, notifying such owner that the work has been performed pursuant to this Article, stating the date of performance of the work and the nature of the work and demanding payment of the costs thereof (as certified by the City Manager), together with a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith. Such notice shall state that, if said amount is not paid within 30 days of mailing the notice, it shall become an assessment on and a lien against the property of the owner, describing the same, and will be certified as an assessment against such property in the amount set forth in Subsection (b) above, together with an additional fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for administrative and other incidental costs incurred in certifying said amount to the County Treasurer. The above-mentioned assessments will be collected in the same manner as a real estate tax upon the property. 
(e)  If the City Clerk does not receive payment within the period of 30 days following the mailing of such notice, the City Clerk shall certify to the County Treasurer the whole cost of such work, including a charge as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, which is the total amount owing for inspection costs, administrative costs and other incremental costs in connection therewith, for Subsections (b) and (d) above, upon the lots and tracts of land upon which the graffiti was removed or eradicated. The County Treasurer shall collect the assessment in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
(f)  Each such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(Prior code,  7.14.080; Ord. No. 711,  9, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-4-200. - Violation. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating this Division shall be subject to a penalty and fine of up to $1,000.00. The Municipal Court shall have the authority to order the violator to perform useful public service up to and including 100 hours. 
(b)  The City may elect to place all or a part of the fines collected into a separate account to be used for the removal and eradication of graffiti within the City. 
(Prior code,  7.14.090; Ord. No. 711,  10, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Public Peace, Order and Decency 

Sec. 10-5-10. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisances, he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Commits an act in a public place in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another, whereby that other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb or health. 
(2)  Commits an act in a public place in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another, whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  In a public place causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill. 
(4)  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence. 
(5)  Obstructs in a public place, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the Police Department or other lawful authority known to be such. 
(6)  Uses force in resisting arrest by a peace officer or any other authorized official of the City, interferes with such officer in the making of an arrest, or resists or obstructs the performance of duties by the peace officer or any other authorized official of the City when known to be such an official. 
(7)  In a public place addresses abusive language or threats to any police officer, any other authorized official of the City who is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties, or another person, when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence; words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited. 
(8)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons in a public place or within or near a private residence or other private place that he or she has no right to occupy. 
(9)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a peace officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity and the public health and safety are imminently threatened. 
(10)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(11)  Not being a peace officer, discharges a deadly weapon in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting. 
(12)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon, displays any article used or fashioned in a manner to cause a person to reasonably believe that the article is a deadly weapon, or represents verbally or otherwise that he or she is armed with a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(b)  This Section shall not be construed to suppress the rights of lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Prior code,  7.10.020, 7.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-20. - Disrupting lawful assembly. 
    A person commits disrupting lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he or she significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-30. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network or computer system that is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by Paragraph (a)(4) above may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call, electronic mail or other electronic communication was either made or received. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-40. - Loitering. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Loiter with the intent to violate any provision of this Chapter or any criminal provisions of state or federal law. 
(2)  Loiter for the purpose of unlawful gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia. 
(3)  Loiter for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviate sexual intercourse. 
(4)  Loiter with intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren in a school building, on school grounds or within 100 feet of school grounds when persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on the grounds, for one not having any reason or relationship involving custody for, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator, the administrator's representative or a peace officer. 
(5)  Loiter with one or more persons for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing a controlled substance, as defined in Section 10-7-110 of this Chapter. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he or she was exercising his or her rights of lawful assembly as part of a peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 938, 1, 11-27-2018 ) 
Sec. 10-5-50. - Loitering in railroad cars. 
    It is unlawful for any person, not being an employee of a railroad company, to loiter about railroad cars or car yards, to enter any railroad car, depot or freight house, to be found sleeping therein, or to move or open any car door. 
(Prior code,  6.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-60. - False alarms. 
    Any person who intentionally makes or gives a false alarm of fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-70. - Storage of flammable liquids. 
    It is unlawful to store or cause to be stored or parked, except for delivery, any tank vehicle carrying flammable liquids or gases upon any streets, ways or avenues of the City or in any other part of the City, except those areas zoned for such uses. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-80. - Abandoned containers, motor vehicles and appliances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon, discard, leave or permit to remain in any public or private place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded chest, closet, piece of furniture, icebox, refrigerator, motor vehicle or other container having a compartment of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which, when closed, cannot be opened easily from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device. 
(Prior code,  6.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-90. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
    No person shall throw or shoot any stone or other missile at or against any person, animal, building, tree, shrub or public or private property; or at or against any vehicle or equipment designed for the transportation of persons or property. 
(Prior code,  6.08.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-100. - Fraud by check. 
(a)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a certain sum in money, drawn on a bank, payable on demand and signed by the drawer. Check , for the purposes of this Section only, also includes a negotiable order of withdrawal and a share draft. 
    Drawee means the bank upon which a check is drawn or a bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union on which a negotiable order of withdrawal or a share draft is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of himself or herself or of a person authorized to draw the check on himself or herself. 
    Insufficient funds means a drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account with the drawee, or has funds in such an account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance; and a check dishonored for "no account" shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue. A person issues a check when he or she makes, draws, delivers or passes it or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal and share draft mean negotiable or transferable instruments drawn on a negotiable order of withdrawal account or a share draft account, as the case may be, for the purpose of making payments to third persons or otherwise. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal account means an account in a bank, savings and loan association or industrial bank, and share draft account means an account in a credit union, on which payment of interest or dividends may be made on a deposit with respect to which the bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union, as the case may be, may require the depositor to give notice of an intended withdrawal not less than 30 days before the withdrawal is made, even though in practice such notice is not required and the depositor is allowed to make withdrawal by negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft. 
(b)  Any person, knowing he or she has insufficient funds with the drawee who, with intent to defraud, issues a check for a sum less than $500.00 for the payment of services, wages, salary, commissions, labor, rent, money, property or other thing of value, commits fraud by check, which is unlawful. 
(c)  Any person, having acquired rights with respect to a check which is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds, shall have standing to file a complaint under this Section, whether or not he or she is the payee, holder or bearer of the check. 
(d)  Any person who opens a checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing fraudulent checks commits fraud by check. 
(e)  If deferred prosecution is ordered, the court as a condition of supervision may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the supervision, in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
(f)  A bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to a sheriff, deputy sheriff, undersheriff, peace officer, district attorney, assistant district attorney, deputy district attorney or authorized investigator for a district attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this Section. 
(g)  This Section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required culpable mental state. However, for purposes of this Section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
(1)  He or she has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he or she issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He or she has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within 30 days after issue. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-110. - Public indecency. 
(a)  It is unlawful to commit public indecency. Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; 
(3)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person; or 
(4)  An act of masturbation. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell or offer for sale any obscene book, picture or other similar thing, or to exhibit or perform any obscene play or other obscene representation. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, masturbation means the real or simulated touching, rubbing or otherwise stimulating of a person's own genitals or pubic area for the purpose of sexual gratification or arousal of the person, regardless of whether the genitals or pubic area is exposed or covered. 
(Prior code,  7.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-120. - Gambling. 
(a)  No person shall play for money or other valuable thing at any game with cards, dice or billiards, or with any other article, instrument or thing whatsoever which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting upon or winning or losing any money or any other thing of value, nor shall any person bet upon any game others may be playing. 
(b)  No person shall keep a gambling house or, in any building or other place used or occupied by such person or his or her agent, procure or permit any persons to frequent or come together to play for money or other valuable thing at any game; keep or suffer to be kept any table or other apparatus for the purposes of playing at any game or sport for money or any valuable thing; or keep or rent any such place for any such purpose. 
(c)  The Chief of Police may seize or cause to be seized any instrument, device or thing used for the purpose of gaming, or, by owning or using such instrument, device or thing, money or other property or thing of value may be lost or won. All such instruments, devices or things shall be demolished or destroyed as the Mayor shall direct. 
(d)  Every clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machine or device for the reception of money on chance, or upon the action on which money is staked or hazarded, bet, won or lost, is hereby declared to be a gambling device. 
(Prior code,  7.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-5-130. - Panhandling. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Aggressive panhandling means any form of panhandling that includes any of the following activities: 
(1)  Knowingly touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent during the course of panhandling. 
(2)  Using violent, threatening, intimidating, coercive or aggressive gestures or conduct toward a person during the course of panhandling or in response to a refusal by any person to give money. 
(3)  Using fighting words or directing violent or obscene verbal or written language toward any person during the course of panhandling or in response to a refusal by any person to give money. 
(4)  Taking any action that obstructs or blocks a public sidewalk, doorway, entryway or other passage way used by pedestrians in a public place or that obstructs the passage or the travel of any person during the course of panhandling in a manner that requires them to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with any person. 
    Panhandling means any solicitation or request made in person on any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city, in which a person requests a donation of money or any other item of value from another person. 
    Coercive means to compel another person by physical force or threat of physical force to take any action against his or her free will. 
    Intimidating means conduct that puts the fear of bodily harm in another person. 
    Obscene means a blatantly offensive description of a sexual act or solicitation to commit a sexual act, whether actual or simulated. 
    Obstruct means any activity that acts to hinder or slow progress, that makes the accomplishment or a task slower or more difficult or that comes in the way of or impedes any person to any unreasonable extent. 
    Public place means any area or place to which the general public has access and a right to occupy for business, entertainment or any other lawful purpose, including but not limited to, any front entryway, doorway, vestibule or immediate access area to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and shall include public buildings, public grounds, parks, trails, plazas, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots and medians owned or maintained in whole or in part by the City or other governmental entity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive panhandling in any public place within the City. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Section shall apply to or limit any panhandling that is conducted solely by passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without approaching or directing a request to a specific person. 
( Ord. No. 938, 1, 11-27-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 6 - Minors 

Sec. 10-6-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Juvenile means any person under the age of 18 years. 
    Loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, to delay or wander about, and to remain idle in or about a public place or public establishment, whether in or out of a vehicle. 
(Prior code,  7.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-20. - Parent or guardian aiding, abetting. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any minor child to violate, or to aid, abet, approve, encourage, allow, permit, tolerate or consent to the violation by any minor child of, any provision of this Article or any ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-30. - Encouraging delinquency. 
    It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-40. - False statement; false credentials. 
    It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to make false statements, to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, note or other document for any unlawful purpose, or to furnish, present or exhibit such document issued to a person other than the one presenting the same for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including beer, liquor, wine or fermented malt beverages as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-50. - Services of others. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure any article which the person under the age of 21 years is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-60. - Sale of cigarettes and tobacco products. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Cigarettes means premanufactured cigarettes and/or hand-rolled cigarettes. 
    Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Tobacco products means cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cutting and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such a manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly furnishes to a minor, by gift, sale or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $200.00. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this Subsection that the person furnishing the cigarettes or tobacco products was presented with and reasonably relied upon a valid state driver's license or other government-issued form of identification which identified the person receiving the cigarettes or tobacco products as being 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  Any minor who purchases or attempts to purchase any cigarettes or tobacco products, and/or is found to be in possession of any cigarettes or tobacco products, commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $100.00; except that, following a conviction or adjudication for a first offense under this Subsection, the Court in lieu of the fine may sentence the person to participate in a tobacco education program. The Court may allow such person to perform community service and be granted credit against the fine and court costs at the rate of $5.00 for each hour of work performed, for up to 50 percent of the fine and court costs. 
(d)  No retailer shall sell or permit the sale of cigarettes or tobacco products by use of a vending machine or other coin-operated machine; except that cigarettes may be sold at retail through vending machines only in: 
(1)  Factories, businesses, offices or other places not open to the general public; 
(2)  Places to which minors are not permitted access at any time during the day or night; or 
(3)  Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an adult employee of the owner, including but not limited to establishments holding a valid liquor license issued pursuant to Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(e)  Any person who sells or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products shall display a warning sign as specified in this Subsection. Said warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place in the building and on such machine at all times, shall have a minimum height of three inches and a width of six inches, and shall read as follows: 
WARNING: It is illegal for any person under18 years of age to purchase cigarettes and tobacco products and, upon conviction, A $100.00 fine may be imposed. 
(f)  Any violation of Subsection (e) above shall not constitute a violation of any other provision of this Section. 
(Prior code,  7.04.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-70. - Protection of minors from tobacco. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The City Council hereby finds that: 
a.  The City recognizes the dangers associated with youth access to tobacco products; 
b.  Research shows that most adult smokers began using tobacco products before reaching the legal age at which they could purchase tobacco products; 
c.  Regulating the sale of tobacco products is an appropriate proven deterrent to protect the health, safety and welfare of young people in the City; and 
d.  The requirement of retail sellers of tobacco products to comply with the foregoing regulations will not unduly burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell tobacco products to youth and will not burden the revenue received by the City for the cigarette excise tax. 
(2)  It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit the sales of tobacco products to youth; to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those laws that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors; and to reduce the impact of tobacco and nicotine product use by youth in the City. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Retail tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is less than five percent gross sales receipts. For purposes of enforcement of this Section, retail tobacco business includes, but is not limited to, a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale or manufacture of hookah or shisha products and related smoking products, including but not limited to any plant or other organic matter packaged for smoking or held out as a smoking product, or any sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other enterprise engaged in the promotion of hookah or shisha smoking, sometimes referred to as a hookah bar, cafe or lounge. 
    Self-service display means the open display or storage of tobacco products in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
    Tobacco paraphernalia means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing or consumption of tobacco products. 
    Tobacco product means and includes: 
(1)  Any product that contains tobacco or nicotine, or is made or derived from tobacco that is intended or expected to be ingested, smoked, inhaled, placed in oral or nasal cavities or applied to the skin; or 
(2)  Any electronic device that can be used to deliver nicotine or tobacco to the person using the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe. 
    The term tobacco product does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in reducing, treating or eliminating nicotine or tobacco dependence, or for other medical purposes, when such product is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
(c)  Minimum age for persons selling and handling tobacco products. No person in the course of employment who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall sell, stock, retrieve or otherwise handle tobacco products. 
(d)  Positive identification required. No person shall sell or transfer a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 30 years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under the laws of the State to purchase and possess tobacco products. 
(e)  No minors permitted in a retail tobacco business. 
(1)  No person who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall be admitted to or be on the premises of a retail tobacco business unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. The presence of an unaccompanied minor in or on the premises of a retail tobacco business shall result in a violation of this Section by the minor and the owner of the business establishment. 
(2)  The owner of a retail tobacco business shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be provided by the City Clerk's office, which shall read as follows: 
WARNING: It is illegal for any person under 18 years of age to be admitted to or be on the premises of this business, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, and upon conviction, a fine may be imposed. 
(f)  Possession of tobacco paraphernalia by minors prohibited. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by the laws of the State for the purchase of tobacco products shall possess tobacco paraphernalia. 
(g)  Prohibition of sale of tobacco products by self-service display. The sale of tobacco products through the use of a self-service display is prohibited. 
(h)  Penalty for violations. 
(1)  Any retail establishment or adult found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00. 
(2)  Any minor found to be in violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine of up to $100.00. Within the discretion of the Court, this fine may be made payable at a rate of $5.00 per hour for services provided to the City by the offending minor. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-80. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any juvenile to be, remain or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public place, right-of-way, park, playground, school yard or any other public place or any establishment open to the public generally after the hour of 11:00 p.m. or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day within the City. 
(b)  Exceptions. It shall not be a violation of Subsection (a) above under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the juvenile is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such juvenile. 
(2)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control of and is accompanied by a person who is over the age of 18 years and possesses the written consent of such parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of the juvenile. 
(3)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control of and is accompanied by a person who has reached 21 years of age. 
(4)  During the period of time when the juvenile is lawfully employed and for a period of 30 minutes before and after said employment hours when commuting directly to and directly from said employment. 
(5)  When the juvenile is performing or conducting an errand, which errand was directed and requested by the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(6)  When the juvenile is attending, traveling to or returning from such events as movies, school-sponsored activities or sporting events, theater performances or religious services, provided that such attendance at these events was approved by the parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(7)  When the juvenile is on private residential property or a sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which the juvenile resides. 
(c)  Penalty. In the event any person violates the provisions of this Section, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  7.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-6-90. - Curfew; parental responsibility. 
(a)  Permitting violation of curfew. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, legal custodian or other individual having the legal care, custody or control of a juvenile to knowingly permit or allow such juvenile to be, remain upon or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, playground, park, school yard or any other public place or establishment after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day within the City. 
(b)  Exceptions. It shall not be a violation of Subsection (a) above under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the juvenile is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such juvenile. 
(2)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control and is accompanied by a person who is over the age of 18 years and possesses the written consent of such parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of the juvenile. 
(3)  When the juvenile is in the care, custody and control and is accompanied by a person who has reached 21 years of age. 
(4)  During the period of time when the juvenile is lawfully employed and for a period of 30 minutes before and after said employment hours when commuting directly to and directly from said employment. 
(5)  When the juvenile is performing or conducting an errand, which errand was directed and requested by the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(6)  When the juvenile is attending, traveling to or returning from such events as movies, school-sponsored activities or sporting events, theater performances or religious services, provided that such attendance at these events was approved by the parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(7)  When the juvenile is on private residential property or a sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which the juvenile resides. 
(c)  Penalty. In the event any person violates the provisions of this Section, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  7.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs 
Division 1 - Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 10-7-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than 0.5% and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight. 
    Malt liquor includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. Private property shall not include: 
(1)  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to Article 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S.; 
(2)  Any establishment which sells alcoholic beverages or upon which alcoholic beverages are sold; or 
(3)  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
    Public place means any place commonly or usually open to the general public or to which members of the general public may resort, or accessible to members of the general public. By way of illustration, such public places include, but are not limited to, public ways, streets, buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, shopping centers, shopping center malls, places of business usually open to the general public and automobiles or other vehicles in or upon any such places, but shall not include the interior or enclosed yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least 0.5% alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor except malt liquors and vinous liquors shall be construed to be a spirituous liquor. 
    Vinous liquor means wine and fortified wines which contain not less than 0.5% and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-20. - Alcohol-related violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to represent himself or herself to be over the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing within the City any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attempt to purchase, purchase or obtain, either directly or through an intermediary, any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by misrepresentation or any other means. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess or consume, whether actual or constructive, any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(d)  It is unlawful to sell fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors to any person under the age of 21 years; to permit any fermented malt beverages, malt or vinous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under 18 years of age; to permit spirituous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under 21 years of age; or to permit any such person to participate in the sale or dispensing thereof. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any person under 21 years of age any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(f)  It is unlawful in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed upon the premises, for any person to beg or to solicit any patron or customer of or visitor in such premises to purchase any alcoholic beverage for the one begging or soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-30. - Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage person. 
(a)  Any person under 21 years of age who possesses or consumes alcoholic beverages anywhere in the City commits illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (a) above that the alcoholic beverages were possessed or consumed by a person under 21 years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the alcoholic beverages were possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of alcoholic beverages in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained alcoholic beverages within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than 0.5% of alcoholic beverages by weight. 
(c)  The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not constitute a violation of this Section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (a) above shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and possessed or consumed alcoholic beverages anywhere in this State; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of 21 years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with alcoholic beverage intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this State. 
(e)  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (a) above, any bottle, can or other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under 21 years of age, or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give, or permit the possession and consumption of, alcoholic beverages to or by a person under the age of 21 years under the conditions described in Paragraph (b)(1) above. This Subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to Article 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment, to give, provide, make available or sell alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-40. - Sales near schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale or gift any fermented malt beverage or any vinous, spirituous or malt liquors within a distance of 500 feet from any public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college, university or seminary, said distance to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property lines. However, this prohibition shall not affect the rights of any person holding a lawful permit or license to conduct such business within the restricted area hereby established; nor shall this prohibition prevent the renewal or reissuance, upon the expiration thereof, of any license in effect, or affect any such business as set forth in Section 12-47-302, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-50. - Open container. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume by open container any alcoholic beverage, whether such possession is actual or constructive, in or on any of the following: 
(1)  In any public place as defined in Section 10-7-10 of this Chapter; 
(2)  In any automobile; 
(3)  On the grounds or in the facilities of any public or private school, college or university except where authorized by the governing authority of such institution; 
(4)  Upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the State or any political subdivision or agency thereof; or 
(5)  Upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the City. 
(b)  Exceptions. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any place duly licensed by the City for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
(3)  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open alcoholic beverage container in the living quarters of a house coach, house trailer, motor home, as the same is defined in Section 42-1-102(57), C.R.S., or trailer coach as the same is defined in Section 42-1-102(106)(a). 
(4)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(5)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Prior code,  4.02.020; Ord. No. 822,  2, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Drugs 

Sec. 10-7-110. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Controlled substance means a drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which is declared to be a controlled substance under this Article, and also includes marijuana, marijuana concentrate and cocaine. 
    Drug paraphernalia means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment or device which is primarily designed and intended for one or more of the following: 
(1)  To introduce into the human body any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
(2)  To enhance the effect on the human body of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
(3)  To conceal any quantity of a controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; or 
(4)  To test the strength, effectiveness or purity of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law. 
    Marihuana or marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L. , whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, the fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination if these items exist apart from any other item defined as marijuana herein. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-120. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly possesses two ounces or less of marijuana commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(b)  Whenever a person is arrested or detained for a violation of Subsection (a) above, the arresting or detaining officer shall prepare a written notice or summons for such person to appear in court. The written notice or summons shall contain the name and address of such arrested or detained person, the date, time and place where such person shall appear and a place for the signature of such person indicating the person's written promise to appear on the date and at the time and place indicated on the notice or summons. One copy of said notice or summons shall be given to the person arrested or detained, one copy shall be sent to the Municipal Court and such other copies as may be required by the Sheriff's Department shall be sent to the places designated by the Sheriff's Department. The date specified in the notice or summons to appear shall be at least five days after such arrest or detention unless the person arrested or detained demands an earlier hearing. The arrested or detained person, in order to secure release from arrest or detention, shall promise in writing to appear in court by signing the notice or summons prepared by the arresting or detaining officer. 
(c)  Any person who openly and publicly displays, consumes or uses two ounces or less of marijuana commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished, at a minimum, by a fine of not less than $100.00 or, at a maximum, by a fine of not more than $100.00 and, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18-1.3-503, C.R.S., by 15 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-130. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if he or she possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of state law. 
(b)  Any person who commits possession of drug paraphernalia commits an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-140. - Abusing toxic vapors. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the term toxic vapors means the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; Freons, including Freon 11 and Freon 12; hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl ketone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; trichloroethane; or xylene. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such substance for the purposes described in this Section. This Subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away to any other person any substance or product releasing toxic vapors, where the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that such substance will be used for the purpose of inducing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(d)  Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of Subsection (b) or (c) above commits the offense of abusing toxic vapors. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for a first offense; and upon conviction of a second or third offense, by a fine of not more than $500.00 and by not more than six months in jail. 
(e)  In a prosecution for a violation of this Section, evidence that a container lists one or more of the substances described in Subsection (a) above as one of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Marijuana Establishments 

Sec. 10-7-210. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis , whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind that are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana club means a business, occupation or other commercial enterprise that allows members and their guests to consume marijuana or marijuana products on the premises. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, a retail marijuana store or a marijuana club. Marijuana establishment specifically does not include a marijuana testing facility. 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana, manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures containing active THC. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana dispensary means a business or clinic where medical marijuana is dispensed for the purpose of providing medical relief to eligible individuals in accordance with federal, state and City regulations. 
    Non-TCH-bearing cannabis and hemp means cannabis or hemp plants specifically grown to produce fiber and oils and byproducts that do not contain tetrahydrocannibol (THC). 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company or organization, or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer or employee thereof. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
(Ord. No. 897,  2, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-7-220. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the City, a memo dated Nov. 2, 2018, repealed  10-7-220, which pertained to marijuana establishments prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 897,  3, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016. 
Sec. 10-7-230. - Penalty. 
    In addition to any other penalties that may exist under federal, state and local law, any person charged with a violation of this Division, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the standard penalty as proscribed in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be a separate violation, and the violator shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 897,  4, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Weapons 

Sec. 10-8-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Blackjack includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device, and includes projectiles designed for use in such device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Handgun means a pistol, revolver or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged, the length of the barrel of which, not including any revolving, detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds; but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain, which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Stun gun means a device capable of temporarily immobilizing a person by the infliction of an electrical charge. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in its handle. 
    Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is hand-held and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-8-20. - Carrying concealed weapon; forfeiture. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to wear under his or her clothes or concealed about his or her person, or to display in a threatening manner, any dangerous or deadly weapon, including but not limited to any pistol, revolver, metallic knuckles, Bowie knife, dirk, dagger or knife resembling a Bowie knife, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, display, use, possess or carry any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife the blade of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance. Any such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of Subsection (a) above, and shall be subject to forfeiture to the City as provided in Subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Every person convicted of any violation of this Section shall forfeit to the City such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to forbid United States Marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies and any regular, special or ex officio police officer or other law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-8-30. - Disposition of confiscated concealed weapons. 
    It is the duty of every police officer, upon making any arrest and taking such a concealed weapon from the person of the offender, to deliver the weapon to the Municipal Judge, to be held by him or her until the final determination of the prosecution for said offense, and upon the finding of guilt, it shall then be the duty of the Municipal Judge to deliver said weapon forthwith to the Chief of Police, who shall make disposition of the weapon. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-8-40. - Prohibited use of weapons. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly and unlawfully aims a firearm at another person; 
(2)  Recklessly or with criminal negligence discharges a gun, pistol, firearm or weapon; 
(3)  Recklessly or with criminal negligence shoots a bow and arrow; 
(4)  Knowingly sets a loaded gun, trap or device designed to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leaves it unattended by a competent person immediately present; 
(5)  Has in his or her possession a firearm while he or she is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance; 
(6)  Knowingly aims, swings or throws a throwing star or nunchaku at another person, or knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When throwing stars or nunchakus are being transported for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, nonaccessible container. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or residences under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence. In addition, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any type of gun whatsoever, when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments by any peace officer as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of his or her duties. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to any provision of this Article that the act was committed by a peace officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. 
(Prior code,  7.13.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-8-50. - Selling weapons to intoxicated person or minor. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol or other firearm in which any explosive substance can be used to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  Such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the City to such person. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-8-60. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code and imposition of community or useful public service. 
(Prior code,  7.13.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9 - Noise 

Sec. 10-9-10. - Declaration of policy. 
    At certain levels, noise is detrimental to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. This Article is intended to protect, preserve and promote the health, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens through the reduction, prohibition and regulation of noise. It is the intent of this Article to establish and provide for sound levels that will eliminate unnecessary and excessive noise, reduce traffic and community noise, establish noise standards and sound levels that will promote a comfortable enjoyment of life, property and conduct of business, and prevent sound levels which are harmful and detrimental to individuals and the community. 
(Ord. No. 747,  1, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  All technical terminology used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, shall be defined in accordance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Publication S1.1-1960, revised 1971, or successor publications of ANSI or its successor bodies. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Article, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
    Ambient noise level means the sound pressure level of the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources; the A-weighted sound pressure level exceeded 90 percent of the time based on a one-hour period. 
    Business district means any district zoned Commercial in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Construction activities means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereof, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Continuous noise means a steady, fluctuating or impact noise which exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of one hour or more. 
    Cyclically varying noise means steady, fluctuating or impulsive noise which may or may not contain a pure tone, which varies in sound pressure level such that the same level is obtained repetitively at reasonably uniform intervals of time. 
    Decibel means a logarithm and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound and is denoted by the symbol dB(A) . 
    Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually produces audible sound when operated or handled. 
    Disturbance means any sound which annoys, disturbs or perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitiveness; or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or safety of other persons. 
    Dynamic braking device means a device used, primarily on trucks, to convert the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle braking. 
    Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Fluctuating noise means the sound pressure level of a fluctuating noise, which varies more than six dB(A) during the period of observation when measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter and does not equal the previously existing ambient noise level more than once during the period of observation. 
    Impulsive noise means a noise containing excursions usually less than one second of sound pressure level twenty dB(A) over the ambient sound pressure level, using the fast meter characteristic. 
    Industrial district means any district defined as an industrial zone in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Level, ninetieth percentile means the A-weighted sound pressure level that is exceeded 90 percent of the time, or the level that is exceeded for 54 minutes in one hour, denoted L90 . 
    Level, tenth percentile means the A-weighted sound pressure level that is exceeded ten percent of the time or the level that is exceeded six minutes in one hour, denoted L10 . 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle such as, but not limited to, a passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer, propelled or drawn by mechanical power, and includes motorcycles, snowmobiles, mini-bikes, go-carts and any other vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Muffler means any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers or acoustical absorbing materials whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids or gases while causing a reduction in sound emission at one end. To qualify, such an apparatus must cause a reduction in sound pressure level of at least ten dB(A) upon insertion into the system for which it is intended. 
    Noise means any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
    Plainly audible means that the information content of sound is unambiguously transferred to the auditor, such as, but not limited to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of raised or normal voices or comprehension of musical rhythms. 
    Property boundary means an imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure at the ground surface which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person and its vertical extension. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley or public space which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
    Residential district means any district zoned residential as defined in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument or apparatus, including a microphone, an amplifier and an output meter and weighting networks for the measurement of sound pressure. The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated and the instrument is of Type 2 or better, as specified in the American National Standards Institute Publication S1.4-1971 or successor publications. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the root mean square pressure of a sound to the reference pressure, which is 10 x 106 Newtons per meter squared. 
    Sound-amplifying equipment means any machine or device used for the amplification of a human voice, music or any other sound or by which the human voice, music or any other sound is amplified. 
    Stationary noise source means any equipment or facility, fixed or movable, capable of emitting sound beyond the property boundary of the property on which it is used. 
    Steady noise means the sound pressure level of a steady noise remains essentially constant during the period of observation; i.e., it does not vary more than six dB(A) when measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter. 
    Unnecessary noise means any excessive or unusually loud sound or any sound which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or safety of any person or causes damage to property or business. 
    Weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard unit notation is dB(A) . 
(Ord. No. 747,  2, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-30. - Scope of application. 
    This Article shall apply to all property, public or private, and persons located within the City. 
(Ord. No. 747,  3, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-40. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    The making and creating of an excessive or unusually loud noise, or a noise which is unreasonable and objectionable because it is impulsive, continuous, rhythmic, periodic or shrill, as heard and measured in the manner prescribed in Section 10-9-60 below, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 747,  4, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-50. - Amplified sounds prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall create or use amplified sound at any place, public or private, within the City limits, created or produced by any electrical device, including, by way of illustration but not by way of limitation, radios, television sets, record or tape players, musical instruments and public address systems, which can be heard by the average person at a distance of more than 25 feet from the source of the sound. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following are excepted from the provisions of Subsection (a) above: 
(1)  Persons using amplified sound who have a permit to do so granted from the City for use at a particular location, for specified hours, on specified dates or in connection with a specific event or activity. 
(2)  Persons using amplified sound on private real property owned or occupied by them, where the amplified sound cannot be heard by the average person more than 25 feet from the property upon which the source of the amplified sound being created is located. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence. In prosecutions for violations of this Section, it shall be prima facie evidence that amplified sound is being produced in violation of this Section when the sound being produced is audible to the peace officer issuing a summons for violation hereof when the peace officer is the prescribed distance from the source or private property on which it is being produced, or is audible to one or more complainants other than a peace officer when the complainant is the prescribed distance from the private property upon which it is being produced. 
(Ord. No. 747,  5, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-60. - Motor vehicle noise prohibited. 
(a)  Noise. It is unlawful for any person to operate, drive or be in possession of a motor vehicle which is stopped, standing, parked or moving, and to make, create or permit an excessive or unusually loud noise or a noise which endangers public safety or is harmful to any person, which is caused by sound amplification equipment and which can be heard without the use of an electronic measurement device. 
(b)  Peace officer as complainant. The complainant may include, but not be limited to, peace officers acting under color of their authority. 
(c)  Exception. It is an exception to a charge under Subsection (a) above that: 
(1)  The vehicle was an emergency, medical or public safety vehicle operating in its official capacity; or 
(2)  The vehicle's sound amplification equipment was used in compliance with a permit issued pursuant to the permit procedure set forth herein. 
(d)  Muffler. It is unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit the operation of, any vehicle or combination of vehicles within the City which is not equipped with an adequate muffler, as defined in this Article, constantly operated and properly maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise, and no such muffler or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of the type originally installed on the vehicle. 
(e)  Except as set forth in Subsection (f) below, it is unlawful for any semi-tractor vehicle weighing more than 10,000 pounds, and considered or licensed by the State as a commercial tractor unit, to use its engines for purposes of braking by use of dynamic braking of the engine so as to slow the speed of the vehicle within the City. It is unlawful for said trucks above described to use a "jake brake" or "compression brake" or make use of any dynamic braking. It shall be sufficient for prosecution and conviction of a violation of this offense if the jake braking, compression braking or dynamic braking is overheard and if the semi-tractor is observed to be operating in the general proximity of the occurrence of the noise. 
(f)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Subsection (e) above if the semi-tractor or trailer vehicle is in an emergency situation and, in an effort to avoid collision with any other vehicle, stationary object or moving object, Jake brake compression, compression brakes or any dynamic brake is required for purposes of avoiding said collision. Should the Municipal Court determine that dynamic braking, compression braking or Jake braking was used in conjunction with the avoidance of a collision as anticipated in this Section, the defendant shall be exonerated from any liability under Subsection (e) as to the criminal offense anticipated therein. Nothing contained herein shall expand or limit any civil liability, if any should exist. 
(Ord. No. 747,  5, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-70. - Maximum permissible noise levels. 
(a)  Every activity to which this Article is applicable shall be conducted in a manner so that any noise produced is not objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness. Sound levels of noise radiating from a property line at a distance of 25 feet or more therefrom, in excess of the dB(A) established for the time period and zones listed in this Section, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such noise is a public nuisance: 
Zone 7:00 a.m. to next 7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. to next 7:00 a.m. Residential 55 dB(A) 50 dB(A) Commercial 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A) Light Industrial 70 dB(A) 65 dB(A) Industrial 80 dB(A) 75 dB(A)  
(b)  Periodic, impulsive or shrill noises shall be considered a public nuisance when such noises are at a sound level of five dB(A) less than those listed above in Subsection (a) above. 
(c)  This Section is not intended to apply to the operation of aircraft or to other activities which are subject to federal law with respect to noise control. 
(d)  Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise levels specified for industrial zones for the period within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable construction permit issued by a proper authority or, if no time limitation is imposed, for a reasonable period of time for completion of the project. 
(e)  All railroad rights-of-way shall be considered as industrial zones for the purposes of this Section, and the operation of trains shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise levels specified for such zone. 
(Ord. No. 747,  6, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-80. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Provisions of this Article shall not apply to sounds emitted as a result of any of the following: 
(1)  Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church. 
(2)  Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity or imminent danger; provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminating within 15 minutes after being activated shall not be excepted from the provisions of this Article. 
(3)  Any aircraft in flight subject to federal law regarding noise control, or any rail traffic subject to protection as interstate commerce. 
(4)  Any activities of a temporary duration which are permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the City, including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts, firework displays or public address systems. 
(5)  Any entertainment or sporting events sponsored by a tax-supported governmental entity or a nonprofit organization. 
(6)  Any power equipment operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for the purpose of maintenance or improvement of property. 
(7)  Any vehicle operating on a prescribed truck route with a manufacturer's gross weight rating of 10,000 pounds and above. 
(b)  Any construction activities within the City between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., regardless of location, shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise level specified for industrial zoned districts for the periods within which construction is to be completed, pursuant to any applicable building permit or pursuant to any contract with the City, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 747,  6, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-90. - Permit for relief from noise limitation. 
(a)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the City Manager and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and user of the sound-amplifying equipment. 
(2)  The license number of the sound truck which is to be used. 
(3)  The general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(4)  Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes. 
(5)  The dates upon which, and streets over which, the equipment is proposed to be operated. 
(b)  Permit issuance conditions. Any permit granted by the City Manager shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been authorized and shall specify the time that the permit shall be effective. 
(c)  Appeal. The applicant may appeal a decision of the City Manager to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 747,  6, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-9-100. - Penalties. 
    The following penalties may be imposed for violation of this Article: 
(1)  First offense. Upon conviction for a first offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(2)  Second offense. Upon conviction for a second offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense for violating this Article, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00. The minimum fine imposed by this Paragraph shall be mandatory, and the Municipal Court shall not suspend or waive any portion of such minimum fine. 
(Ord. No. 747,  6, 1-12-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 10 - Fireworks 

Sec. 10-10-10. - Legislative declaration. 
    The City Council hereby declares that the purpose of this Article is to protect the lives and property of the citizens of the City from injury and damage resulting from indiscriminate firing and exploding of fireworks and that this Section is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(Prior code,  6.02.010; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall be as defined below: 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic special effects materials and pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition use. Articles pyrotechnic shall also include pyrotechnic devices meeting the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such and are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 pursuant to 49 C.F.R.,  172.101, as amended. 
    City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Rocky Ford or the City Clerk's authorized representative. 
    City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Rocky Ford or the City Manager's authorized representative. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation and includes, but is not limited to, salutes containing more than 130 milligrams of explosive material, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic compositions, and other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for classification as consumer fireworks, as defined in 16 C.F.R.,  1500.1 to 1500.272 and 16 C.F.R.,  1507.1 to 1507.12, and are classified as fireworks UN0333, UN1334 or UN0335 pursuant to 49 C.F.R.,  172.101, as amended, and including fused set pieces containing components that exceed 50 milligrams of salute powder. 
    Fireworks means any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, and that meets the definition of articles pyrotechnic, permissible fireworks or display fireworks. Fireworks does not include: 
(1)  Toy caps, party poppers and items similar to toy caps and party poppers that do not contain more than 16 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition per item and snappers that do not contain more than one milligram of explosive composition per item. 
(2)  Highway flares, railroad fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and other emergency signal devices. 
(3)  Educational rockets and toy propellant device type engines used in such rockets when such rockets are of nonmetallic construction and utilize replaceable engines, or model cartridges containing less than two ounces of propellant and when such engines or model cartridges are designed to be ignited by electrical means. 
(4)  Fireworks which are used in testing or research by a licensed explosives laboratory. 
    Permissible fireworks means the following small fireworks devices designed to produce audible or visual effects by combustion, complying with the requirements of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as set forth in 16 C.F.R.,  1500.1 to 1500.272 and,  1507.1 to 1507.12 and classified as consumer fireworks UN0336 and UN0337 pursuant to 49 C.F.R.,  172.101: 
(1)  Cylindrical fountains, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 75 grams each for a single tube or, when more than one tube is mounted on a common base, a total pyrotechnic composition of no more than 200 grams. 
(2)  Cone fountains, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 50 grams each for a single cone or, when more than one cone is mounted on a common base, a total pyrotechnic composition of no more than 200 grams. 
(3)  Ground spinner, a small device containing not more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition venting out of an orifice usually in the side of the tube, similar in operation to a wheel, but intended to be placed flat on the ground. 
(4)  Illuminating torches and colored fire in any form, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 200 grams each. 
(5)  Dipped sticks and sparklers, the total pyrotechnic composition of which does not exceed 100 grams, or which the composition of any chlorate or perchlorate shall not exceed five grams. 
(6)  Any of the following that do not contain more than 50 milligrams of explosive composition: 
a.  Explosive auto alarms; 
b.  Toy propellant devices; 
c.  Cigarette loads; 
d.  Strike-on-box matches; 
e.  Other trick noisemakers; or 
f.  Snake or glowworm pressed pellets of not more than two grams of pyrotechnic composition and packaged in retail packages of not more than 25 units. 
(7)  Fireworks that are used exclusively for testing or research by a licensed explosives laboratory. 
(8)  Multiple tube devices with: 
a.  Each tube individually attached to a wood or plastic base; 
b.  The tubes separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-half inch; 
c.  The effect limited to a shower of sparks to a height of no more than 15 feet above the ground; 
d.  Only one external fuse that causes all of the tubes to function in sequence; and 
e.  A total pyrotechnic composition of no more than 500 grams. 
Permissible fireworks does not include aerial devices or audible ground devices, including but not limited to firecrackers. 
    Police Chief means the Chief of the Rocky Ford Police Department or his or her authorized representatives. 
    Retail stand means any temporary or permanent structure, stand, building or other permanent or temporary facility used to sell, deliver, transfer, consign or furnish fireworks to another person not for resale. 
    Retailer means a person who is permitted under the provisions of this Section and who sells, delivers, consigns, gives or otherwise furnishes display fireworks or articles pyrotechnic to a person authorized in this Article to discharge fireworks in the City. 
(Prior code,  6.02.020; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-30. - Sale of fireworks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or possess with intent to sell at retail in the City any fireworks until such person has first obtained a permit from the City for sale of fireworks at retail pursuant to the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Only permissible fireworks, as defined in this Article, may be sold by a retailer. 
(Prior code,  6.02.030; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-40. - Possession or discharge of fireworks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess, explode or discharge fireworks except permissible fireworks; however, the City may possess display fireworks for the purpose of an Independence Day display. 
(Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-50. - Application for permit to sell fireworks at retail. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit to sell fireworks at retail shall file an application therefor with the City Clerk, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the names and addresses of the principal officers of the corporation or limited liability company, and the names and addresses of the person who will manage, be responsible for and be in charge of the sale of fireworks at retail. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners and the name and address of the person who will be in charge of, supervise and manage the sale of fireworks at retail. 
(4)  Location where the applicant will sell fireworks at retail. 
(5)  Whether the applicant intends on constructing a temporary stand for the sale of said fireworks at retail. 
(Prior code,  6.02.040; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-60. - Review of permit application. 
    Upon receipt of the application by the City Clerk, and upon approval by the City Manager and payment of the application fee as provided above for each location at which fireworks shall be sold at retail, the City Clerk shall issue a permit for the sale of fireworks at retail, which shall be valid from the date of issuance through July 10 of the same year. Each separate permit issued shall apply and be valid only with respect to the location for which it is issued. In the event the City Manager determines, based upon the information contained on the application and any relevant information with respect to the applicant's or supervisor's prior violations of this Article or Section 12-28-101, et seq., C.R.S., that a permit should not be issued, no permit shall be issued. 
(Prior code,  6.02.050; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-70. - Limit on location and transferability. 
    A fireworks sale permit shall be valid only for the premises or location for which it is issued. Such permit shall not be transferable, assignable or renewable. 
(Prior code,  6.02.060; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-80. - Limit on sale of fireworks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell at retail in the City any fireworks prior to June 26 or after July 5 of any calendar year. 
(Prior code,  6.02.070; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-90. - Temporary stands for sale of fireworks at retail. 
    In the event any person desires to construct, install or maintain a temporary stand or facility for the sale of fireworks at retail and said temporary stand or facility is otherwise in compliance with the zoning provisions of this Code, it is unlawful for any person to construct, operate, utilize, install or maintain said temporary stand prior to June 20 or after July 10 of any calendar year. Further, any temporary stand which is constructed, installed, utilized or maintained for the purpose of sale of fireworks at retail shall be maintained in a safe and orderly manner so as not to interfere with any emergency vehicle of the City. 
(Prior code,  6.02.080; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-100. - Seizure of fireworks. 
    The Police Chief is hereby authorized to and shall seize, take and remove at the expense of the owner or possessor all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, held or used in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code,  6.02.090; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-110. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, other than Section 10-10-40 above, upon conviction, shall be punished by revocation of the permit or license issued to such person if the same has been issued to such person. In addition, such person shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00. Any person violating Section 10-10-40, upon conviction, shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(Prior code,  6.02.100; Ord. No. 743,  1, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 834, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 10-10-120. - Ban on fireworks. 
(a)  When the Fire Chief determines that conditions are such that the use of fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman candles, skyrockets and other pyrotechnic displays within the City limits are hazardous, he or she may ban the use of the same and announce said ban, which shall be in effect until he or she lifts the ban. 
(b)  Each firework, firecracker, torpedo, Roman candle, skyrocket or other pyrotechnic display used shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 874,  1-3, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 883,  1-3, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property 
ARTICLE 1 - Sidewalks 

Sec. 11-1-10. - Repair and maintenance. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any premises or property shall maintain the sidewalks adjoining such premises or property in good repair and in a safe, unobstructed condition, free of snow, weeds and debris. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Snow and ice removal. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any premises or property shall maintain the sidewalks adjoining such premises or property, and shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed or cleared away, snow and ice from sidewalks in all business districts within the City by four business hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain or by the beginning hours of the next business day following such fall, whichever period is shorter, and from all other sidewalks in the City within 24 hours of the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Excavations 

Sec. 11-2-10. - Standards, regulations and specifications. 
    The Public Works Department, in consultation with the City Manager and the Public Works Director, shall develop standards, regulations and specifications governing access, utilization and restoration of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the City, which standards, regulations and specifications shall not constitute a barrier to the use and excavation of City facilities, but shall preserve the integrity of the facilities at the least possible cost to City taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-2-20. - Reporting. 
    The Public Works Director shall report to City Council the particulars of such regulations, specifications and standards as soon as possible, whereupon the same shall be adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Construction Regulations 

Sec. 11-3-10. - Construction by owner. 
    Sidewalks, curbs and gutters may be constructed by the owner of the property abutting upon the same at his or her expense upon any public street or avenue within the corporate limits of the City. All such sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be constructed of the same character, location, grade, material and in the manner provided by this Article. 
(Prior code,  9.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-20. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct a sidewalk, curb or gutter where the grades have been established shall first procure from the City Clerk a permit therefor, which shall have an accurate description of his or her lot, the size of the sidewalk, curb or gutter and the character of the material to be used in the construction thereof, which shall conform to the provisions of this Article. The permit shall state the date when construction will commence and the time within which the work must be completed. A duplicate copy thereof shall be retained by the City Clerk as part of the records of the City and for the use of the City Manager and the Street Supervisor in superintending the laying of said work. Before construction work is commenced, the City Manager shall endorse on both copies of said permit that he or she has properly located and staked the same, together with any special requirements concerning the construction thereof. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued unless grades have been established in the locality. Where proceedings are had to lay sidewalks, curbs or gutters under the provisions of this Article or under any special law of the State, where the entire work in a district is let by the City as one contract, it shall not be necessary for the property owner to procure a permit. 
(Prior code,  9.02.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Grades. 
(a)  All sidewalks, curbs and gutters constructed under the provisions of this Article shall conform to the grades heretofore established, or which may hereafter be established by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. Said grades shall be established as near as may be so as to produce a uniform slope from grade point to grade point and to secure a uniformity of grade as near as may be through the City, due consideration being given to the necessity of proper drainage. 
(b)  All such sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed under the supervision of the City Manager at the location, with the material and in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the detailed specifications prepared by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  9.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-40. - Business district. 
    The following provisions shall apply to that portion of the City designated as the "business district," which district shall include Front Street and Railroad Avenue, Main Street from Sycamore Avenue from Ninth Street to Tenth Street: 
(1)  The sidewalks shall be 14 feet in width from the lot line to the curb, except that, on Walnut and Elm Avenues, the sidewalk shall be 12 feet, and on Front Street and on Railroad Avenue, the sidewalk shall be ten feet in width from the lot line to the curb. The sidewalks shall have a uniform slope of three-sixteenths inch per foot from the lot line to the curb. However, at street or alley intersections or where necessary to secure proper drainage, such different slope may be specified by the City Engineer as necessary to produce a more uniform grade for curb and gutter or to secure the necessary drainage. 
(2)  The curb shall be six inches in thickness at the top, flush with and directly adjoining the outer edge of the sidewalk. The other dimensions shall conform to those hereinafter set forth. 
(3)  The gutter shall be four feet in width and laid with a downward slope or curve toward the curb of approximately one inch per foot. 
(Prior code,  9.02.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-50. - Residence district. 
    The following provisions shall apply to the "residence district," which district shall include all that portion of the City outside of the business district set forth in Section 11-3-40 above. 
(1)  The sidewalks shall be four and one-half feet in width, laid 12 inches from the lot line. They shall be laid to grade so that, if the entire surface from lot line to curb were covered, it would conform to the requirements for a sidewalk in the business district. 
(2)  The curbing shall be of the same construction and dimensions as required for the business district and shall be 14 feet from the lot line. The gutter shall be four feet in width and otherwise constructed the same as for the business district. 
(Prior code,  9.02.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-60. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  All sidewalks shall be constructed by excavating to a proper depth below the top surface of the intended walk. The trench shall be thoroughly wetted and made compact by ramming until the surface is unyielding, smooth and parallel with and four and one-fourth inches below the finished surface of the intended walk; provided that, in any place where the natural soil so treated will not produce a suitable foundation, the City Engineer may require the construction of a foundation of cinders or sand and gravel, which shall be wetted and thoroughly compacted until its surface is smooth, unyielding and parallel with and four and one-half inches below the surface of the intended sidewalk, along the edge, then one and one-half inches thick, firmly held in place by stakes, thus making a form for the concrete to follow. On the foundation thus prepared and within the form, cement concrete shall be placed and thoroughly compacted by ramming with an iron, tamping to a thickness of three and three-fourths inches, so that the surface of the concrete shall be smooth, free from loose particles, parallel and one-half inch from the finished surface of the walk. 
(b)  The concrete mixtures shall be composed of one part cement, two parts sand and four parts of screened gravel or crushed stone ranging from one-fourth inch to one inch in diameter, thoroughly mixed together until it appears of the same consistency, and to be mixed dry before wetting. Not more than one barrel of cement shall be used in one mixture with the above proportion of sand and gravel. The cement used shall be of the best quality of Portland cement, and the sand shall be clean, sharp and coarse, and free from earth, loam or other foreign matters. The excavation shall be made with a shovel, and in no case shall a plow be used. 
(c)  The wearing surface shall be one-half inch in thickness and shall be composed of one part of cement and two parts of clean sharp sand; sand and cement shall be of the quality above specified. The cement and sand shall be thoroughly mixed while in its dry state then moistened sufficiently to be worked into a homogeneous mass, and the resultant mass shall then be evenly spread on the concrete course while said course is still soft so that both courses will fully unite. The spreading shall be done with a trowel and straightedge. A dust of cement shall then be carefully and evenly sifted on the wet surface and floated down to a uniform surface. The thickness of this wearing surface shall be not less than one-half inch in thickness when finished, and the total depth of cement and concrete shall not be less than four and one-fourth inches above the foundation. All work involving the use of cement shall be done rapidly and, on completion, shall be protected from injury and from heat, cold and weather until hard set. All such work shall be constructed so as to leave an open joint between sections, said joint to extend entirely through the concrete. Joints shall not be more than six feet apart. 
(Prior code,  9.02.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-70. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  The requirements for laying a cement gutter shall be in all particulars the same as for sidewalks as specified above, except that the foundation shall be five inches below the finished surface, the concrete shall be four inches in thickness and the surface not less than one inch in thickness. Said gutter shall closely adhere to and become a part of the curb, so that the curb and gutter together shall make a channel for water. 
(b)  Cement curbs shall be six inches in thickness at the top, which shall conform to the established grade for curbs. The bottom shall be seven inches in thickness and not less than five inches below the gutter line. The concrete shall be prepared in the same manner and of the same materials and the top and street side shall be surfaced as required for sidewalks. In case one piece of the curb and gutter is a six-foot length, spacing shall be the same as for sidewalks. 
(c)  Additional protection to the street side of the curb, such as steel imbedded plates or other reinforcement where necessary, may be required by the City Engineer in the detail specifications. 
(d)  At street and alley intersections, crosswalks and other places where extraordinary conditions prevail, such changes in the general specifications shall be made as the City Engineer, in his or her detail specifications as the exigencies of the case may require, to secure the most satisfactory results. All such detail specifications shall be approved by the City Council before work is begun thereunder. 
(e)  All curbs located at intersections within the City installed, replaced or substantially repaired subsequent to February 5, 2002, shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the regulations adopted thereunder, and shall be so designed as to provide for the safe and convenient movement of disabled persons, including those in wheelchairs. 
(Prior code,  9.02.070; Ord. No. 777,  1, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-80. - Petition by property owners for improvements. 
    Whenever the owners of two-thirds of the frontage of the lots or lands adjacent to or abutting upon any streets or alleys or portion thereof, designated a "district," petition the City Council in writing to require sidewalks, curbs or gutters, or any one or more of them, to be constructed as located and approved under the provisions of this Article, it shall be the duty of the City Council to take such proceedings in relation thereto as are provided by law, said improvements to be made as near as shall be possible according to the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code,  9.02.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-90. - Order of improvements by City Council. 
(a)  Whenever the City Council deems it necessary that any portion of a sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or reconstructed because it is not conformable to the provisions of this Article, the City Council may, upon its own motion, order that said sidewalk, curb, gutter, or any one or more of them, be constructed or reconstructed, as the case may be. Said order may be by resolution or by ordinance duly passed in relation thereto. Said order shall describe the place where said sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed; that, in the opinion of the City Council, said improvement is necessary; and further that, if the same is not done by the property owner within 30 days from the date of said resolution or publication of said ordinance, the City will construct or reconstruct the same or cause said work to be done and charge the cost thereof against the adjacent property and the owner thereof, and certify and collect the same as provided by law. 
(b)  In case the order is by ordinance, the publication thereof shall be notice to all persons affected thereby of the contents and requirements thereof as to making such improvements. If the order is by resolution, notice of the same shall be served upon the owner of the property to be assessed by delivering a copy of said resolution in person or by mailing the same to said owner. 
(Prior code,  9.02.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-100. - Special assessment of costs. 
    If any person fails or refuses to construct any sidewalk, curb or gutter in front of his or her premises when so ordered and within the time so provided, the City Council shall proceed to construct the same by contract, which contract shall include all portions of said improvement not constructed by the owner of the property adjacent thereto described in said ordinance or resolution. When completed, the entire cost shall be ascertained and assessed proportionately against the adjacent lot or land and the owner thereof; and thereupon, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to extend said assessment in a book to be kept for that purpose. If the same is not paid by the owner within 30 days, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify said assessment to the County Treasurer, who shall extend the same upon the tax roll and collect the assessment in the same way as other taxes against said property, provided that the cost of constructing said improvements across any intersecting streets or avenues or alleys shall be paid by the City. 
(Prior code,  9.02.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-110. - City Manager's estimate required. 
    Whenever the City Council, by resolution or by ordinance, has directed the construction or reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter, the City Clerk shall at once notify the Supervisor of Streets and the City Manager of such action. The City Manager shall at once prepare or cause to be prepared plans and specifications for said sidewalk, curb or gutter, or any one or more of them as the order directs, and shall deliver the same within 20 days to the City Clerk, who shall retain the same on file in his or her office and permit any person interested in the proposed improvement to see and examine the same. The plans and specifications shall include all detailed specifications for the proper construction of the improvement, a map of the district in which the improvement is to be made, an estimate of the cost and a schedule showing the approximate amount to be assessed upon the several lots or parcels of property within the district. 
(Prior code,  9.02.110; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-120. - Advertisement of improvements. 
    As soon as the plans and specifications have been approved by the City Council, the City Clerk shall at once prepare and cause to be inserted in a newspaper of general circulation in the City an advertisement calling for sealed bids for the proposed improvement. Said advertisement shall set forth the nature and extent of the proposed improvement; that plans and specifications therefor are on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be seen and examined by any interested person; the time during which bids will be received for the work, which time shall not be less than ten days from the date of the first publication of said advertisement; and the time and place where such bids will be opened by the City Council. In all advertisements, the right to reject any and all bids shall be reserved. The advertisement shall be notice to all owners of property to be assessed of the time and place of opening bids. 
(Prior code,  9.02.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-3-130. - Contract requirements. 
    At the time and place set forth in the advertisement, the bids received shall be opened by the City Council and the contract for the work let to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder, if such there be, in the manner and form as required by the laws of the State; provided, however, that no contract shall be let for a greater sum than the estimated cost of the City Engineer. If no bid received is acceptable to the City Council, the City may order advertisements for new bids or it may proceed to construct the work by day labor, under the direction of the City Engineer and the Supervisor of Streets, and cause to be drawn the necessary warrants to pay for said labor and for the purchase of necessary material as provided by law. 
(Prior code,  9.02.130; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Other Regulations 

Sec. 11-4-10. - Flooding of streets and alleys prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person using or having the control of water to willfully or negligently suffer or permit it to leave his or her premises and flow in and upon a public street or alley in the corporate limits of the City. This Section shall apply to all persons using water outside of the corporate limits of the City, as well as those inside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  9.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-20. - Use of barbed wire limited near streets and sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful to erect, keep or maintain any barbed wire fence or barbed wire within three feet of the margin of any street open for use or within four feet of any sidewalk laid along any street within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  9.04.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-30. - Obstruction and littering of streets and alleys prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit in any street or alley within the City tin cans, broken crockery, ashes, posts, poles, lumber, wire, wagons, vehicles or machinery or any other thing or substance that will interfere with the free passage of vehicles and equipment through or over the same. It is also unlawful to allow trees, bushes and/or weeds to grow in such a manner as to interfere with free passage of vehicles and equipment. All trees and bushes shall be cut back to the fence property line, weeds removed and trees trimmed so there is 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
(Prior code,  9.04.030; Ord. No. 764,  1, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-40. - Authority of City to remove obstruction. 
    The Mayor, any Council Member or the City Manager is hereby authorized to order any article or thing which may encumber or obstruct any street, alley or other public place to be removed; and, if such article or thing is not removed within one day after notice to the owner of the article, or his or her agent, to remove the same or to cause the same to be removed to some suitable place. The owner of any article or thing so removed shall be fined, in addition to the sums named, the amount of the expenses of such removal, which expenses shall also be recoverable in the same manner as expenses for the removal of nuisances, as set forth in Chapter 7 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  9.04.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-50. - Limitations for obstructive building materials. 
    The City Council shall not grant permission to place or to keep any building materials in any street or alley for a longer period than four months. Such permission shall not authorize the obstruction of more than one-third of the roadway and one-half of the sidewalk except in cases of urgent necessity and for short periods. Such permission shall be deemed void when ever the person to whom the same is granted extends the obstruction beyond the limits prescribed herein. 
(Prior code,  9.04.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-60. - Placing building in streets and alleys prohibited. 
    Every person who erects or places any building in whole or in part upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds within the City shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  9.04.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-70. - Notice of removal of obstruction. 
    The owner of any building, fence or other obstruction now standing or which may hereafter be erected or placed upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground within the City limits shall remove the same within 30 days after he or she is requested to do so by a notice in writing signed by the Mayor or City Manager. 
(Prior code,  9.04.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-4-80. - Violation of notice to remove obstruction. 
    Whenever the owner of any building, fence or other obstruction standing or encroaching upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground in this City refuses or neglects to remove the same after notice as provided in Section 11-4-70 above, the cause shall be deemed a nuisance and it shall be lawful for the Mayor to cause the same to be taken down at his or her discretion. The expense thereof shall be recoverable from the owner in an action of debt or by assessment on the premises in the manner provided for other municipal charges and assessments, and every person who opposes or resists the execution of the order of the Mayor made in pursuance hereof shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  9.04.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Park Regulations 

Sec. 11-5-10. - Regulation of hours. 
    All municipal parks, including but not limited to Library Park, Railroad Park and Play Park, shall be open to the public for use by the public each calendar year during the daylight hours only, subject to the following exceptions, which shall permit additional use to be made of the particular named parks: 
(1)  Library Park may be used during the nighttime hours for the express purpose of going to and from the library. 
(2)  The facilities of Play Park may be used after the daylight hours and until 11:00 p.m. only in such areas where proper lighting facilities have been provided, and then only so long as such lighting facilities are in operation. The picnic facilities shall be available for use until 11:00 p.m., so long as the lighting facilities are in operation. 
(3)  No restriction shall be made with regard to Play Park for use by the City in the conducting of the Rocky Ford Golf Club and the use of the golfing facilities by club members and their guests. However, when the golf club facilities have been closed by the duly authorized representatives of the Rocky Ford Golf Club, then these facilities shall be closed to use by the public at all times, including the daylight hours. 
(4)  The City Manager is authorized to order the temporary closure of any public park, or sections thereof, to use by the general public, with or without advanced notice, when it has been determined that: 
a.  The closure is necessary to protect members of the public from possible injury due to actual or anticipated circumstances or conditions; or 
b.  The closure is necessary to protect the recreational or other facilities within a public park from damage or destruction due to actual or anticipated circumstances or conditions; or 
c.  The closure is necessary to facilitate maintenance or repairs; or 
d.  The closure is warranted because the public park or facilities within a public park have been reserved for use by authorized persons, teams or organized groups for athletic events, practices, contests, tournaments or other special events authorized by the City Manager pursuant to contract, agreement or park use permit. 
(Prior code,  9.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 935,  1, 5-22-2018 ) 
Sec. 11-5-20. - Conduct. 
    In no event, during the period of time for authorized use, shall anyone commit injury to public property, conduct himself or herself in a disorderly fashion or disturbing manner or carry on any type of anti-social conduct which should be barred from any public place. 
(Prior code,  9.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-5-30. - Traffic. 
    All traffic on park property shall be limited to a maximum speed of 15 miles per hour; otherwise, all of the provisions of Chapter 8 of this Code shall be applicable in dealing with traffic. 
(Prior code,  9.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-5-40. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found entering into or upon the park facilities above described other than at the time permitted by this Article shall be deemed guilty of a breach of the peace. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of committing injury to public property in violation of the terms of this Article, if over the age of 18 years, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00. 
(c)  All parents of minors under the age of 18 years, which minors have been found committing injury to public property in the park systems described by this Article, shall be individually and collectively liable in an amount not to exceed $300.00 for such injury committed, and the City shall have full authority to commence a civil action at law against said parents for the recovery of all damages resulting from injury to the public property and disorderly conduct by said minors, plus all court costs and reasonable attorney fees. Such action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of record of competent jurisdiction within the State. 
(Prior code,  9.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Street Numbering 

Sec. 11-6-10. - City streets to be mapped. 
    The City Manager shall cause to be prepared, from time to time, maps of the streets of the City, showing the numbers of all houses and in all cases where the numbers of all houses shall hereafter be changed. The same shall be renumbered in the manner provided by this Article. 
(Prior code,  9.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-6-20. - Assignment of street number. 
    The City Manager shall assign each house its proper number and, upon application, shall deliver to the owner or occupant thereof a certificate designating said number at a cost to such owner or occupant, not exceeding a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each number. 
(Prior code,  9.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-6-30. - Provisions for numbering. 
    The buildings fronting on all streets shall be numbered by plain, distinct figures, not less than three inches in length, placed upon a conspicuous portion of the front of such buildings. The numbers shall be as follows: 
(1)  Commencing at the center of the BNSF Railway Company right-of-way as now located on all streets running in a northerly and southerly direction therefrom, the first number shall be 100, and so commencing they shall be numbered consecutively until the terminus of the railway right-of-way. The first numbering of the block on each side of said right-of-way shall commence with the number 200 and be consecutively carried forward to the end of the block. The first number of the second block shall commence with the number 300 and so consecutively carried forward until the terminus of the block. All other blocks extending north or south shall be so numbered, commencing with consecutive hundreds for each additional block to the limits of the City, as the same now is or may hereafter be constituted and laid out. 
(2)  The even numbers shall be on the east side and the odd numbers on the west side on all streets running in a northerly or southerly direction. 
(3)  Commencing at First Street, on all streets running in an easterly direction, the first number shall be 100 for the first block, as heretofore designated, and consecutive hundreds for each additional block to the limit of the City, as the same now is or may hereafter be constituted or laid out; except for the blocks lying between Ninth and Tenth Streets, the following number shall be given: 
a.  Commencing at Ninth Street, in all blocks lying between Ninth Street and Main Street, the first number shall be 900 and be consecutively carried forward to the end of the block. 
b.  Commencing at Main Street, in all blocks lying between Main Street and Tenth Street, the first number shall be 951 and be consecutively carried forward to the end of the block. 
c.  On all streets running in an easterly or westerly direction, the even numbers shall be on the south side and the odd numbers on the north side thereof. 
(Prior code,  9.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 11-6-40. - Frontage allowed to each number. 
(a)  The frontage allowed to each number on all streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be the width of the lot to which the number is given. 
(b)  On all streets running in an easterly or westerly direction, 20 feet shall be given to each number. In dividing any lot into Sections of 20 feet for the purpose of numbering, the fractional parts of 20 feet shall in all cases come next to the alley. 
(c)  Where a residence, place of business or other building stands partly on one space and partly on another, the number given shall be the lowest given to either space by this Section. Where there are two residences or places of business on one numbering space, the one nearest the side where the numbering begins shall take the proper number for the space on which the same is located and the one adjoining on the same shall add one-half to the number. 
(d)  All streets running in a northerly or southerly direction from the center of the BNSF Railway Company right-of-way, as herein mentioned, shall have the word "North" prefixed to their names, and all streets running in a southerly direction from said line shall have the word "South" prefixed to their names. 
(Prior code,  9.10.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 13 - Municipal Utilities 
ARTICLE 1 - Utility Accounts 

Sec. 13-1-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish a utilities deposit fee and utilities late payment fee. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.010, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-20. - Deposit payment. 
(a)  Each person establishing a utilities account with the City for a property owned by the person shall make a utilities deposit with the City in the amount set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each utilities account established. 
(b)  Each person establishing a utilities account with the City for a property not owned by the person shall make a utilities deposit with the City in the amount set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each utilities account established. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.020, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 865,  1, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-30. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Customer means the person or entity for whom the utilities deposit was made. 
    Number of utilities accounts shall equal the number of water taps that exist on the premises for which utility service is being requested. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.030, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-40. - Water rental due date. 
    Water rentals shall be due and payable monthly at the City Utilities Office on the twentieth day of each month, without notice. All connections on which water rentals are not paid on the twentieth day of the month shall be shut off. Water shall not be turned on again through said connections, except upon the payment of all unpaid water rents, late fees, disconnect fees, reconnect fees and a new or additional deposit. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.030, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-50. - Deposit period. 
(a)  Property owned by customer. Where the customer owns the property being served, the customer may request the return of the deposit after making 12 consecutive utility bill payments in full on or before the due date. Where the deposit was not previously returned, the City shall return the deposit upon payment of the customer's final bill. 
(b)  Property not owned by customer. Where the customer does not own the property being served, the City shall return the deposit only upon payment of the customer's final bill. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.040, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 865,  2, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-60. - Deposit application and forfeiture. 
    Where the City cuts off service to a utilities account for nonpayment of any City-provided utility and the customer has not brought the utilities account current or made payment arrangements satisfactory to the City within 15 days of the cutoff date, the City shall apply the deposit to the utilities account. The customer shall not be entitled to a refund of any amount of a deposit applied to a utilities account pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.050, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-70. - New deposit required. 
    Where the City has applied a deposit as provided in this Article, the customer shall make a new deposit prior to reconnection. The new deposit shall be the greater of the deposit set forth in the City's Fee Schedule required of that class of customer or the sum of the last three months of utilities billings, excluding any extended payment billing. In computing the new deposit, the customer shall be given credit for any remaining deposit amount after application of the deposit pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.060, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 865,  3, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-80. - Late fee. 
    A late fee shall be applied to each utilities account when the customer fails to pay the full amount due on or before the due date. The term full amount due shall not include arrearages not due in a particular billing period as a result of an arrearage payment plan previously approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.070, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-90. - Disconnect fees and reconnect fees. 
    The City shall charge a disconnect fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule when any water connection is shut off pursuant to this Article. The customer shall pay a reconnect fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule prior to the City water service being reconnected once shut off pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.075, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-100. - Appeal. 
(a)  A customer may appeal a late fee, disconnect or reconnect fee or new or additional deposit to the City Council after attempting to resolve the issue with the City Manager. The City Council shall apply the following criteria in determining the appeal: 
(1)  Whether the rentals and any fees due were paid timely; 
(2)  Any extraordinary circumstance that prevent timely payment, including but not limited to hospitalization or an unexpected and sudden emergency trip out of the area; and 
(3)  Whether a reasonable person could have paid the rentals and fees under the circumstances. 
(b)  Inability to pay due to lack of funds shall not constitute an extraordinary circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.080, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-110. - Waiver. 
    A late fee may be waived by the City Manager upon application by the customer and a showing by the customer of the following criteria: unusual, nonrecurring mitigating circumstances and a prior timely utilities account payment history. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.085, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-1-120. - Deposit, fee and rental changes. 
    The City Council may by resolution reduce or increase the utilities deposit, late fees, disconnect fees, reconnect fees and commodity rentals. 
(Ord. No. 793,  10.11.090, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Water Regulations 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 13-2-10. - Purposes of use of water. 
    In an application to the City for water use, the applicant must state fully and truly all purposes for which the water supplied to him or her will be used and, at any time when called upon, must frankly and without concealment answer all questions put to him or her regarding the consumption of water. In said application, the applicant shall agree that he or she will not in any case, except by permission of the City Manager, permit water to be used for any purpose on premises adjoining the premises for which said taps are made and said service pipes installed and that he or she will comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, now or hereafter to be established, concerning the water system and the use of water therefrom. The applicant shall further agree that he or she will be responsible for the rentals due the City for all water drawn through said tap so long as he or she retains the title to said premises. 
(Prior code,  10.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-20. - Pollution of, diversion of and interference with public water prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person in any manner to pollute the water in any reservoir, pipe line, lateral ditch or other conveyance or receptacle used by the City in storing, conveying and distributing water to the inhabitants thereof, or to cast into said reservoirs, pipe lines, lateral ditches or other conveyances or receptacles any garbage, offal or any other substance or thing. 
(b)  No person other than the proper officials and employees of the City shall: 
(1)  Dig, cut or break down in any manner any embankment, dike or cutting connected with any reservoir or lateral ditch used by the City; 
(2)  In any way injure or interfere with any head gate, flume, waste gate or division box in any of said lateral ditches or reservoirs; 
(3)  In any manner whatsoever interfere with the flow of water in said lateral ditches or the pipe lines leading from said reservoir or used in distributing City water; and 
(4)  Divert from any reservoir, pipe line, lateral ditch or other conveyance or receptacle used by the City in storing, conveying or distributing water, except as provided in this Article. 
(Prior code,  10.04.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-30. - Exclusive tapping rights of City. 
    The City hereby reserves the exclusive right to tap all mains and place service pipes to the line of curbing and to do all excavating in any street or alley required to be done in connection herewith. 
(Prior code,  10.04.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-40. - Property owner required to make application for water service. 
    Whenever the owner of any premises within the City desires to obtain water for his or her premises from the water systems of the City, the owner or his or her agent shall make and file with the City Clerk an application in writing, accompanied by a sufficient cash deposit, to pay all expenses and costs of making said tap, installing the meter and putting in service pipe to the curb. 
(Prior code,  10.04.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-50. - Water supplied to property owners. 
    Water shall be supplied to property owners only, and the rates, charges and rentals for the use of said water, as fixed, determined and assessed by the City Council, shall be payable by the owner and/or occupant of the premises or property to which said water is supplied. All such rates, charges and rentals shall become and remain a lien upon the property and premises to which said water is supplied from the date of the maturity thereof until the same is fully satisfied and discharged, and said lien may be enforced as provided below. All accounts and records shall be kept in the name of the owner and/or occupant of the property or premises to which water is furnished, and all notices shall be given to the owner and/or occupant or his or her agents or personal representatives. 
(Prior code,  10.04.050; Ord. No. 801,  2, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-60. - City Manager to record taps. 
    Whenever the City Manager makes a new tap or changes the connections now existing, he or she shall at once make a complete record in his or her office upon the map of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 801,  3, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-70. - Disconnection and reconnection. 
    In the event the water rents, late charges or assessments are not timely paid pursuant to this Article, the water service to the premises shall be disconnected and shall remain disconnected until all rents, late charges, assessments and disconnection and reconnection fees are paid in full. If an occupant moves to another premises that receives water from the City and has failed to pay all rents, late charges, assessments and disconnection and reconnection fees incurred at the occupant's previous premises, the water service to the occupant's new premises shall not be connected and the water service to the occupant's previous premises may be reconnected. When an occupant fails to pay the final rents, late charges, assessments and disconnection and reconnection fees for his or her previous premises at the end of the first billing cycle for the occupant's new premises, the water services shall be turned off until all rents, late charges, assessments and disconnection and reconnection fees are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 801,  4, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-80. - Liens. 
    If water rentals, charges, assessments and fees have not otherwise been paid by the property owner, user, occupant or former occupant and remain unpaid, they shall become a lien upon the property to which the service was rendered as indicated by the County tax rolls. 
(Ord. No. 801,  5, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-90. - Notice of costs and charges; hearing. 
(a)  A notice of the costs and charges shall be sent to the property owner, as shown by the County tax rolls, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on said tax rolls. The property owner may request a hearing before the City Council to contest the amount of charges and costs. Such request must be made within ten days of the receipt of the notice, and said hearing shall be held not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the request for hearing. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(b)  When no hearing is requested or when, after the hearing, the statement of charges and assessments remains unpaid, the statement of assessment and charges shall be certified to the County Treasurer, along with the name of the property owner and legal description of the property, to be collected by the County Treasurer in the same manner as real estate taxes upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 801,  6, 7, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-100. - Supervision by City Manager. 
    All connections, disconnections or alterations made to service pipes on premises, or at intersections of line between the street and alley, must be under the supervision of the City Manager, acting under advice of the City, as to the kind of pipe and other material to be used and the manner of construction or alteration to be made. When such work is completed, the contractor or such person doing such work shall file with the City Manager a statement to that effect. 
(Prior code,  10.04.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-110. - Uncontrolled cross-connection prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Backflow preventer means a device accepted by the Department of Public Health and Environment for a specified type of cross-connection that prevents backflow and that is approved for installation at a specific location by the Superintendent of Water and Wastewater. 
    Cross-connection , in this Section, means any point in the water distribution system where chemical, biological or radiological contaminants may come into contact with potable water. 
(b)  Cross-connection without installation of an approved backflow preventer for the specific type of cross-connection is prohibited. 
(c)  Each installed backflow preventer shall be tested annually by a certified backflow prevention technician. 
(d)  Backflow preventer testing and maintenance records shall be kept for three years from the date of testing or maintenance. 
(e)  The water supply to any cross-connection without an approved backflow preventer shall be shut off where the cross-connection is not disconnected or a backflow preventer installed, and shall not be reconnected until the cross-connection is disconnected or an approved backflow preventer is installed and the corrective measure is inspected by the Superintendent of Water and Wastewater. 
(f)  The City Manager shall inform the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment of the uncontrolled cross-connection and the corrective action being taken. 
(g)  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 and not more than $300.00, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offenses. 
(Ord. No. 831,  10.04.065, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-120. - Connecting to City water systems. 
(a)  No connection with the water system shall exceed three-fourths inch in diameter, unless permission of the City Manager is obtained prior to installation of the connection. No person using or having control of any service pipes in the City shall permit any person to use water from said service pipe on any adjoining or other premises, except by prior permission of the City Manager. The City shall not be liable for damages by reason of the breaking of any service cock or service pipe. 
(b)  In case of fraudulent misrepresentation on the part of the applicant or use of water not embraced in the applicant's application, or the violation of the City's ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the use of the water and the water systems, the City Manager may at once shut off the water from the premises on which the violation occurred, and the water shall not be supplied again to said premises except upon satisfactory assurance that the wrongful use of water will not thereafter occur and the payment of all damages sustained by the City according to the estimate of the City Manager. 
(c)  Any person feeling aggrieved by the action of the City Manager pursuant to Subsections (a) and (b) above may appeal said matter to the City Council for its decision, in which case the City Manager shall proceed in accordance with the instructions of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 794,  10.04.070, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-130. - Water scarcity. 
    In case of scarcity, the City Manager may limit the hours during which lawns may be irrigated or may prohibit lawn irrigation entirely. Upon service of a notice by the City Manager under this Section limiting or prohibited lawn irrigation, all persons shall strictly comply with the requirements of said notice. Upon failure to do so, the City Manager may at once shut off the water from the premises on which the violation has occurred, and said water shall not be reconnected again except upon the payment of a reconnect fee and satisfactory assurance that further violations will not occur. Upon the City Manager's determination that sufficient water exists to lift the water use restrictions or prohibitions, either temporarily or permanently, the City Manager may cause the restrictions or prohibitions to be lifted, shall report said action to the City Council at its next regular meeting and shall then follow any City Council instructions. 
(Ord. No. 794,  10.04.075, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-140. - Interference with meter or meter box prohibited. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct or interfere with any meter or meter box. 
(Prior code,  10.04.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-150. - Separate meters. 
    More than one residence shall not be supplied through any one meter, and each residence must have a separate meter. 
(Prior code,  10.04.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-160. - Authority to order meter for each occupant. 
    Where there is more than one occupant or any building or premises, the City Council shall have the power to order a separate meter installed for each occupant, and thereafter water shall be supplied to such occupant only through the meter so installed. 
(Prior code,  10.04.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-170. - Meter required. 
    No person shall take or use water through or from the water pipes or water system of the City except through a meter, excepting water through a tank, and shall pay for such water at the established rates, payable on the first day of each and every month. The City Manager may grant permission to any person to permit water to be used on adjoining or other premises for building operations, in which case the person through whose pipe line said water is delivered shall be responsible for the payment of water so used. The City reserves to itself the exclusive right to supply water to water tanks, and the City Manager shall collect for each tank of water the sum set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. The City Council may by resolution charge the water rates herein specified or make new rates for the use of water not above provided for. 
(Prior code,  10.04.110; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-180. - City's exclusive right to conduct water within City limits. 
    The City hereby reserves the sole and exclusive right to conduct water along and across any and all streets, alleys, avenues or parks within the limits of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.04.120; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-190. - Authorized persons to control water flow through City-owned ditches. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to control and regulate the running water in all ditches belonging to the City. The City Manager shall have full charge of said ditches and the water flowing therein and shall distribute said water for the proper use of those entitled thereto for the proper irrigation of the parks of the City and the trees in the City. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to cause water to flow through and along stated streets at regular intervals, as far as practicable, and to give public notice thereof by publishing or posting schedules of the probable time of the flowing of water for irrigation use through the different sections of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.04.130; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-200. - Reserve taps. 
(a)  Water taps may be reserved for a period not to exceed six months upon payment to the City of the tap fee in effect upon the date of reservation. Reservation of water taps may be renewed from time to time for periods of six months each upon payment of the difference between the tap fee in effect upon date of reservation and any additional tap fee rate in effect upon the date of renewal. Failure to renew the reservation as provided in this Subsection shall terminate the reservation, and all monies paid under reservations shall be forfeited to the City. 
(b)  Upon payment to the City of all costs for materials, labor, equipment and pavement replacement, the City shall install and connect the meter. 
(Prior code,  10.04.140; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-210. - Water Conservancy District. 
    The City Council has given consent for the inclusion of the City within the boundaries of the Southeast Colorado Water Conservancy District. 
(Prior code,  10.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Water Rates and Charges 

Sec. 13-2-310. - Water rates and charges. 
    Rates for water taken from or used through the water pipes of the City shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  10.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-320. - Water tap charges. 
(a)  The charge for tapping into or connection with the water system of the City shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(b)  The charge for tapping onto or connection with the water system of the City for any size of service line over two inches shall be subject to contract with the City upon negotiation. If the meter is larger than the service line or the service line is larger than the meter, the tap fee shall be based on the larger size. 
(c)  The City Council may by resolution reduce or increase the rate of charge and classify or reclassify any recipient of such water for rate purposes, and may further establish by such resolution the charge to be assessed against any future industrial or business water recipient. 
(Prior code,  10.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-330. - Waiver of water tap fees. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section are to establish a procedure and method for the City to set, adjust, modify, amend or waive its tap fees for connection to the City water system. 
(b)  Water tap fees. No water tap onto the City water system shall be made except by the City after application and upon such terms and conditions as determined by the City Manager or as provided herein. All tap fees shall be paid when the request for the tap is made. For each tap, the City will furnish the labor and one tap fitting. The cost of excavation, if done by the City, and repair of main lines, if broken by parties other than City personnel, will be charged to the party requesting the connection. All fees and charges paid in accordance with this Section shall be deposited into the Water Fund, together with all other Water Fund revenues derived by the City. Upon motion of the City Council, such funds may be transferred to the General Fund from time to time, as may be determined necessary. The City Council shall be entitled to set, modify, amend, waive or otherwise determine the water charges or fees to be charged for tapping into or connection onto the City water system. Said rates, charges or fees shall be set, modified, amended or waived from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  10.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-340. - Turn-on and turn-off fees. 
(a)  Property owner liable for service charge. From and after the date on which a service pipe is installed for any premises, the owner of said premises shall pay to the City the stated charges for the use of water as fixed by ordinance or resolution and, whether using water or not, shall pay the minimum rate during all the time the premises are occupied. In case of the property owner's neglect or refusal to pay all the rates herein specified, including the minimum charge for the period during which said premises are occupied, but water not used thereon, the rates shall be charged against the property owner and the property, and the water shall not again be turned on to the premises until all such delinquent charges are paid in full. 
(b)  Service charges. Services charges to be charged to each water recipient shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  10.10.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-350. - Service line. 
(a)  Cost of installing water service pipes charged to party requesting such services. The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to charge the cost of installing water service pipes or water service lines connecting the water mains of the City to any water meter to the person requesting the installation of such water service pipes or water service lines. 
(b)  Payment made within 30 days after completion of installation. The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue the distribution of water to any person to whom such charge is made in the event that such cost has not been to the City within 30 days after completion of the installation. Service shall not be restored until the charge has been paid in full. 
(Prior code,  10.10.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-360. - Penalties. 
    It is unlawful, after water service has been discontinued by shutting off the water supply, or in any other manner, for the person to re-connect the same without the consent of the City. Any person violating this Subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for each offense, and an additional penalty of not less than $25.00 for each day said violation continues. 
(Prior code,  10.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 3 - Emergency Restrictions 

Sec. 13-2-410. - Restriction of water use in emergency. 
    At any time when, in the opinion of the City Manager, an emergency exists as to the use of City water and the supply should be conserved for basic human needs, the City Manager may impose such restrictions with approval of the City Council as to the use of City water as he or she may deem necessary and proper for the conservation of such water. 
(Prior code,  10.12.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-420. - Restrictions effective upon posting. 
    Emergency water restrictions shall become effective when said restrictions are posted in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code,  10.12.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-430. - Water use contrary to restrictions prima facie evidence of violation. 
    Any use of water contrary to such emergency restrictions at any outlet shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of such regulations by the person to whom such water is metered. 
(Prior code,  10.12.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-2-440. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this Article or any part thereof shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(b)  Additional penalty. The water of any person charged with a violation of this Division shall be disconnected forthwith by the Superintendent of Water Works pending the ultimate disposition of those charges. Any person whose water has been so disconnected may have the same reconnected by posting with the Municipal Judge a bond running to the City, with a surety to be approved by the Municipal Judge, of not less than $300.00, conditioned upon the appearance of such person for trial thereon and payment of any penalties and charges arising therefrom. 
(Prior code,  10.12.040, 10.12.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Sewer Regulations 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 13-3-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish a procedure and method for the City to set, adjust, modify, amend or waive its tap fees for connection to the City water and sewer system. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-20. - District sanitary sewer system created. 
    The sanitary sewer system of the City consists of the Rocky Ford District Sanitary Sewer District Number One and of all other lateral and house sewers connected with said sewer system. They are designed to carry off all liquid house waste. The main sewer is hereafter referred to as the main sewer . All other sewers in streets and alleys connected therewith are herein called lateral sewers . The sewers on private property leading to lateral sewers are called house sewers . 
(Prior code,  10.14.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-30. - Sewer regulations. 
(a)  Injury or pollution of sewer system prohibited. No person shall break, injure or remove any portion of any manhole, lamp pole, flush tank, catch basin or any part of the sewer system, or throw and deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in any sewer opening receptacle any vegetables, parings, ashes, cinders, rags or any other matter or thing whatsoever, except feces, urine, the necessary water closet paper and liquid house and mill slops. 
(b)  City Manager authorized to prevent discharge of injurious matter into sewer system. The City Manager shall have the power to stop and prevent from discharging into the sewer system any private sewer or drain through which such substances are discharged which are liable to injure the sewers or obstruct the flow of sewage. 
(c)  Regulations for burial of sewage within City limits. It shall be unlawful to deposit or bury in the ground or on any premises within the City limits any night soil, grease trap or cesspool matter. 
(d)  Connections. 
(1)  The charge for tapping onto or connection with the sewer system of the City shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(2)  No sewer taps shall be made except by the City. All taps fees shall be paid when the request for the tap is made. For each tap, the City will furnish the labor and one tap fitting. The cost of excavation, if done by the City, and repair of main lines, if broken by parties other than City personnel, will be charged to the party requesting the connection. All previous tap charges based upon the City's charges are to be in addition to the above-stated tap fees. All fees and charges paid in accordance with this Section shall be deposited into the Sewer Fund, together with all other sewer fund revenues derived by the City. Upon motion of the City Council, such funds may be transferred to the General Fund from time to time, and, upon motion of the City Council, such funds may be determined as necessary. The City Council may by resolution reduce or increase the rate of sewer tap charge or change the classification for tapping and connection of any residential or business establishment. 
(e)  Limitations. No person shall connect or cause to be connected to the City sanitary sewer system or continue to use any connection to the sewer system for drainage other than waste from plumbing fixtures. 
(Prior code,  10.14.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-40. - Reservation of sewer tap. 
(a)  Sewer taps may be reserved for a period of no more than six months upon payment to the City of the tap fee in effect upon the date of reservation. Reservation of sewer taps may be renewed from time to time for periods of six months each upon payment of the difference between the tap fee in effect upon the date of reservation and any additional tap fee rate in effect upon the date of renewal. Failure to renew the reservation as provided in this Section shall terminate the reservation, and all monies paid under reservations shall be forfeited to the City. 
(b)  Upon payment to the City of all costs for materials, labor, equipment and pavement replacement, the City shall install and connect the meter. 
(Prior code,  10.14.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-50. - Grease trap, privy vault and cesspool regulations. 
(a)  Grease traps to be cleaned yearly. All grease traps shall be cleaned at least once a year, or more often if ordered by the City Manager. 
(b)  Cleaning privy vaults and cesspools. All privy vaults and cesspools must be cleaned whenever the contents thereof are within two feet of the top or surface of the ground or cleaned or disinfected at any other time after notice from the City Manager. 
(c)  Discontinuing use of vaults and cesspools. Whenever the use of any vault or cesspool is discontinued, such vault or cesspool must be cleaned to within two feet of the surface of the ground, and the remainder shall be thoroughly disinfected and filled up with earth or other suitable material, done to the satisfaction of the City Manager. 
(d)  License required for professional cleaners of vaults and cesspools. No person shall clean any vault or cesspool for hire, nor carry on the business known as vault cleaner, without first having obtained from the City a license therefor. The person applying for such license shall pay to the City Clerk the sum set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for one year. Said license may be revoked any time for cause. The person shall be equipped with the most modern and approved appliances for such work. 
(e)  Regulations for removal of contents of vaults, grease traps and cesspools. The contents of the privy vaults, grease traps or cesspools within the limits of the City shall not be removed therefrom, nor shall the same be transported through any street, alley or public place within the City, except in the most improved sanitary manner, through or by means of air-tight tanks if soft and mixed with water; and, if solid or dry, in steel-tight covered tanks in such a manner as shall prevent the escape of any noxious or offensive odors and preserve such contents from sight or exposure during transportation. All tools, appliances and vehicles shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and subject to the inspection and under the direction of the City Manager. 
(Prior code,  10.14.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Sewer Rates and Charges 

Sec. 13-3-110. - Charges for sewer and disposal systems. 
(a)  Charges for use of sewer and disposal system. A monthly charge as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for the use of the sewer and sewage disposal systems within the City for each connection shall be paid to the City. 
(b)  Monthly charges. The monthly charge for such use outside the City shall be double the charge itemized above for similar types of users; provided, however, that the City Council may, by resolution, reduce or increase the rate of charge or change the classification of any residential or business establishment as above provided, and may further establish the charge to be assessed against any future industrial or business operation. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-120. - Collection of charges. 
    The sewer charges set out in Section 13-3-110 above shall be added and made a part of the monthly water rental bill and shall be paid in the same manner and subject to the same regulations as provided for the payment of water bills. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-130. - Discontinuance of service; lien. 
    A sewer charge shall constitute a lien upon any lot, land, building or premises served. In the event such charges are not paid when due, the service may be discontinued by the City without further notice by shutting off the sewer supply from such premises, or the City Clerk may certify the charges to the County Treasurer, to be placed by him or her upon the tax list for the current year and collected in the manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent added thereto to defray the cost of collection. All laws of the State for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including all laws for sale of property for taxes and redemption thereof, shall be applicable hereunder. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-140. - Reconnection unlawful. 
    It is unlawful, after sewer service has been discontinued by shutting off the sewer supply or in any other manner, for the person to reconnect the same without the consent of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-150. - Waiver of sewer tap fees. 
    No sewer tap onto the City sewer system shall be made except by the City after application and upon such terms and conditions as determined by the City Manager or as provided herein. All tap fees shall be paid when the request for the tap is made. For each tap, the City will furnish the labor and one tap fitting. The cost of excavation, if done by the City, and repair of main lines, if broken by parties other than City personnel, will be charged to the party requesting the connection. All fees and charges paid in accordance with this Article shall be deposited in the Sewer Fund, together with all other sewer fund revenues derived by the City. Upon motion of the City Council, such funds may be transferred to the General Fund from time to time, as may be determined necessary. The City Council may, by resolution, reduce or increase the rate of sewer tap charge or change the classification for tapping and connection of any residential or business establishment. The City Council shall be entitled to set, modify, amend, waive or otherwise determine the rates, charges or fees to be charged for tapping into or connecting onto the City sewer system. Said rates, charges or fees shall be set, modified, amended or waived from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-160. - Septic tank dumping fees. 
    No person shall dispose of wastes from septic tanks, seepage pits, grease traps or privies into the sewer system of the City until having notified the City Manager of the intention so to do at least two hours prior to such disposal. Upon such notification and prior to such disposal, the person shall pay a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each vehicle disposing of such waste into the sewer system of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-3-170. - Penalties. 
    The violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  10.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Water and Sanitary Sewer Main Extension 

Sec. 13-4-10. - Exclusive right of City to extend existing water lines. 
    In addition to the water mains already laid in connection with the water works of the City, the City is hereby authorized and empowered and hereby reserves the exclusive right to extend said mains upon, through, under and along all streets, alleys and parks within the City when proper, necessary and expedient so to do, for the purpose of supplying water to the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-4-20. - Water and sanitary sewer main extension outside City limits. 
    The City may permit and authorize, pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth below, any person, partnership, firm, corporation or unincorporated association (hereinafter called "applicant") whose property is located outside the municipal boundaries of the City, upon application to and in the discretion of the City Council, to connect to the water supply of the City and to the sanitary and/or storm sewer systems of the City upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The location, size and extension of any water or sewer line and the point of connection shall be determined solely by the City Manager, and his or her judgment shall be final. 
(2)  Any application for connection, extension or use of water shall be accompanied by a connection fee in accordance with the City's Fee Schedule. 
(3)  The cost of all material and installation with appropriate metering devices, as required by the City Manager, shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit plans and specifications to the City Manager 30 days prior to the commencement of any construction for water and/or sewer lines. The applicant must have received approval of the plans and specifications as to all phases of construction, including size, depth, fill, backfill, trenching and other construction consideration, prior to commencement of any work. 
(5)  All inspections shall be accomplished by the City Manager, and he or she shall have the authority to reject any and all work which, in his or her opinion, does not conform to the approved plans and specifications. The City Manager shall have sole authority to refuse to deliver services until he or she has certified that all construction has been approved by him or her. 
(6)  Upon the completion of all construction and upon the commencement of use, all water and/or sewer main lines shall become the property of the City. 
(7)  The applicant shall furnish evidence to the City Manager that rights-of-way or easements for use have been obtained for all necessary installations and that, upon completion, all rights-of-way and/or easements for use shall be conveyed to the City without restriction. The City Manager may refuse to permit installation if free access by means of rights-of-way or nonrestrictive easements has not been obtained by the applicant. 
(Prior code,  10.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-4-30. - Charges for use. 
    Any applicant whose property is located outside the municipal boundaries of the City and who utilizes the City water, sewer or storm sewer system shall be required to pay water and sewer fees at twice the rate assessed customers located within the municipal boundaries. 
(Prior code,  10.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-4-40. - Extension upon annexation. 
    The applicant agrees that, as soon as the property to which the water and/or sewer extension has been made becomes eligible for annexation to the City pursuant to the annexation laws of the State, the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest is deemed to authorize the City to annex such property to the City, at the option of the City, at such time thereafter that the City, in its sole discretion, may determine. 
(Prior code,  10.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-4-50. - Maintenance of lines. 
    From and after the commencement of use by the applicant and as long as the payment of fees as provided for hereinabove are current, it shall be the duty of the City to maintain any and all water and/or sewer main lines. 
(Prior code,  10.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-4-60. - Delinquency of payments. 
    All payments for water and/or sewer use and facilities shall be subject to the same conditions, penalties, collections and regulations, including termination of services, as provided in this Chapter governing those matters for the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code,  10.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Fire Hydrants 

Sec. 13-5-10. - Exclusive use by authorized person. 
    All the fire hydrants constructed in the City for the purpose of extinguishing fires in the City are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and no person shall open any of the fire hydrants, attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere with or injure any of the fire hydrants. 
(Prior code,  10.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-5-20. - Damage of public hydrants prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully or carelessly damage, break or injure any of the public fire hydrants or pollute or unnecessarily waste water at any such fire hydrants. 
(Prior code,  10.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-5-30. - Wrenches used exclusively by Fire Department. 
    No member of the Fire Department shall let out, suffer or permit any person to take the wrenches furnished to the Fire Department to be used in case of fire, or shall suffer or permit any of said wrenches furnished to the Fire Department to be taken from the hose house or fire station of the Fire Department, except as they accompany the fire equipment on occasions of fire or for other purposes connected with the Fire Department. 
(Prior code,  10.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Garbage and Refuse Collection 

Sec. 13-6-10. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the opinion of the City Council that it is necessary to regulate the collection, disposition and removal of garbage and rubbish within the City, in order to promote the health of its inhabitants, to suppress disease, to improve sanitary conditions and to prevent fire hazards. 
(b)  It is the purpose and intent of this Article to set forth the requirements, regulations and prohibitions concerning the collection, disposition and removal of garbage and refuse within the City, to establish a system of rates, charges and fees for that collection by the City, and to establish a landfill fee and charge for the use of the Otero County landfill. 
(Ord. No. 757,  1, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Apartments means dwelling units for more than one family where each family does not have garbage pickup as a single-family unit. 
    Garbage means all animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, consumption or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, excluding dead animals and slaughterhouse offal. 
    Landfill charge means a charge assessed per unit for dwellings designated for multiple families or multiple unrelated individuals where no City garbage services are purchased or where garbage services are purchased for the entire facility rather than by individual units. Examples include, but are not limited to, apartments, townhouses, nursing homes and assisted living facilities. Landfill charges defray per capita charges assessed by OCLI regardless of use of City garbage services. 
    Refuse means all hay, straw, shavings, excelsior, grass cuttings, paper or paper products, containers, boxes, glass, cans, bottles and material commonly known as rubbish or refuse, as are commonly produced in homes, stores and institutions, excluding, however, debris or rubbish from the construction, demolition or repair of buildings and other structures, trees and tree limbs, abandoned dead animals, large machinery, vehicles and furniture. 
    Single-family unit means a dwelling designed to house a single family. 
    Unit means each residence, business, apartment, mobile home, motel, hotel, residential rooms within a nursing home, residential rooms within an assisted living facility, school and other business establishment, residence and dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 757,  2, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-30. - Responsibility of owner, tenant or resident for disposal and removal. 
    The owner, lessor, agent, tenant or occupant of any house, dwelling or building where housekeeping, cooking or eating is done or where any commercial business is carried on in the City shall dispose of and remove garbage and refuse which may accumulate from such house, dwelling, building or commercial business. 
(Ord. No. 757,  3, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-40. - Collection and removal by City. 
(a)  The City has determined that it would be in the best interest of the residents of the City to provide garbage collection and removal services. The City is hereby authorized to provide garbage collection and removal services as appropriate and as determined by the City Council in its discretion. The City is further authorized to charge a fee to all persons who utilize the City's garbage collection services except as specifically provided herein. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prohibit any person from hauling his or her own refuse to a landfill, provided same is done at a time when the landfill is officially open and the refuse is transported in such a manner so as to preclude any of the refuse from being deposited on any street, alley or other property in route. Any person hauling his or her own refuse shall not be excused from paying the applicable collection charge provided for herein for the collection of refuse for the City. Furthermore, any restaurant owner or the operator of a similar business having garbage fit for swine feeding may contract with any person to haul away such garbage. 
(Ord. No. 757,  4, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 936,  1, 7-24-2018 ) 
Sec. 13-6-50. - Fees for collection and removal. 
(a)  The owner or his or her agent or any person in possession of or occupancy of any residence, dwelling or apartment house with fewer than eight units shall pay for services provided by the City in the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse at rates determined by the City Council as set forth on the City's Fee Schedule. 
(b)  Any commercial industrial or mercantile establishment or apartment house with eight units or more are not required to utilize the services of the City for collection and disposal of garbage and refuse and are not required to pay the garbage collection fee or rates as set forth herein. In the event such commercial, industrial or mercantile establishment or apartment house with eight units or more elects to use the City's garbage collection and disposal services, it shall be required to pay a garbage collection fee for said services as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 757,  5, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-60. - Unauthorized dumping. 
    No person shall place, or cause to be placed, rubbish, trash or other waste materials in any Toter &reg;, Dumpster or other trash receptacle or container of another where no legal right of access to the container by virtue of ownership, leasehold, other tenancy or an agency relationship with the owner, lessee or other tenant exists. 
(Ord. No. 800,  1, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-70. - Receptacles and containers. 
(a)  All garbage for disposal shall be placed in bags or other appropriate receptacle made of material and of a size to be determined by the City. 
(b)  Refuse of such size, shape and weight that will fit into said bags shall also be placed therein, provided that institution and business refuse may be treated the same as garbage above, except as hereinafter provided. Refuse of such size, weight or shape not capable of being placed in such bags shall be placed in a container made of metal, plastic, pasteboard or wood, or other material acceptable to the City, which container, however, shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight when filled. Brush and trimmings less than five feet in length and other items easily tied in bundles weighing less than 50 pounds may be placed out for collection. Cardboard shipping containers shall be crushed and tied in bundles not exceeding 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 757,  6, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-80. - Disposal of other materials. 
    All rubbish, trash or other waste materials too bulky or heavy so as to be placed in bags or containers as set forth in Section 13-6-70 above, including but not limited to debris and rubbish resulting from the construction, repair and demolition of buildings and other structures, trees and tree limbs, industrial refuse, dead animals, machinery, vehicles, furniture and other like items, shall be removed and disposed of by the owner or occupant of the premises where the same are located at his or her own expense; provided, however, that nothing herein shall preclude the City from undertaking to remove any of these items, at its option and at charges to be determined by the City by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 757,  6, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-90. - Sealing of containers. 
    All bags of garbage or refuse, or a combination thereof, shall be securely fastened when placed outdoors for collection, or prior thereto, so as to preclude the intrusion of insects, rodents or animals therein; provided, however, that, prior to the placing of a bag out for collection, it need not be fastened at the top if it is at all times kept in a metal container or other receptacle approved by the City, which container shall have a tight-fitting lid and no defect sufficient to allow the intrusion of flies, rodents and insects therein. 
(Ord. No. 757,  6, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-100. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Garbage and refuse, in proper containers as herein provided for, shall be placed out for collection at a convenient place in the alley or on the property of the user adjacent to the street and alley, or at such other convenient place as the City may from time to time determine with respect to individual properties or users. 
(b)  The City may permit a user to place said container at a place selected by the user; provided, however, that, if said spot selected is more than ten feet from the spot for collection designated by the City, the City may make an additional charge to the user over and above the regular collection charge. 
(Ord. No. 757,  7, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-110. - Frequency of collection. 
    Collection shall be made at such times and frequencies as the City may from time to time determine, acting in its administrative capacity. 
(Ord. No. 757,  8, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-120. - Authorization for collection of fees. 
(a)  The City Council shall by resolution establish charges for collection service for removal and hauling of garbage and refuse in the City, prescribe the time and manner of payment of such charges and adopt measures or regulations designed to enforce the payment thereof as, in its discretion, are necessary or desirable. Such resolution, when adopted, shall be of the same force and effect as if incorporated in this Section. 
(b)  Charges for garbage and refuse removed shall be a lien on the property served until paid in full. If payment of any such charge is not made within 90 days after the same is due, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of such charge to be given to the owner of such property by publishing the same for two consecutive weeks in a local newspaper, stating the amount of the charges. If the same are not paid within ten days thereafter, along with publication charges, the City Clerk shall certify such charges as assessed to the County Treasurer, to be placed on the tax rolls for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected, with a penalty of ten percent to defray the cost of collection as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 757,  9, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-130. - Billings. 
    The collection fees enumerated above shall be billed monthly in arrears, as a part of the water bill for each month. 
(Ord. No. 757,  10, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-140. - Liability of property owner; charges to constitute lien; action to collect charge. 
    Whether garbage and refuse are collected and removed by employees of the City or by persons under contract with the City for such purposes, in all instances where garbage or refuse is accumulated in any business establishment, house, dwelling or building where housekeeping, cooking or eating is done, the owner of such property shall be held personally liable for all charges imposed under this Article from the time such charges are due. Such charges shall become and remain a lien upon any such buildings or lots until such charges are paid, and such charges may be collected from any owner by an action at law or in equity, such action to be in the name of the City. Any such action may be prosecuted in any court having jurisdiction, and the action may be for the enforcement of the lien. Such lien shall attach to such buildings or lots upon which the garbage or refuse is procured, accumulated or kept. The property owner and/or customer of the City shall be liable for all costs, expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in prosecuting any action for enforcement of this Article or collection of any fees associated herewith. 
(Ord. No. 757,  11, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-150. - Determination by resolution. 
    The City Council may, by resolution duly made and adopted by the City Council from time to time, determine and re-determine any of the following matters having to do with collection of garbage and refuse within the City: 
(1)  The method and manner of transporting garbage and refuse. 
(2)  The make, size, type and kind of bags. 
(3)  The adequacy of the containers for refuse. 
(4)  The places where garbage and refuse must be placed for collection. 
(5)  The hours, frequencies and route of collection by the City, and the hours the City dump shall be open. 
(6)  Fees for removal and/or collection. 
(7)  Land use fees. 
(8)  Establishment of other regulations deemed necessary and appropriate for garbage and refuse collection and removal in the City. 
(9)  Such other matters as may be necessary to effectively implement the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 757,  12, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-160. - Disturbing containers or contents prohibited. 
    No person shall disturb, destroy, mutilate, vandalize, remove, handle or otherwise disturb the garbage and refuse containers or contents which may have been placed for removal by the City or other garbage collector, except the owner, occupant, lessor or tenant of a residence, dwelling or building, or his or her employees, agents or persons legally collecting the same under this Article. 
(Ord. No. 757,  13, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-170. - Depositing garbage or refuse on public places or vacant lots prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, keep, place or deposit, or cause to be deposited, any garbage or refuse upon any street, alley, park or other public place or upon any vacant lot within the City, or to store or keep the same except as otherwise provided and required by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 757,  14, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-180. - Depositing garbage or refuse on private premises prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, keep, place or deposit or cause to be thrown, kept, placed or deposited any garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish, debris or other offensive matter on any private property or premises within the City limits, except as provided in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 757,  15, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-190. - Burning refuse and garbage prohibited. 
    No person shall at any time burn any refuse or garbage within the City limits. 
(Ord. No. 757,  16, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-200. - Establishment of landfill fees. 
    The owner or his or her agent or a person in possession or occupancy of any dwelling, residence, apartment house, store, commercial operation or business, or any and all other mercantile establishments shall pay a landfill fee to assist in defraying the cost of the ownership, development and operation of a county-wide landfill as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. This fee shall apply to all persons in possession of or ownership of any dwelling, apartment house, store, business or other mercantile establishment, regardless of whether the City provides garbage collection and removal services to that person. 
(Ord. No. 757,  18, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-6-210. - Penalties. 
    It is unlawful for any persons to violate any provision of this Article. Any person violating the same shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  10.16.130; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Water Enterprise 

Sec. 13-7-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    There is hereby established, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Water Activity Law, Article 45.1 of Title 37, C.R.S., the City of Rocky Ford Water Enterprise (the "Enterprise"). The Enterprise shall consist of the system which is the business represented by all of the City's water facilities and properties, now owned or hereafter acquired, whether situated within or without the City boundaries, including all present or future improvements, extensions, enlargements, betterments, replacements or additions thereof or thereto. The Enterprise shall have all of the authority, powers, rights, obligations and duties as may be provided or permitted by the Water Activity Law and the Colorado Constitution, and as may be further prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 849,  1, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-20. - Governing Body. 
    The governing body of the Enterprise (the "Governing Body") shall be the City Council and shall be subject to all of the applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the City Council. Whenever the City Council is in session, the Governing Body shall also be deemed to be in session. It shall not be necessary for the Governing Body to meet separately from the regular and special meetings of the City Council, nor shall it be necessary for the Governing Body to specifically announce or acknowledge that actions taken thereby are taken by the Governing Body of the Enterprise. The Governing Body may conduct its affairs in the same manner and subject to the same laws which apply to the City Council for the same or similar matters; provided that, in accordance with Section 37-45.1-104(2), C.R.S., the Governing Body may authorize the issuance of bonds by adoption of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 849,  2, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-30. - Maintenance of Enterprise status. 
    The Enterprise shall at all times and in all ways conduct its affairs so as to continue to qualify as a "water activity enterprise" within the meaning of Section 37-45.1-102, C.R.S., and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Article X, Section 20, of the Colorado Constitution. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the Enterprise is not authorized to, and shall not, receive ten percent or more of its annual revenue in grants from all state and local governments combined. 
(Ord. No. 849,  3, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-40. - Issuance of bonds. 
    The Enterprise is authorized to issue bonds, notes or other obligations payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from the water system, in accordance with the Water Activity Law. The City Council may also authorize the issuance of such bonds, notes or other obligations in accordance with the laws of the State, and in so doing shall be deemed to be acting as both the Governing Body and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 849,  4, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-50. - Water Enterprise fees and charges. 
    The City Council shall adopt by resolution, for and on behalf of the Enterprise, the following rates, fees and charges: 
(1)  Minimum and sufficient water rates; 
(2)  Plant investment fees; and 
(3)  Other fees and charges as the City Council deems necessary to cover the cost of inspection, testing fees for engineering design review, operations, maintenance and extensions of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 849,  5, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-60. - Water Enterprise annual budget. 
    The City Council shall adopted an annual budget for the Enterprise, separate from the City's general fund budget. 
(Ord. No. 849,  6, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-7-70. - Water Revenue Fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established an enterprise fund, to be known as the Water Revenue Fund, in which shall be deposited all revenues from water billing and other revenues related to the water system. All funds received from the water rates shall be used only for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement of and additions to the system. All amounts on hand in such fund shall be invested by the City Council in investments proper for public funds. 
(b)  The Enterprise may pledge all or any portion of the Water Revenue Fund, including revenues anticipated to be collected, to the payment of principal, interest, premium, if any, and reserves for revenue bonds or any other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the Enterprise for the payment or other financing of costs of the water system, or for the purpose of refunding any obligations issued or otherwise contracted for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 849,  7, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Sewer Enterprise 

Sec. 13-8-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    There is hereby established, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Water Activity Law, Article 45.1 of Title 37, C.R.S., the City of Rocky Ford Sewer Enterprise (the "Enterprise"). The Enterprise shall consist of the system which is the business represented by all of the City's wastewater facilities and properties, now owned or hereafter acquired, whether situated within or without the City boundaries, including all present or future improvements, extensions, enlargements, betterments, replacements or additions thereof or thereto. The Enterprise shall have all of the authority, powers, rights, obligations and duties as may be provided or permitted by the Water Activity Law and the Colorado Constitution, and as may be further prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 887,  1, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-20. - Governing Body. 
    The governing body of the Enterprise (the "Governing Body") shall be the City Council and shall be subject to all of the applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the City Council. Whenever the City Council is in session, the Governing Body shall also be deemed to be in session. It shall not be necessary for the Governing Body to meet separately from the regular and special meetings of the City Council, nor shall it be necessary for the Governing Body to specifically announce or acknowledge that actions taken thereby are taken by the Governing Body of the Enterprise. The Governing Body may conduct its affairs in the same manner and subject to the same laws which apply to the City Council for the same or similar matters; provided that, in accordance with Section 37-45.1-104(2), C.R.S., the Governing Body may authorize the issuance of bonds by adoption of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 887,  2, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-30. - Maintenance of Enterprise status. 
    The Enterprise shall at all times and in all ways conduct its affairs so as to continue to qualify as a "sewer activity enterprise" within the meaning of Section 37-45.1-102, C.R.S., and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Article X, Section 20, of the Colorado Constitution. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the Enterprise is not authorized to, and shall not, receive ten percent or more of its annual revenue in grants from all state and local governments combined. 
(Ord. No. 887,  3, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-40. - Issuance of bonds. 
    The Enterprise is authorized to issue bonds, notes or other obligations payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from the wastewater system, in accordance with the Water Activity Law. The City Council may also authorize the issuance of such bonds, notes or other obligations in accordance with the laws of the State, and in so doing shall be deemed to be acting as both the Governing Body and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 887,  4, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-50. - Sewer Enterprise fees and charges. 
    The City Council shall adopt by resolution, for and on behalf of the Enterprise, the following rates, fees and charges: 
(1)  Minimum and sufficient wastewater rates; 
(2)  Plant investment fees; and 
(3)  Other fees and charges as the City Council deems necessary to cover the cost of inspection, testing fees for engineering design review, operations, maintenance and extensions of the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 887,  5, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-60. - Sewer Enterprise annual budget. 
    The City Council shall adopt an annual budget for the Enterprise, separate from the City's general fund budget. 
(Ord. No. 887,  6, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-8-70. - Sewer Revenue Fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established an enterprise fund, to be known as the Sewer Revenue Fund, in which shall be deposited all revenues from sewer billing and other revenues related to the wastewater system. All funds received from the sewer rates shall be used only for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement of and additions to the system. All amounts on hand in such fund shall be invested by the City Council in investments proper for public funds. 
(b)  The Enterprise may pledge all or any portion of the Sewer Revenue Fund, including revenues anticipated to be collected, to the payment of principal, interest, premium, if any, and reserves for revenue bonds or any other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the Enterprise for the payment or other financing of costs of the wastewater system, or for the purpose of refunding any obligations issued or otherwise contracted for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 887,  7, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9 - Garbage Enterprise 

Sec. 13-9-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    There is hereby established, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the state statutes, the City of Rocky Ford Garbage Enterprise (the "Enterprise"). The Enterprise shall consist of the system which is the business represented by all of the City's garbage facilities and properties now owned or hereafter acquired, whether situated within or without the City boundaries, including all present or future improvements, extensions, enlargements, betterments, replacements or additions thereof or thereto. The Enterprise shall have all of the authority, powers, rights, obligations and duties as may be provided or permitted by the Colorado Constitution and as may be further prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 888,  1, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-20. - Governing Body. 
    The governing body of the Enterprise (the "Governing Body") shall be the City Council and shall be subject to all of the applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the City Council. Whenever the City Council is in session, the Governing Body shall also be deemed to be in session. It shall not be necessary for the Governing Body to meet separately from the regular and special meetings of the City Council, nor shall it be necessary for the Governing Body to specifically announce or acknowledge that actions taken thereby are taken by the Governing Body of the Enterprise. The Governing Body may conduct its affairs in the same manner and subject to the same laws which apply to the City Council for the same or similar matters; provided that, in accordance with Section 37-45.1-104(2), C.R.S., the Governing Body may authorize the issuance of bonds by adoption of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 888,  2, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-30. - Maintenance of Enterprise status. 
    The Enterprise shall at all times and in all ways conduct its affairs so as to continue to qualify as an "activity enterprise" within the meaning of Section 37-45.1-102, C.R.S., and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Article X, Section 20, of the Colorado Constitution. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the Enterprise is not authorized to, and shall not, receive ten percent or more of its annual revenue in grants from all state and local governments combined. 
(Ord. No. 888,  3, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-40. - Issuance of bonds. 
    The Enterprise is authorized to issue bonds, notes or other obligations payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from the garbage system in accordance with the Water Activity Law. The City Council may also authorize the issuance of such bonds, notes or other obligations in accordance with the laws of the State, and in so doing shall be deemed to be acting as both the Governing Body and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 888,  4, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-50. - Garbage Enterprise fees and charges. 
    The City Council shall adopt by resolution, for and on behalf of the Enterprise, the following rates, fees and charges: 
(1)  Minimum and sufficient garbage rates; 
(2)  System and equipment investment fees; and 
(3)  Other fees and charges as the City Council deems necessary to cover the cost of garbage collection, reduction, cleanup, operations, maintenance and extensions of the system. 
(Ord. No. 888,  5, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-60. - Garbage Enterprise annual budget. 
    The City Council shall adopt an annual budget for the Enterprise separate from the City's general fund budget. 
(Ord. No. 888,  6, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 13-9-70. - Garbage Revenue Fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established an enterprise fund, to be known as the Garbage Revenue Fund, in which shall be deposited all revenues from garbage billing and other revenues related to the garbage system. All funds received from the garbage rates shall be used only for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement of and additions to the system. All amounts on hand in such fund shall be invested by the City Council in investments proper for public funds. 
(b)  The Enterprise may pledge all or any portion of the Garbage Revenue Fund, including revenues anticipated to be collected, to the payment of principal, interest, premium, if any, and reserves for revenue bonds or any other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the Enterprise for the payment or other financing of costs of the garbage system, or for the purpose of refunding any obligations issued or otherwise contracted for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 888,  7, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 15 - Annexation 
ARTICLE 1 - Annexation Procedures 

Sec. 15-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the City in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 15-1-20. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation and to obtain an annexation petition. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 15-1-30. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. At least 15 days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the City Council, the applicant shall submit to the City the annexation petition, the annexation fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, a minimum of 15 copies of the master plan and annexation map and a minimum of five copies of all required supportive information. 
(1)  The Planning Department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. If all documents are complete and accurate, the Planning Department shall submit the annexation petition to the City Clerk. 
(2)  The City Clerk shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the City Council, which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the City Clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure by certified mail to the Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners and to the County Attorney. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least 25 days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the City Council, the Planning Department shall furnish to the entities listed below copies of the annexation map and the master plan. The Planning Department may submit copies of the annexation map and the master plan to additional interested entities as determined by the Planning Department in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the Planning Department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and master plan must be submitted to the City in writing no later than seven days after receipt of the annexation map and master plan: 
a.  Telephone companies. 
b.  Franchise utility companies. 
c.  City Engineer. 
d.  Fire Department. 
e.  City Water and Sewer Department. 
f.  Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall review the annexation map, master plan and zoning request at a public hearing and shall submit a written recommendation to the City Council. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one inch represents 100 feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of 24 by 36 inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description. 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the City and the length of the same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(c)  Master plan. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one inch represents 100 feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of 24 by 36 inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Block numbers and lot numbers with approximate dimensions. 
(6)  Proposed gross and net residential density. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(d)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the annexation map and master plan: 
(1)  Soils description and limitation. 
(2)  Preliminary utility plan. 
(3)  Mailing addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of the annexation. 
(4)  Affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned. 
(5)  Vicinity map with a radius of one and one-half miles, at a minimum scale of 1 inch represents 2,000 feet. 
(6)  Statement on community need for proposed annexation and zoning. 
(7)  For all annexations in excess of ten acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district governing the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to educate such students. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 15-1-40. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten acres, the City shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation not less than 25 days before the date of the annexation hearing. One copy of the impact report shall be filed with the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed within five days thereafter. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map or maps of the City and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the City in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final preannexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the City's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the City's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in Paragraph 15-1-30(d)(7) above. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 15-1-50. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this Article and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the City Council may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the City. In the event the City Council considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 15-1-60. - Final submission of documents. 
    In the event the City Council approves an annexation ordinance, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Department two Mylars of the final annexation map and two Mylars of the master plan within ten days of the effective date of the annexation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 16 - Zoning 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-1-10. - Title. 
    This Chapter may be known and cited as the "Rocky Ford Zoning Ordinance." 
(Prior code,  12.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-20. - Authority. 
    Section 31-23-301, C.R.S., authorizes the governing body of the City, the City Council, to provide for the zoning of all or parts of the incorporated portion of the City. 
(Prior code,  12.02.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-30. - Purpose. 
    The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire hazards, improve public safety and lifeguard the public health; and to create a stable pattern of land uses which can be easily and equitably serviced. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  12.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-40. - Application. 
    This Chapter classifies, regulates and restricts the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of the lot that may be occupied; the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of population; and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes within the incorporated areas of the City. Except as otherwise provided, no zoning permit shall be issued for a use not specifically mentioned or described unless, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, the proposed use is similar to a listed use. 
(Prior code,  12.02.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-50. - Classification of districts. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the City is divided into zoning districts designed as follows: 
Districts Abbreviated Designations Single-Family Residential R-1 Residential, Medium Density R-2 Mixed Residential R-3 Local Commercial C-1 Highway Commercial C-2 Light Industrial I-1 Industrial I-2 Floodplain F-1  
(Prior code,  12.02.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-60. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the districts designated in Section 16-1-50 above are hereby established as shown on Zoning Map the City, hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map." 
(b)  The Zoning Map and all the notations thereon are hereby made part of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.02.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-70. - Words and terms. 
    When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and the masculine includes the feminine. Additionally: 
(1)  The word shall is mandatory. 
(2)  The word may is permissive. 
(3)  The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or other legal entity, as well as an individual. 
(4)  Whenever the words dwelling, dwelling unit , rooming house , rooming unit or premises are used, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words or any part thereof . 
(5)  The word building includes the word structure ; the term use includes the words arranged , designed or intended to be used ; and the term occupied includes the words arranged , designed or intended to be occupied . 
(6)  If a term or word causes difficulties in interpretation and is not herein defined or properly described, the Planning Commission shall define the terms and recommend to the City Council that it amend this Chapter to include an appropriate definition. 
(Prior code,  12.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-1-80. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and terms are hereby defined as follows: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle left within the limits of any street, road, highway or alley, or upon property of another without the consent of the owner of such property, for a period of 24 hours or longer. A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if its owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance; thus, a properly licensed operable vehicle shall not be abandoned if the vehicle is parked in a legal manner within a designate parking space. 
    Accessory building or structure means any building or structure, not larger than two-thirds the size of the principal building, or structure designed and constructed not to be used as living space, but for storage purposes or the like, including specifically but not limited to a garage, shop, studio, shed, workshop, solar panel, hot tub, satellite dish, radio or television antenna or similar unit. 
    Alley means any public space or thoroughfare less than 20 feet but not less than ten feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Alter means any structural change in the supporting or load-bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists. 
    Alternative energy structure means any structure or element of a structure designed, used or intended for use as an alternative energy system or an element of an alternative energy system, which structure is designed and constructed not to be used as a living space, exceeds the maximum height allowed for accessory uses when attached to an accessory building, or exceeds the maximum height allowed for the principal use building when attached to the principal use building. 
    Apartment house. See Dwelling, multiple. 
    Approved means sanctioned by the appropriate official as required by law, so long as all provisions of these zoning regulations are met. 
    Auto repair shop means a shop or place of business for repair and maintenance of automobiles, trucks and other automotive and farm equipment which carry a valid title and show a work order. 
    Automobile and trailer sales area means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles, trailers and related vehicles, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises. 
    Bed and breakfast means a residential property which has been modified or renovated to accommodate overnight guests for a short-term period of less than 30 days, in which the owner may reside and in which meals are served as a part of or in conjunction with the rates charged for the room. 
    Block means a distinct portion or plot of land in a platted subdivision described and numbered as a block on the recorded plat of said subdivision, or a distinct portion or plot of land bounded on all sides by public streets, alleys or easements. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. See also Structure. 
    Building area means that portion of a lot or parcel that can be occupied by a building or structure. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance at the center of a building's principal front measured from the established street grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the center height between the eaves and ridge for pitched roofs. For buildings set back from the street line, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building. 
    Building line means a line on a plat or the theoretical line on the ground between which line and a street, alley or private place no principal building or structure may be erected. This is the farthest extended part of the building, such as roof eaves or porches. 
    Building, nonconforming. See Nonconforming structure. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot or parcel on which said building is situated, including garages, carports, storage sheds, etc., which are attached to the principal building. 
    Business and professional office means the office of an architect, attorney, dentist, doctor, engineer, insurance broker or other similar professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting, correspondence, research, editing or administration. 
    Campgrounds and recreational areas means organized campgrounds, including federal-owned and federal-designated, state-owned and state-designated and municipal-owned and municipal-designated parks and campgrounds; privately owned campgrounds which are made available, either with or without a fee to the public; and all public lands and surface waters of the State, other than campgrounds, used for picnicking, camping and other recreational activities. 
    Carport means a structure with a roof and at least two open sides (it is considered a building). 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    City Council means the City of Rocky Ford City Council. 
    Clinic, dental or medical, means a building in which a group of physicians, dentists or physicians and dentists and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their professions. A clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory but not facilities for inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery. See also Hospital . 
    Club means a building or rooms and accessory buildings and grounds occupied by a nonprofit association of persons for the promotion of some common objective, such as, but not limited to, literature, science, politics, recreation and good fellowship, meeting periodically, limited to members, with not more than one-third of the gross floor area being used for residential activity. 
    Communication facility means a non-inhabitable structure or tower, up to 100 feet in height, and accessory building, supporting antennas and microwave dishes that send and/or receive radio frequency signals, including television and date impulses, through space by means of electromagnetic waves. Individual/personal direct-to-home satellite services are not included in this definition. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the sum of policies, proposals, programs, maps and reports adopted and identified by the Planning Commission as components of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Condominium means an apartment house in which the apartments or dwelling units are individually owned; each owner receiving a recordable deed enabling him or her to sell, mortgage, exchange, etc., his or her unit independent of the owners of the other units in the building. 
    Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land devoted to housing and usable open space. 
    Developmentally disabled, home for means a home for those persons having cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, mental retardation, autism and epilepsy, or any other developmental disability. 
    District, zone means a land area or land areas, as defined by the Zoning Map, within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages to customers while they remain in their automobile. 
    Duplex means a dwelling structurally connected and designed for or used exclusively as a residence by two families living independently of one another. 
    Dwelling means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used by one family and/or its resident domestic servants for its living, sleeping and cooking and eating needs. The width of any projected view of an exterior wall elevation of a residence shall not be less than 20 feet. The term dwelling shall include a manufactured home which: 
(1)  Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory. 
(2)  Is not less than 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length. 
(3)  Is installed on an engineered permanent foundation and footer with a stem wall around the perimeter. The stem wall must be a minimum of six inches of poured concrete or constructed with a six-inch concrete block. 
(4)  Has brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding on all exterior walls which provides a consistent, continuous facade from the bottom of the soffit (top of wall section) downward to the top of the exposed perimeter wall or foundation or to grade, whichever is applicable, and has a pitched roof. 
(5)  Is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.,  5401, et seq., as amended, and all regulations enacted pursuant thereto, including any local modifications as are expressly allowed by federal law, or has been certified by the State as being in compliance with the requirements of the Building Code as adopted by the State, and as is enforced and administered by the Colorado Division of Housing. 
The term dwelling shall also include conventional stick-built housing, but shall not include mobile homes as defined herein. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of two or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means any building, or portion thereof, which contains one dwelling unit used, intended or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied for living purposes. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Easement means a right held by the public, a corporation or persons to make use of the land of another for a limited purpose as a rite of passage. 
    Educational institution means schools and/or seminaries administered by churches or religious organizations; schools, colleges or universities administered by public agencies; nonprofit schools, colleges or universities operated under a charter or license from the State; and any nonprofit institution, residence or home operated for the education of five or more students. 
    Enclosed means surrounded by four walls with a roof and no contents visible. 
    Engineered foundation means a foundation which, by using engineering calculations or testing and by following commonly accepted engineering practices or manufacturer's recommendations, all components and subsystems will perform to meet health, safety and functional requirements and shall include a footer and stemwall around the perimeter of the dwelling, which stemwall must be a minimum of six inches of poured concrete or constructed with six-inch concrete block, or as otherwise required by the manufacturer's recommendations or the Building Code adopted by the City or as designed by a licensed engineer. 
    Extended care facility means an establishment that provides lodging, board and personal services for the health, safety and comfort of persons residing therein. This term does not apply to hospitals. 
    Fabrication means the stamping, cutting, assembling or otherwise shaping of processed materials into useful objects, excluding the refining or other initial processing of basic raw materials. 
    Family means a group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living together on the premises in a single dwelling unit, or a group of not more than five individuals living in a single dwelling unit not related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    Family care home means a facility for child care in a place of residence of a family for the purpose of providing family care and training for a child or children under the age of 18 years who are not related to the head of such home. The term includes any family care home receiving a child or children for regular part-time or regular full-time care, and anyone receiving a child or children from any state-operated institution for child care or from any child placement agency. 
    Farming means the act or business of cultivating land and producing crops. 
    Feedlot means an enclosure for the feeding of fowl, sheep, hogs, cattle or other livestock where the livestock are kept within restricted areas, where a majority of the feed is purchased rather than being produced on the same property and where the livestock are especially fed for weight gain prior to sale or slaughter. 
    Floodplain means an area in and adjacent to a stream, which area is subject to flooding as the result of the occurrence of an intermediate regional flood, and which area thus is so adverse to past, current or foreseeable construction or land use as to constitute a significant hazard to public health and safety or to property. 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to lands, properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to lands, properties, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard zone. 
    Floodway zone means the channel of a stream and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwaters of an intermediate regional flood. In the context of these regulations, it is the floodplain LESS the low hazard zone, if any such low hazard zone has been designated or otherwise regulated under these regulations. If no low hazard zone has been so designated or regulated, then the terms floodplain and floodway zone shall be synonymous. 
    Floor area, gross, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas measured between the exterior faces of exterior walls of the several floors of a building and accessory buildings, including interior walls, balconies, mezzanines, hallways, walls, basements and cellars, and including the area of roofed porches, patios and carports having more than one wall. 
    Floor area, net, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas measured between the interior faces of exterior walls of the several floors of a building, including all floors having one-third of their vertical dimension above grade; but excluding garages, accessory store rooms and/or areas, roofed porches and patios, carports, cellars and wells. 
    Frontage means that portion of a lot, parcel, tract or block abutting upon a street. See also Yard, front. 
    Garage means a fully enclosed structure for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Grazing means feeding or growing grasses or herbage. 
    Health Department means the Otero County Health Department. 
    Home occupation means a use for gain or support in a residential zone, conducted on the parcel and carried on by its inhabitants and no others, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the parcel for residential purposes and which does not change the character thereof. 
    Hospital means any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation or nursing, medical, surgical or psychiatric care of sick, injured or infirm persons. See also Clinic, dental or medical. 
    Hotel means a building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. 
    House, guest, means living quarters within a semi-attached or detached accessory building located on the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. 
    Intermediate regional flood means a type of flood, including the water surface elevation and territorial occupation thereof, which can be expected to occur at any time in a given area based upon recorded historical precipitation and other valid data, but with an average statistical one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any one year. The term is used interchangeably with a one-percent flood or one-hundred-year flood. 
    Junk, refuse and waste means objects, material, property or items which, by reason of their location and character, are dangerous to public health, safety or welfare, are unsightly, interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of the property by neighbors, detrimentally affect property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises. Junk, refuse and waste includes, but is not limited to: rubbish, refuse, debris, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, inoperable machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, whether ferrous or non-ferrous, dead plants and trees, trimmings from plants and trees, cans, bottles, barrels, bones, rags, used rubber or used rope. Junk, refuse and waste shall also include any material or object, used or new, which is not presently usable, including but not limited to: scrap metals in their alloy, bones, rags, cloth, rubber pieces, rope, tinfoil, bottles, tools, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, automobile or airplane tires, machinery and appliances. Objects or material shall be considered junk if they are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, if they are not capable of being used in their present location on the property or if they cannot legally be used due to the absence of the legal prerequisites to use, and shall specifically include junked or abandoned vehicles. 
    Junk or abandoned vehicle means any vehicle not capable of travel under its own power, or any vehicle not bearing current registration plates or, if bearing such plates, which remains stationary or unused for more than 30 consecutive dates; or any automobile, truck or self-propelled vehicle which does not comply with the minimum safety requirements of the Colorado Motor Vehicle Law. Junk vehicle shall also include any vehicle which is not capable of such travel in its existing mechanical condition; or any dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished or partially demolished vehicle. 
    Junk yard, salvage yard or dumping ground means any property, establishment or place of business which is used, operated or maintained for the permanent or temporary storage, keeping, buying or selling of refuse, waste, junk, junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles. Junk yards, salvage yards or dumping grounds shall also include property or places used for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked, inoperable or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, house trailers or machinery of any kind or any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors, builders or other persons. 
    Kennel and pet shop means any lot, parcel, tract or structure in which pets are kept, maintained, housed, treated or sold for private gain. 
    Laundromat means an establishment providing washing, drying, ironing or dry-cleaning machines for hire, to be used by customers on the premises. 
    Limited commercial means commercial endeavors that require minimal exterior amenities. This type of use must impose little or no unusual pressure on the surrounding area; for example, a residence converted to an architect's office. 
    Living area. See Floor area, net. 
    Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot, parcel or tract providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles or trailers. 
    Lodge. See Club. 
    Lot means a distinct portion or plot of land in a recorded, platted subdivision described and numbered or lettered as a lot on the recorded plat of said subdivision. See also Parcel and Tract. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the junction of two or more streets. 
    Lot coverage means that portion of the lot, parcel or tract shielded from the sky by buildings and/or structures. 
    Lot depth means the distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means the perimeter or outer boundary of a lot, parcel or tract. 
    Lot line, front, means the line separating such lot, parcel or tract from any public street right-of-way. 
    Lot line, rear, means the line which is opposite and most distant from a front lot line or, on an irregular or triangular lot, a line which is at least ten feet long entirely within the lot parallel to and furthest distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means a line connecting a front lot line with a rear lot line. 
    Lot, nonconforming. See Parcel, nonconforming. 
    Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage upon two parallel or nearly parallel streets. 
    Lot width means the distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front building setback line or, in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the front building line. 
    Low hazard zone means that area of the floodplain in which the waters of an intermediate regional flood will not attain a maximum depth greater than one and one-half feet. 
    Machine shop means a structure containing machinery for the manufacture, modification or repair of metal goods and equipment. 
    Manufacture means the creation of a finished or semi-finished product. 
    Master Plan. See Comprehensive Plan. 
    Mobile home means a detached, single-family housing unit that may not meet the definition of Dwelling set forth herein and which has all the following characteristics: 
(1)  Is designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities, and has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; 
(2)  Is designed to be transported, after fabrication, on its own wheels, on flatbed or other trailers or on detachable wheels; 
(3)  Arrives at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete unit and is ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports or jacks, underpinning, connections to utilities and the like; 
(4)  Is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; 
(5)  Has brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding on all exterior walls which provides a consistent, continuous facade from the bottom of the soffit (top of wall section) downward to the top of the exposed perimeter wall or foundation, or to grade, or has skirting of the same or similar material and color as the siding, whichever is applicable, and has a pitched roof; 
(6)  Exceeds eight feet in width and 32 feet in length, excluding tower gear and bumpers; 
(7)  Is without motive power; and 
(8)  Is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.,  5401, et seq., as amended, and all regulations enacted pursuant thereto, including any local modifications as are expressly allowed by federal law. 
    Mobile home, double-wide, means a unit which is built in two separate units which are bolted or secured together to make one dwelling unit. Said unit shall meet the Housing and Urban Development Building Standards established for mobile homes. 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located for periods of longer than 90 days, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
    Mobile home, single-wide, means a unit which is built and transported as a single dwelling unit and is not intended to have additions or other units bolted or secured to it. Said unit shall meet the Housing and Urban Development Building Standards established for mobile homes. 
    Motel means a building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, usually with access directly from a parking lot. 
    Museum means a building or structure for the display of natural, scientific, literary or artistic objects of general, historic or other special interest. 
    Nonconforming structure means a building, structure or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance and amendments thereto, which does not conform with the provisions of this Chapter or amendments hereto. 
    Nonconforming use. See Use, nonconforming. 
    One-hundred-year flood or one-percent flood means an intermediate regional flood. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal title to any land or structure, or contract of purchase, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any land or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, conservator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were the owner. 
    Parcel means a lot or tract, or contiguous groups or portions of such lots and/or tracts, shown on the County Assessor's roll, or a contiguous area of land under legal control of any one person, partnership, firm, corporation, syndicate, agency or institution. See also Lot and Tract. 
    Parcel, nonconforming, means a parcel which lawfully existed at the time this Zoning Ordinance or any amendments hereto became effective, but which does not now conform to the regulations applicable in the zone district in which it is located. 
    Parking means the assembling or standing of motor vehicles, boats and trailers for relatively temporary periods of time. 
    Parking, commercial, means parking lots or structures open to the public and operated for a profit. 
    Parking, community, means parking lots or structures not open to the public but shared by several persons not residents on the premises. 
    Parking lot means a lot, parcel or tract for the parking of motor vehicles and trailers. 
    Parking, off-street, means parking of motor vehicles off of public rights-of-way. An off- street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. 
(1)  Required off-street parking areas for three or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked and shall be so designated, maintained and regulated that no parking lot maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another automobile. 
(2)  For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at 300 square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case and in accordance with all ordinances and regulations of the City. 
    Parking space means a rectangular area designated for parking with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum depth of 18 feet. 
    Person means firms, corporations, associations, partnerships, societies and/or individuals. 
    Planned unit development means an area of land improved as a residential development in which normal restrictions of lot sizes, setbacks, densities, land uses and other criteria may be relaxed in return for development conformance to an approved plan for the total parcel. Approval may be given upon evidence of the provisions of open spaces, public facilities access and other considerations deemed important by the Planning Commission. 
    Planning Commission means the Planning Commission established at Chapter 2, Article 12 of this Code. 
    Plat means a map and supporting materials of certain described land prepared in accordance with subdivision regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Premises means part or all of any lot, parcel or tract of land or part or all of any building or structure or group of buildings or structures located thereon. 
    Property line means the boundary of any lot, parcel or tract and shall not include the streets or alleys upon which the lot, parcel or tract may abut. 
    Public hearing means a meeting called by a public body for which public notice has been given and which is held in a place to which the general public may attend to hear issues and express their opinions. 
    Recreational vehicle means, for the purpose of this Chapter, major recreational equipment, including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
    Retail means sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use and not for resale. 
    Right-of-way means all streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys and all other areas reserved for present of future use by the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
    Road means a right-of-way owned and maintained by the City for the benefit of its citizens. 
    Road, collector, means paved roads. 
    Road, local, means unpaved roads. 
    Road, minor arterial, means state highways. 
    Road, principal arterial, means federal highways. 
    Secretary means the Secretary to the Planning Commission or a designated employee. 
    Service station, gasoline, means a property where flammable liquids used as motor fuels are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles and which may include, as an incidental accessory use only, facilities for polishing, greasing, washing or minor servicing of such motor vehicles, but not including auto body work or other major repairs. 
    Setback means the distance from the lot line or right-of-way line to any building or structure on the lot. 
    Sign means any words, lettering, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, devices, designs, pictures, symbols or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate a firm, an association, a corporation, a business, a service or a commodity or product or any type of publicity, whether placed on natural objects or on a building, fence or other man-made structure, which are visible from any public street or public right-of-way. 
    Stable, commercial, means a building with more than four stalls for horses not owned by the owner of the stable. 
    Street means any thoroughfare or public space not less than 20 feet in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
    Street, center line of, means the true center line of a dedicated public right-of-way as determine by the City Council. Where such public right-of-way is curved, off-set or angular or any other questions arise, the City Council shall determine the alignment of the center line. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. This definition shall exclude any deck or steps built on a home which are less than 30 inches high and fences or driveways built on or about improvements to real property. 
    Subdivision means a division, subdivision or resubdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land as defined in this Section. 
    Tract means a portion of land, usually not platted, delineated by a metes and bounds description. See also Lot and Parcel. 
    Trailer means a unit that is towed by a vehicle. 
    Use means any activity taking place upon land and/or in structures. 
    Use, accessory, means a subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal use of the parcel. 
    Use by review means a use that may be permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission. 
    Use by right means a use which may be permitted in a zone district upon issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator. 
    Use, nonconforming, means a use of a building or land at the time this Zoning Ordinance or an amendment hereto became effective and which does not now conform with the use regulations applicable in the zone district in which it is located. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this Chapter where such relaxation will not be contrary to the public interest or the intent and purpose of this Chapter and where, due to the conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, and the condition or situation is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonable and practicable the formulation of an amendment containing a general regulation for such condition or situation. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides to transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, airplanes, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
    Warehouse means a building or portion thereof used and appropriated by the occupant: 
(1)  For the deposit and safekeeping or selling of his or her own goods at wholesale or by mail order; or 
(2)  Not for the deposit and safekeeping or selling of his or her own goods, but for the purpose of storing the goods of others placed therein in the regular course of commercial dealing and trade, to be again removed and reshipped. 
    Wholesale means sale for resale, not for direct consumption. 
    Wrecking yard. See Junk yard. 
    Yard means an existing or required space not occupied or not to be occupied by a principal use or building on the same lot, parcel or tract with a principal use or building. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the required front setback line. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the required rear setback line. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending between the required side setback line and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the required front setback line to the required rear setback line. 
    Zone District. See District, zone. 
    Zoning Administrator means the administrative and enforcing officer, as designated by the City Council, to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, with the authority to make all decisions and investigations necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this Chapter. The City Manager shall be the Zoning Administrator unless otherwise designated by City Council. 
(Prior code,  12.04.020; Ord. No. 739,  1, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 750,  2, 3, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 864,  1, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  1, 5-22-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 2 - Administration 

Sec. 16-2-10. - Duties of Zoning Administrator. 
    All permits, certifications and stop orders required by this Chapter shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, who shall have the authority to make all decisions and investigations necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a use is similar to those uses listed, unless his or her decision is reversed by the Planning Commission. No required permit, certificate or order shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator if, in his or her judgment, the requirements of this Chapter have not been met. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the Zoning Administrator or on the part of any official or employee of the City shall legalize or authorize the violations of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.16.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-2-20. - Right of entry. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall, if possible, first secure permission of the occupant before entering upon any premises for the purpose of making any inspection necessary to the conduct of his or her duties in the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.16.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-2-30. - Zoning permits. 
    Permits shall be secured from the Zoning Administrator prior to the construction, moving, conversion, extension, enlargement or structural alteration of buildings or other structures, including fences. 
(1)  Application forms. Application for a zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided for that purpose. 
(2)  Premises diagram. Each application shall include a diagram of the premises containing: 
a.  The dimensions of the lot or parcel of land. 
b.  The location of relevant lot boundary lines determined by existing survey pins, except that the Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement where the Zoning Administrator's personal inspection of the property discloses that the exact location of the lot lines is not at issue for the issuance of the permit. 
c.  The location and dimension of each structure on the premises, including the proposed project. 
d.  The distance from the outermost extensions of the proposed project to the relevant lot lines. 
(3)  Application fee. A nonrefundable zoning permit application fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be submitted with the completed application form. The City Council may amend this fee from time to time by resolution or ordinance. 
(4)  Issuance. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the proposal, as set forth in the application and verified by personal inspection of the Zoning Administrator, is in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning permit. 
(5)  Disapproval. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the proposal, as set forth in the application and verified by personal inspection of the Zoning Administrator, is not in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall refuse to issue a zoning permit and shall state in writing, on the application or an attachment to the application, the reason for such disapproval. 
(6)  Null or void permits. 
a.  Any permit issued in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be null and void and may not be construed as waiving any provision of this Chapter. 
b.  A zoning permit, once issued under the provisions of this Chapter, shall be valid for 12 months. Where the applicant fails to commence construction within the 12-month limit, the zoning permit shall be null and void. 
(Prior code,  12.16.030; Ord. No. 739,  2, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 843, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-2-40. - Stop orders. 
    Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or land or structures are being used contrary to this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall order the work or use stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done or such use to be continued, and any such person and all others engage in doing or causing such work to be done or such use to be continued shall forthwith stop such work or use until authorized by the Zoning Administrator to proceed with the work or continue the use. 
(Prior code,  12.16.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-2-50. - Appeals. 
    Any person denied a permit or certificate or issued a stop order may appeal such action of the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission within 30 days from the date of such action by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Prior code,  12.16.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Planning Commission 

Sec. 16-3-10. - Duties of Planning Commission. 
    The Planning Commission is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To hear and decide on special use permits required by the terms of this Chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals for a variance from the Zoning Administrator's actions. 
(3)  To hear and decide appeals for a variance from the strict application of this Chapter. 
(4)  To receive testimony under oath and make such studies and surveys as are required to carry out the duties herein outlined. 
(5)  To request information or opinions from any administrative officer of the City or any other person considered an expert on the matter. 
(6)  To attach such requirements, conditions and/or reviews to actions on applications presented to it as it believes necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.18.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-20. - Application form. 
    Any person requesting a special use permit or making an appeal to the Planning Commission shall submit a written application on a form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. 
(Prior code,  12.18.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-30. - Fees. 
    Accompanying each application shall be a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, plus the costs of legal advertising, which costs must be paid before the hearing for said application is scheduled. Fees shall be made payable to the City of Rocky Ford. In the event the Planning Commission determines that a hearing for a special use permit or use by review was not necessary or required or that any appeal from the actions of the Zoning Administrator is upheld, said application fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Except as specifically provided herein, the application fee or any part thereof shall not be refunded. 
(Prior code,  12.18.030; Ord. No. 750,  10, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-40. - Public hearings. 
(a)  All actions of the Planning Commission shall be taken at public hearings. 
(b)  Notice of a hearing shall include the time, date and place of the hearing, a brief description of the request, and a legal description and the street address of such property in question. 
(c)  The notice shall be given no less than 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)  The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant. 
(f)  The notice shall also be distributed to all the property owners within 350 feet of the property in question. 
(Prior code,  12.18.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-50. - Special use permit. 
    Before granting a special use permit, the Planning Commission shall find in writing, based upon evidence and testimony, that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The requested use is a use listed as a use by review in the district in which the parcel is located. 
(2)  The granting of the special use permit will not substantially modify the Comprehensive Plan or the intent, purpose and spirit of this Chapter. 
(3)  The special use proposal incorporates reasonable means to create an environment harmonious with that to the surrounding properties. 
(4)  The special use will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Prior code,  12.18.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-60. - Appeal time limit. 
    Appeals to the Planning Commission may be made in writing at any time but, if for relief from any action by the Zoning Administrator, it must be made within 30 days from the date on which any person was aggrieved by an action of the Zoning Administrator. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and he or she shall transmit said appeal to the Secretary of the Planning Commission within 15 days, along with all records upon which the action was taken, and a written statement indicating his or her findings of fact and his or her reasons for the action for which the appeal is made. 
(Prior code,  12.18.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-70. - Appeal from Zoning Administrator. 
    Before granting an appeal from actions of the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission shall find in writing, based on evidence and testimony, that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The granting of the appeal will permit only those uses listed in the zone district in which the parcel is located. 
(2)  The action of the Zoning Administrator was arbitrary, capricious or not in harmony with the provisions, purposes, intent and spirit of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.18.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-80. - Request for variance from zoning regulations. 
    Before granting a variance, the Planning Commission shall find in writing, based upon evidence and testimony, that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The variance, if granted, will permit only those uses listed as a use permitted in the zone district in which the parcel is located. 
(2)  The parcel for which the variance appeal is made suffers unique or singular disadvantages, such as, but not limited to, size, shape, topography, location or surroundings not shared by other parcels in the neighborhood. 
(3)  The variance will not grant privileges inconsistent with limitations shared by other parcels in the zone district. 
(4)  The variance will not have an injurious effect on the existing or future use of the adjacent parcels. 
(5)  The variance will not injure or adversely alter the general character of the neighborhood in which the variance is sought. 
(6)  The variance request is in harmony with the intent, purpose and spirit of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.18.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-90. - Actions. 
(a)  All actions of the Planning Commission shall be in writing, shall contain the required findings of fact and shall include a statement setting forth those factors which the Planning Commission considered controlling factors in reaching its decision. 
(b)  Any appeals granted by the Planning Commission shall not be personal to the applicant, but shall be transferable and shall run with the land, except that the appeals granted must be exercised in full or construction started within not more than one year from the date of granting such appeal; otherwise, the appeal granted shall become null and void and the parcel shall thereafter be subject to all the applicable regulations of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.18.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-100. - Reapplication. 
    In the event a variance, special use or appeal from an action of the Zoning Administrator is denied, no new applications for a hearing shall be made for the same or a substantially similar condition within six months of such denial. 
(Prior code,  12.18.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-3-110. - Legal remedy. 
    The findings and decisions of the Planning Commission shall be final. Appeals to the District Court shall be made within 30 days from the date of the action by the Planning Commission. 
(Prior code,  12.18.110; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - District Regulations 

Sec. 16-4-10. - Single-Family Residential District (R-1). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the R-1 District are designed to retain and provide areas of low- to medium-density development characteristically used for single-family dwelling units. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Accessory building or structure. 
(2)  Parks. 
(3)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is not being made. 
(4)  Schools. 
(5)  Single-family dwelling. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Alternative energy structure. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast. 
(3)  Church. 
(4)  Clinic. 
(5)  Club. 
(6)  Condominium. 
(7)  Extended care facility. 
(8)  Family care home. 
(9)  Grazing. 
(10)  Home for the developmentally disabled. 
(11)  Home occupation - See Section 16-5-30. 
(12)  Hospital. 
(13)  Limited commercial. 
(14)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(15)  Planned unit development. 
(16)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is being made. 
(17)  Communication facility. 
All uses by review will conform with the major consideration of visual impact and neighborhood continuity. 
(e)  Lot dimensions . No parcel of land shall be less than 70 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
(f)  Setback requirements : 
(1)  Principal building: 
(d)  Lot area . No parcel of land, at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein, can henceforth be divided for sale in units of less than 8,000 square feet.
a.  Interior lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total, with no less than 10 feet on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
(2)  Accessory building or structures: 
a.  Interior lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet, but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet, but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total, but not less than the principal building on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
(g)  Lot coverage . The total ground area covered by all buildings on the parcel shall not exceed 50 percent of the total ground area of the parcel. 
(h)  Height of buildings : 
(1)  Maximum height for principal uses: 35 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height for accessory uses: 20 feet. 
(i)  Minimum net floor area : 1,200 square feet. 
(j)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(l)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.010; Ord. No. 739,  3, 4, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 750,  4, 5, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 864,  2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 884, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  2, 5-22-2018 ) 
Sec. 16-4-20. - Residential, Medium Density District (R-2). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the R-2 District are designed to retain and provide areas with comingling of single-family dwelling units and multi-family dwelling units. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast. 
(3)  Community parking. 
(4)  Condominium. 
(5)  Parks. 
(6)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is not being made. 
(7)  Schools. 
(8)  Single-family dwelling. 
(c)  Use by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Alternative energy structure. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Clinic. 
(4)  Club. 
(5)  Extended care facility. 
(6)  Family care home. 
(7)  Grazing. 
(8)  Home for the developmentally disabled. 
(9)  Home occupation - See Section 16-5-30. 
(10)  Hospital. 
(11)  Hotel. 
(12)  Limited commercial. 
(13)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(14)  Mobile home parks as provided in Chapter 18, Article 10 of this Code. 
(15)  Planned unit development. 
(16)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is being made. 
(17)  Schools. 
(18)  Communication facility. 
    All uses by review will conform with the major consideration of visual impact and neighborhood continuity. 
(e)  Lot dimensions . No parcel of land shall be less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
(f)  Setback requirements . 
(1)  Principal building: 
(d)  Lot area . No parcel of land existing in a single ownership, at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein, can henceforth be divided for sale into lots of less than 7,000 square feet. 
a.  Interior lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total, but not less than 10 feet on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 55 feet minimum. 
(2)  Accessory building or structure: 
a.  Interior lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total, but not less than the principal building on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
(g)  Lot coverage . The total ground area covered by all buildings on the parcel shall not exceed 50 percent of the total ground area of the parcel. 
(h)  Height of buildings : 
(1)  Maximum height for principal uses: 45 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height for accessory uses: 20 feet. 
(i)  Minimum net floor area : 864 square feet. 
(j)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(l)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.020; Ord. No. 739,  5, 6, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 750,  6, 7, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 864,  3, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 884, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  3, 5-22-2018 ) 
Sec. 16-4-30. - Mixed Residential District (R-3). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the R-3 District are designed to retain and provide areas with comingling of mobile homes with the traditional site-built housing. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Accessory building or structure. 
(2)  Community parking. 
(3)  Condominium. 
(4)  Parks. 
(5)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is not being made. 
(6)  Single-family dwelling. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission. 
(1)  Alternative energy structure. 
(2)  Campground and recreation area. 
(3)  Church. 
(4)  Clinic. 
(5)  Club. 
(6)  Extended care home. 
(7)  Family care home. 
(8)  Grazing - See Chapter 7, Article 7 of this Code regarding animals. 
(9)  Home for the developmentally disabled. 
(10)  Home occupation. 
(11)  Hospital. 
(12)  Hotel. 
(13)  Limited commercial. 
(14)  Mobile home park as provided in Chapter 18, Article 10 of this Code. 
(15)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(16)  Planned unit development. 
(17)  Redevelopment, rehabilitation or restoration of a property where a change in use is being made. 
(18)  School. 
(19)  Communication facility. 
    All uses by review will conform with the major consideration of visual impact and neighborhood continuity. 
(2)  Lot dimensions. No parcel of land shall be less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
(e)  Setback requirements . 
(1)  Principal building. 
a.  Interior lot. 
(d)  Lots . 
(1)  Lot area. No parcel of land existing in a single ownership, at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein, can henceforth be divided for the sale into lots of less than 7,000 square feet. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet minimum, 50 feet maximum. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 15 feet total, but no less than 10 feet on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
(2)  Accessory building or structures. 
a.  Interior lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet, but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  Front setback: 30 feet, but not less than the principal building. 
2.  Side setback: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet total, but not less than the principal building on the street side. 
3.  Rear setback: 5 feet minimum. 
(f)  Lot coverage . The total ground area covered by all buildings on the parcel shall not exceed 50 percent of the total ground area of the parcel. 
(g)  Height of buildings . 
(1)  Maximum height for principal uses: 45 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height for accessory uses: 20 feet. 
(h)  Minimum net floor area : 700 square feet. 
(i)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(j)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.030; Ord. No. 739,   7, 8, 6-9-1998; Ord. No. 750,   8, 9, 2-23-1999; Ord. No. 864,  4, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 884, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  4, 5-22-2018 ) 
Sec. 16-4-40. - Local Commercial District (C-1). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the C-1 District are designed to provide a central business district permitting those uses which are compatible with pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses. 
(1)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(2)  Banks. 
(3)  Business and professional offices. 
(4)  Churches and auditoriums. 
(5)  Clubs, lodges and meeting halls. 
(6)  Laundromats. 
(7)  Hotels and motels. 
(8)  Parking lots. 
(9)  Restaurants, bars and lounges. 
(10)  Retail, service and commercial uses. 
(11)  Service stations, gasoline. 
(12)  Supermarkets. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Any use not listed as a use by right except for junk yards, which are prohibited in this zone district. 
(2)  Alternative energy structure. 
(3)  Communication facility. 
(4)  Medical marijuana businesses. 
    All uses by review will conform with the major consideration of visual impact and neighborhood continuity. 
(e)  Setback requirements . No restrictions. 
(f)  Lot coverage . No restrictions. 
(g)  Height of buildings . 
(1)  Maximum height for principal uses: 45 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height for accessory uses: 30 feet.
(d)  Lot area . No parcel existing in single ownership at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein shall be divided for sale in units smaller than 5,000 square feet.  
(h)  Storage . All items held for sale or repair, with the exception of titled vehicles and farm equipment, shall be stored in a fully enclosed building or adequately shielded from public view by a minimum of a six-foot-tall fence during nonbusiness hours. 
(i)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(j)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(l)  (1)  Residential units may be located on the second floor and all floors above the second floor of a building provided 
a.  That the fire code enforcement officer and building inspector inspect each residential unit located on the second floor and floors above the second floor of a building prior to the unit's initial occupation as a residential unit; and 
b.  That no residential unit located on the second floor and any floor above the second floor of a building shall be occupied or used as a residential unit until said unit is in compliance with the fire code and all building and building maintenance codes then in effect and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building inspector. 
(2)  Conflict. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed or amended to the extent necessary to conform with this chapter. 
(3)  Severability. Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid. 
(Prior code,  12.06.040; Ord. No. 864,  5, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 905,  A, 8-25-2015 ; Ord. No. 933,  5, 5-22-2018 ; Memo. of 6-18-2018) 
Sec. 16-4-50. - Highway Commercial District (C-2). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the C-2 District are designed to provide a commercial district permitting those uses which are compatible with automobile traffic and limited neighborhood use. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures. 
(2)  Agricultural implement and sales stores. 
(3)  Automobile accessory stores. 
(4)  Automobile and trailer sales areas. 
(5)  Banks and money institutions. 
(6)  Business and professional offices. 
(7)  Convenience stores. 
(8)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(9)  Hotels and motels. 
(10)  Kennels and pet shops. 
(11)  Laundromats. 
(12)  Mortuaries. 
(13)  Parking lots. 
(14)  Restaurants, bars and lodges. 
(15)  Retail, service and commercial uses. 
(16)  Retail liquor outlets. 
(17)  Service stations, gasoline. 
(18)  Supermarkets. 
(19)  Vehicle repair services. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon the issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Any use not listed as a use by right except for junk yards, which are prohibited in this zone district. 
(2)  Alternative energy structures. 
(3)  Communication facility. 
(4)  Medical marijuana businesses. 
    All uses by review will conform with the major consideration of visual impact and neighborhood continuity. 
(e)  Setback requirements . No restrictions. 
(f)  Lot coverage . No restrictions. 
(g)  Height of buildings . 
(1)  Maximum height for principal uses: 55 feet. 
(2)  Maximum height for accessory uses: 30 feet. 
(d)  Lot area . No parcel existing in single ownership at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein shall be divided for sale in units smaller than 5,000 square feet. 
(h)  Storage . All items held for sale or repair, with the exception of titled vehicles and farm equipment, shall be stored in a fully enclosed building or adequately shielded from public view by a minimum of a six-foot-tall fence during nonbusiness hours. 
(i)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(j)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.050; Ord. No. 864,  6, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  6, 5-22-2018 ; Memo. of 6-18-2018) 
Sec. 16-4-60. - Light Industrial District (I-1). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the I-1 District are designed to retain and provide areas for the manufacture, warehousing, jobbing and limited retailing of products which, by their inherent characteristics and the operation involved, are not obnoxious to one another or surrounding uses. The operation of this use will be entirely within a completely enclosed structure. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Agricultural implements, manufacture, sales and service. 
(2)  Auto garages and rental vehicles. 
(3)  Auto, service and body work. 
(4)  Auto storage. 
(5)  Beer, ale and liquor, wholesale. 
(6)  Brick manufacture, wholesale. 
(7)  Cafes and cafeterias. 
(8)  Can, wholesale. 
(9)  Cement products, retail and wholesale. 
(10)  Concrete batching or "ready mix" plants. 
(11)  Contractors' equipment and supplies, retail and wholesale. 
(12)  Feed and/or grain manufacture, wholesale and retail. 
(13)  Fences, manufacture, retail and wholesale. 
(14)  Freight depots. 
(15)  Frozen food lockers. 
(16)  Industrial equipment, assembly, retail, rental, storage and wholesale. 
(17)  Motor freight company garage. 
(18)  Truck parking and service garages. 
(19)  Warehousing. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Alternative energy structure. 
(2)  Communication facility. 
(3)  Medical marijuana businesses. 
(4)  Any other use not listed in any other zone as a use by right except for junk yards, which are prohibited in this zone.  
(e)  Setback requirements . 
(1)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Minimum side yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage . No requirement. 
(d)  Lot area . No parcel of land shall be subdivided, after the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein, into units smaller than 5,000 square feet.
(g)  Height of buildings . Maximum height of principal structure: 55 feet. 
(h)  Floor area . No restrictions. 
(i)  Performance standards : 
(1)  The volume of sound generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently exceed 60 decibels at any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(2)  The vibrations generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently be perceptible, without instruments, at any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(3)  The emission of heat, glare, radiation or fumes by this use shall not emit any obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(j)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(l)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.060; Ord. No. 864,  7, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  7, 5-22-2018 ; Memo. of 6-18-2018) 
Sec. 16-4-70. - Industrial District (I-2). 
(a)  Purpose . The standards of the I-2 District are designed to retain and provide areas for the manufacture, warehousing, jobbing and limited retailing of products which, by their inherent characteristics and the operation involved, are not obnoxious to one another or the surrounding area. 
(b)  Uses by right . A use by right is any of the following uses: 
(1)  Agricultural implements, manufacture, sales and service. 
(2)  Auto garages and rental vehicles. 
(3)  Auto, service and body work. 
(4)  Auto storage. 
(5)  Beer, ale and liquor, wholesale. 
(6)  Brick manufacture, wholesale. 
(7)  Cafes and cafeterias. 
(8)  Can, wholesale. 
(9)  Cement products, retail and wholesale. 
(10)  Concrete batching or "ready-mix" plants. 
(11)  Contractors' equipment and supplies, retail and wholesale. 
(12)  Feed and/or grain manufacture, wholesale and retail. 
(13)  Fences, manufacture, retail and wholesale. 
(14)  Freight depots. 
(15)  Frozen food lockers. 
(16)  Industrial equipment, assembly, retail, rental and storage, wholesale. 
(17)  Motor freight company garages. 
(18)  Truck parking and service garages. 
(19)  Warehousing. 
(c)  Uses by review . A use by review is any of the following uses, which are permitted only upon issuance of a special use permit by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Alternative energy structure. 
(2)  Communication facility. 
(3)  Medical marijuana businesses. 
(4)  Any other use not listen in any zone as a use by right. 
(d)  Lot area . No parcel of land shall be subdivided, after the passage of the zoning ordinance codified herein, into units smaller than 5,000 square feet. 
(e)  Setback requirements . 
(1)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Minimum side yard: 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage . No requirement. 
(g)  Height of buildings . Maximum height of principal structure: 55 feet. 
(h)  Floor area . No restrictions. 
(i)  Performance standards : 
(1)  The volume of sound generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently exceed 80 decibels at any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(2)  The vibrations generated by this use shall not inherently or recurrently be perceptible, without instruments, at any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(3)  The emission of heat, glare, radiation or fumes by this use shall not emit any obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond any point of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(j)  Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements . See Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Signs . See Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(l)  Floodplain area . See Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(Prior code,  12.06.070; Ord. No. 864,  8, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016; Ord. No. 933,  8, 5-22-2018 ; Memo. of 6-18-2018) 
ARTICLE 5 - Supplementary District Regulations 

Sec. 16-5-10. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
    The height limitations contained in Article 4 above do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, television antennas, ventilators or chimneys. 
(Prior code,  12.08.010; Ord. No. 864,  9, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-20. - Solar considerations. 
    No construction shall be allowed that interferes with an existing conforming solar system. 
(Prior code,  12.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-30. - Home occupations or limited commercial. 
(a)  The use of a dwelling unit for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(1)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding eight square feet in area, nonilluminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. 
(2)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(3)  No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, smoke, dust or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence or outside the dwelling unit, or conducted in other than a single-family residence. 
(4)  Vehicle repair shall be conducted only in completely enclosed buildings. 
(b)  After March 1, 2010, a variance for home occupation or limited commercial use, when granted by the Planning Commission, shall be granted for a limited period, which period shall terminate at midnight on December 31 following the last day of the twelfth month subsequent to the date of variance approval. Immediately following termination of the variance, a grace period shall exist between January 1 and March 31, during which time the variance may be renewed by paying a renewal fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule and completing a form provided by the City Clerk, attesting that the home occupation or limited commercial use is continuing and that the occupant is compliant with all conditions imposed by the Planning Commission. Failure to renew shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the home occupation or limited commercial use has ceased, and the holder of the variance must appear before the Planning Commission to obtain a renewal. This provision shall not apply to variances granted prior to March 1, 2010. 
(Prior code,  12.08.030; Ord. No. 864,  10, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-40. - Meat processing and rendering plants. 
    Processing plants shall be operated in a manner that will not adversely affect other properties and uses in the area. 
(1)  No obnoxious or noxious odors resulting from the processing plant shall be discernible at the outer boundaries of the parcel. 
(2)  Wastes shall be so deposited, stored and transmitted from the parcel as to not be objectionable to adjacent properties or create a public nuisance. 
(3)  Sounds resulting from the processing plant shall not exceed 60 decibels at the outer boundary of the parcel. 
(4)  The applicable standards of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment shall be complied with, including methods of disposal of sewage and drainage water as outlined in the Colorado Water Quality Control Act. 
(Prior code,  12.08.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-50. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
    Vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property, unless they are in a fully enclosed structure, completely concealed behind a privacy fence and/or covered bumper-to-bumper with a fitted opaque cover. 
(Prior code,  12.08.050; Ord. No. 766,  C, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-60. - Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether or not occupied by such equipment. 
(1)  No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored more than seven days on any public property that is not designated for that specific use. 
(2)  A visitor may use his or her camper for not more than three weeks if the camper is parked on private property. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Prior code,  12.08.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-70. - Planned unit developments. 
    In any zone district and on land composed of one or more contiguous parcels, a plan may be submitted to the Planning Commission proposing the unique development of such land for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of an existing area with unique planning, building or ownership techniques not adequately recognized by the terms of this Chapter for the zone district in which the land is located. A public hearing shall be held as required by Section 16-3-40 of this Chapter. If, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, the objectives set forth below can be satisfied, the Planning Commission may approve such a plan and its approval shall be final and binding and permits shall be issued. No subsequent change in the plan may be made unless approved by the Planning Commission after a public hearing. 
(1)  If residential, the overall net density of the area so planned, exclusive of the street rights-of-way, is not greater than if each individual parcel were built upon with a lot size conforming to the requirements of the zone district. 
(2)  The plan provides for the use and continuous maintenance of any remaining open space as public land if the City Council will accept such land, or as land common to all properties or controlled by a corporation composed of all present and future owners of all property within the proposed development and provision is made for the recording of such with each deed. 
(3)  Exception to minimum setback and lot width and depth requirements for each building can reasonably be made so that the public health, safety and general welfare will be protected. 
(4)  Setbacks on the periphery of the area are not less than those required for the zone district in which the building complex is located; provided, however, that front setback requirements on the interior streets or service drives may be changed. 
(5)  The plan is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and provides appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter. 
(6)  The property is to be provided with adequate access to transportation, water supply, waste disposal, fire and police protection and other needed public facilities and services. 
(7)  The plan will cause no undue traffic congestion or create unnecessary traffic hazards in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  The plan will provide traffic access ways, interior circulation ways and parking and loading spaces as required for the zone district in which the land is located. 
(9)  The plan will not have a substantially adverse effect upon the character of the neighborhood or upon adjacent property values in the area. 
(10)  The plan will incorporate adequate safeguards, screening, fences and landscaping to protect and maintain harmony with the surrounding area. 
(11)  This provision is specifically intended to facilitate and encourage unique or inventive development ideas, such as cluster plans, variable density arrangements, condominium arrangements, garden apartments, shopping centers, industrial parks and common grounds and facilities. 
(12)  All other zoning regulations shall apply to planned unit developments for each appropriate district. 
(Prior code,  12.08.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-80. - Projections from buildings. 
    Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features and other similar architectural features may project into a required yard or into required open space as established by coverage standards. 
(Prior code,  12.08.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-90. - Public utilities. 
    For the purpose of this Section, a public utility is defined to be a water, irrigation, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, cable television, bus, taxi, ambulance or railroad system; or an installation which serves five or more customers, whether or not franchised or organized as a corporation or district. Public utility installations shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Distribution, transmission and service lines requiring simple easements or installation in public rights-of-way or installed under a franchise agreement with the City and usual customer facilities shall not be subject to zoning requirements. 
(2)  Special services facilities, such as water reservoirs, sewage lagoons, switching yards, pumping stations and other components, and equipment installations on land owned or leased and where the equipment is fenced or placed in a building, shall not be constructed until a special use permit has been issued by the Planning Commission. 
(Prior code,  12.08.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading 

Sec. 16-6-10. - General provisions. 
(a)  The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces is a continuing obligation of the property owner. No building or other permit shall be issued until plans are presented that show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space. 
(b)  Requirements for types of buildings and uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the Planning Commission based upon the requirements of comparable uses listed. 
(c)  In the event several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately. 
(d)  Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may agree to jointly utilize the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap, provided that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the Zoning Administrator in the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish the joint use. 
(e)  Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used for conducting the business or use. 
(Prior code,  12.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-6-20. - Off-street parking. 
    At the time of erection of a new structure or at the time of enlargement or change in use of an existing structure within any district, off-street parking spaces shall be as provided in this Section unless greater requirements are otherwise established. If parking space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is required by this Section. Where square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the net floor area. 
Use Number of Required Spaces Residential Uses Single-family dwelling 1 space per dwelling unit Multi-family dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units 1 space per dwelling unit Housing, restricted to aged, disabled, etc. 1 space per unit Institutions Extended care facility 1 space per 2 beds Hospital 1 space per 2 beds Places of Public Assembly Auditorium 1 space per 4 seats Church 1 space per 4 seats School:  Elementary school 1 space per 20 students  Junior high school 1 space per 10 students  High school 1 space per 6 students  Vocational or  commercial school 1 space per 4 students Commercial Club Spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted, such as hotel, restaurant, auditorium, etc. Eating or drinking establishment 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of floor area Hotel 1 space per 1 guest room Medical and dental clinic 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per 2 employees Mortuary 1 space per 4 seats Motel 1 space per guest room or suite plus 1 additional space for owner/manager Office 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per 2 employees Retail store 1 1/2 spaces per 300 sq. ft. of floor space Service repair shop; retail store handling exclusively bulky merchandise, such as automobiles and furniture 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor space Stadium, arena and theater 1 space per 4 seats Industrial Storage warehouse, manufacturing establishment; air, rail or trucking freight terminal 1 space per employee Wholesale establishment 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 700 sq. ft. of patron-serving area.  
(Prior code,  12.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Signs 

Sec. 16-7-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to define the types of signs that will be permitted in the various zoning districts and those that will be prohibited, the manner in which sign areas and dimensions will be measured, and the exemption of certain types of signs from this Chapter. It is further the intent of this Article to encourage the erection of signs which are attractive and compatible with adjacent property and which will preserve and enhance property values within the City. 
(Prior code,  12.12.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-20. - General standards. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all signs, either accessory or nonaccessory, in all zoning districts regardless of designation: 
(1)  Signs in need of paint, broken signs and signs of vacated buildings shall be removed from the premises or repaired or renovated by the owners of the premises on order of the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Signs pertaining to special events which refer to particular periods or points of time, such as meetings, sales, exhibitions and vacancy announcements, shall be permitted, provided that such signs shall be removed when no longer applicable. 
(3)  Along streets and roads, no sign shall obscure the vision or views of the natural landscape or the larger urban area, nor shall any sign be distracting to motorists or create a traffic hazard. 
(4)  No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street or road in such a manner as to obstruct clear vision; nor shall any sign be erected at a location where, by reason of its position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any traffic sign or traffic control device. 
(5)  Signs shall not be erected on a City right-of-way. 
(Prior code,  12.12.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-30. - Permitted accessory signs in residential districts. 
    In residential districts, no sign shall be erected or maintained, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  No sign shall be erected on the roof of any building. 
(2)  Signs shall not be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights. 
(3)  No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of ribbons, streamers, spinners or smaller moving, fluttering or revolving devices. Such devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be used for the purposes of advertising or attracting. 
(4)  Owner or occupant signs. A sign, identifying property or the name of the owner or occupant of property is allowable, provided that such sign is not in excess of two square feet in area and only one such sign is erected on any single lot or parcel. 
(5)  For lease or sale signs. Signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the property on which the sign is located, or any building thereon, are allowable, provided that such signs do not exceed four square feet in area per sign, and further that not more than two signs are located on any single lot or parcel. 
(6)  Church signs. A sign or entrance marker for each church is allowable, provided that such sign does not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
(7)  Contractor signs. One sign may be maintained by the contractor during construction of the building, but shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. 
(8)  Business or home occupation signs. Signs pertaining to a business operated out of the home or building is allowed, provided that it does not exceed four square feet and no more than one sign is located on the property. 
(Prior code,  12.12.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-40. - Permitted accessory signs in commercial and industrial districts. 
    In local commercial, highway commercial and industrial districts, accessory signs shall not be erected or maintained except in conformity with the following regulations: 
(1)  An accessory sign shall identify only the name of the owner, trade name, trade mark, product symbol, products sold and/or the business or activity conducted on the premises whereon such sign is located. 
(2)  Signs along the highway must conform to the state sign laws. 
(3)  Commercial or industrial off-premises signs are not allowed. 
(4)  Symbolic signs, such as a barber pole, mortar and pestle, etc., which are traditional in nature and size, shall be permitted. 
(5)  Directional signs, not to exceed two square feet in area, may be erected as needed. 
(Prior code,  12.12.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-50. - Nonaccessory signs. 
    No outdoor advertising sign, billboard or other advertising media not directly related to the use of the premises on which it is located shall be permitted in any district, except as a use by review in such districts as is hereinafter provided. Any nonaccessory sign permitted as a conditional use shall be in harmony with the spirit and intent of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.12.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-60. - Public agency signs. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to signs erected by national, state, county or municipal governmental agencies, including traffic and informational signs. 
(Prior code,  12.12.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-7-70. - Removal of signs. 
    Any sign existing on or after the date of enactment of the zoning ordinance codified herein identifying a business or activity which no longer exists or a product which is no longer sold on the premises shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon written notice of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, upon determining that such sign exists, shall notify the owner of the premises in writing to remove such sign within six months of the date of the notice or upon expiration of the lease agreement. 
(Prior code,  12.12.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Nonconforming Lots, Uses, Structures and Signs 

Sec. 16-8-10. - Purpose. 
    Any use of a lot, structure or sign that existed immediately prior to the adoption of the zoning ordinance codified herein, which does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter at the time of adoption, shall be known as a nonconforming use, nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure or nonconforming sign. 
(Prior code,  12.14.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-8-20. - Nonconforming use. 
(a)  Continuation of nonconforming use . A nonconforming use may be continued, but shall not be enlarged without approval by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Discontinuance of nonconforming use . If a nonconforming use is discontinued from a use for a period of six months, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use, unless the use is of a seasonal character; then a period of 12 months shall apply. Vacancy of a dwelling while the dwelling is listed with a real estate broker shall not constitute discontinuance of a nonconforming use. 
(c)  Change of nonconforming use . If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to the regulations of the district and, after change, it shall not be changed back again to the original nonconforming use. 
(Prior code,  12.14.020; Ord. No. 809, 1-25-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-8-30. - Nonconforming structure. 
(a)  Alteration or enlargement . A structure not conforming as to height, setback or coverage may be altered or enlarged, provided that the alteration or enlargement does not result in a violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Destruction of nonconforming structure or structure having nonconforming use . 
(1)  If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, flood, wind, explosion or other act to the extent exceeding 50 percent of the cost of replacement of the structure using new materials, a future structure or use on the property shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter. Where the destroyed structure contained a nonconforming use as a dwelling and where the nonconforming use had not been discontinued prior to the destruction, the replacement use may be as a dwelling. 
(2)  If destruction is determine to be less than 50 percent, restoration must be started within 12 months of such calamity and completed within 24 months of initiating restoration. 
(Prior code,  12.14.030; Ord. No. 809, 1-25-2005; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-8-40. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  No structure shall be erected or enlarged on a nonconforming lot without approval of the Planning Commission. 
(b)  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance codified herein, and part or all of said lots do not meet the requirements of the district in which they are located as to minimum area or frontage or both, the lands shall be considered, for the purpose of this Chapter, an undivided parcel. No portion of said parcel shall be sold or used in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  12.14.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-8-50. - Nonconforming signs. 
    No sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to increase its nonconformity; provided, however, that any sign or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(Prior code,  12.14.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-8-60. - Completion of structure or building. 
    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction alteration or designated use of a building for which construction work has commenced prior to the adoption of the zoning ordinance codified herein. 
(Prior code,  12.14.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9 - Zoning Amendments and Map Changes 

Sec. 16-9-10. - Amendments. 
    Any portion of this Chapter and/or the Zoning Map may be changed whenever the public necessity, health, safety, general welfare and/or good zoning practices justify such action. Any such change shall be made only by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  12.20.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-20. - Initiation of amendment. 
    An ordinance for the amendment of any portion of this Chapter or of any zone district boundaries may be initiated by any member of the City Council or the Planning Commission, an administrative officer of the City or one or more of the owners of the property within the area for which the amendment is requested. The request for such change shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator on a form provided for that purpose. 
(Prior code,  12.20.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-30. - Fees. 
    All requests for amendments to this Chapter or the Zoning Map, except those initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission or any administrative office of the City, shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule plus the cost of legal advertising, which costs shall be paid and a receipt therefor presented to the Planning Commission Secretary before the hearing for said application is scheduled. Fees shall be made payable to the City of Rocky Ford. The Zoning Administrator shall receive the application for an amendment and all supporting documents, to be transmitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission within ten working days of its receipt by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Prior code,  12.20.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-40. - Action of Secretary of Planning Commission. 
    Upon receipt of the application or an amendment and all supporting documentation as transmitted by the Zoning Administrator, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall cause said application to be placed on the agenda of the next Planning Commission meeting. The Secretary shall submit a written or verbal report of the application, its documentation and such other information as he or she deems pertinent. 
(Prior code,  12.20.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-50. - Planning Commission action. 
(a)  At the meeting at which the application is on the agenda for first consideration, the Planning Commission shall receive and file the application, documentation and written report of the Secretary, hear or receive and file a presentation by the applicant and set a date and time for a public hearing, which date shall not be later than 60 days from receipt of such application. 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall cause notice to be published, as required by law, at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing and, if for a change in the Zoning Map, shall cause notice of the public hearing on the proposed changes to be sent to owners of the lots included in such proposed change, those property owners with property within 350 feet of the new zone boundary, and such other persons as in the judgment of the Secretary should be notified. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the post office. 
(Prior code,  12.20.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-60. - Hearing and findings. 
    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and may recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment in whole or in part. The action of the Planning Commission shall be in writing, shall contain the following findings of fact and shall include a statement setting forth those factors which the Planning Commission considered to be controlling factors in reaching its decision: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  The change requested promotes the public necessity, health, safety and general welfare and is consistent with good land use and zoning practices. 
(Prior code,  12.20.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-70. - Referral of recommendation. 
    The recommendation shall, within 60 days of receipt thereof, be referred to the City Council and an ordinance embodying the recommendation, in whole or in part, may be adopted by the City Council after a public hearing thereon as required by law. 
(Prior code,  12.20.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-80. - Mandatory review. 
    During the first 30 days following the one-year anniversary of the effective date of any ordinance changing the zoning map, the Planning Commission shall review the proposed development of the subject area in the field to determine whether the development intended by the amendment is being undertaken in good faith. If such development is not underway, in keeping with said intent, the Planning Commission may initiate action to rezone the subject area back to the classification it had prior to the change in zoning, or to any other more appropriate classification. 
(Prior code,  12.20.080; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-90. - Reapplication. 
    In the event the proposed amendment is denied by the City Council, no new request for the same or a substantially similar amendment shall be heard by the City Council within one year of such denial. 
(Prior code,  12.20.090; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-9-100. - Legal remedy. 
    The findings and decisions of the City Council shall be final. Appeals to the District Court shall be made within 30 days from the date of the City Council's action. 
(Prior code,  12.20.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 10 - Violations and Penalties 

Sec. 16-10-10. - Violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, occupant or otherwise, to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation of the provisions of this Chapter or any amendment thereof. 
(Prior code,  12.22.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 16-10-20. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code; and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Prior code,  12.22.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 11. - MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FOR PERSONAL USE 

Sec. 16-11-10. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
    This Article clarifies local law to assure provisions of H.B. 17-1220 codified in C.R.S.  18-18-406 regarding the maximum number of marijuana plants that may be cultivated, grown or produced on a residential property may be enforced within the City of Rocky Ford. 
( Ord. No. 929, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 16-11-20. - Definitions. 
    Residential property in this Article means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Residential property also includes the real property surrounding a structure, owned in common with the structure, that includes one or more single units providing complete independent living facilities. 
( Ord. No. 929, 3-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 16-11-30. - Prohibitions. 
    Effective April 1, 2018, no person shall knowingly possess at, cultivate, grow or produce more than 12 marijuana plants on or in a residential property regardless of whether the plants are for medical or recreational use and regardless of the number of persons residing temporarily or permanently on the residential property. 
( Ord. No. 929, 3-13-2018 ) 
CHAPTER 17 - Subdivisions 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 17-1-10. - Purpose. 
    These regulations are designed and enacted for the purpose of providing for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the Master Plan for adequate access and convenience to open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum area and width of lots. 
(Prior code,  13.02.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-20. - Short title. 
    For the purpose of brevity, these regulations shall be referred to as the "Rocky Ford Subdivision Regulations" or "this Chapter." 
(Prior code,  13.02.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-30. - Authority. 
(a)  The Rocky Ford Subdivision Regulations are authorized by state statutes and are hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of those statutes. 
(b)  Any person, being the owner or agent of any land located within a subdivision, who transfers, sells, agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to, exhibition of or use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded or filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred, sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this Chapter. The City may enjoin such transfer of sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code,  13.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-40. - Jurisdiction. 
    The territory of jurisdiction of the Planning Commission over the subdivision of land shall include all land located within the legal boundaries of the City and limited only to control with reference to a major street plan and not otherwise, and shall also include all land lying within three miles of the corporate limits of the City and not located in any other municipality. However, in the case of any such non-municipal land lying within five miles of more than one municipality, the jurisdiction of each municipal planning commission shall terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective corporate limits of the City and such other municipality. 
(Prior code,  13.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-50. - Public dedication. 
    All plans of streets or highways for public use and all plans, plats, plots and re-plots of land laid out in a subdivision or building lots and the streets, highways, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to a public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval before they are recorded. Acceptance of said proposed dedication by the public shall be given by action of the Planning Commission. 
(Prior code,  13.02.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-60. - Words and terms. 
(a)  The word shall is always mandatory and directory; and may is permissive. 
(b)  Words used in the present tense include the future, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(c)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Prior code,  13.04; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-1-70. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and terms are hereby defined as follows: 
    Development means the act of building structures and installing site improvements. 
    Resubdivision means: 
(1)  Substandard lots of record that are combined into larger, more saleable plots in keeping with contemporary development ideas and in which new streets are opened up or in which a recombination of the lots constitutes a development. 
(2)  Small parcels and strips transferred to adjoining owners in order to make minor property line adjustments. 
(3)  Lots of adequate or above-standard size, either fully serviced or unserviced, that are divided or recombined in such a way that none falls below standards but the marketability of the land is increased. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
(Prior code,  13.04; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Administration 

Sec. 17-2-10. - Variances for hardship. 
    The Planning Commission may authorize variances from the terms of this Chapter where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions of a tract of land, the strict application of any regulation contained herein would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the subdivider; provided that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  13.12; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-2-20. - Amendments. 
    The Planning Commission and the City Council may amend the requirements of this Chapter after giving public notice of any such proposed amendment and after holding a public hearing thereon. 
(Prior code,  13.14; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-2-30. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter, the following regulation shall govern: 
(1)  Provisions are minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. This Chapter shall therefore be regarded as remedial and shall be liberally construed to further its underlying purposes. 
(2)  Application of overlapping regulations. Whenever any provision of this Chapter and any provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind contain restrictions covering the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(3)  Existing permits and private agreements. This Chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
a.  Any permits issued before the effective date of the original ordinance codified herein; or 
b.  Any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that it is not in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code,  13.16; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-2-40. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the several provisions of this Chapter shall be severable, in accordance with the provisions set forth below: 
(1)  If any provision is declared invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
a.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision which is expressly stated in the decision to be invalid; and 
b.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Chapter as a whole or any other part thereof, but the rest of this Chapter shall continue in full force and effect. 
(2)  If the application of any provision of this Chapter to any tract of land is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
a.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that tract of land immediately involved in the controversy, action or proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered; and 
b.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Chapter as a whole or the application of any provision thereof to any other tract of land. 
(Prior code,  13.18; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-2-50. - Repeal. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the City inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistency and no further, are hereby repealed. The repeal of any of said ordinances and resolutions does not revive any other ordinance or resolution or portion thereof repealed by said ordinance or resolution. Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the violation of any ordinance or resolution repealed hereby for an offense committed prior to the repeal. 
(Prior code,  13.20; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Procedure for Submission of Plats 

Sec. 17-3-10. - Preapplication. 
    A conference with the Chairperson of the Planning Commission is recommended in order to become familiar with the provisions of this Chapter, and with the City Engineer, Building Inspector and other City officials on the availability of services and facilities in the area to be subdivided. 
(Prior code,  13.06.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-3-20. - Sketch map. 
(a)  The purpose of the sketch map is to resolve points of disagreement before the subdivider goes to the expense of designing and drawing the preliminary plat and engineering drawings. 
(b)  The sketch map shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch map with the subdivider at the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. 
(c)  The sketch map shall show on a topographic or other suitable base map in a preliminary form: the proposed layout of streets and lots; existing and proposed covenants; utilities available; the number and size of residential lots; building types, sizes and price range; parks, playgrounds and school areas; and any commercial use proposed. 
(d)  In addition, the sketch map shall include a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries, public transportation, shopping areas, schools and churches. 
(e)  A time schedule should be submitted if only part of the subdivision is to be developed at one time. 
(f)  The sketch map should be approximately to scale but does not need to be mechanically drawn. 
(g)  The Planning Commission shall have approval, subject to suggested changes to be incorporated in the preliminary plat and engineering drawings. 
(Prior code,  13.06.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-3-30. - Preliminary plat and engineering drawings. 
(a)  The preliminary plat drawings are those from which construction work on the subdivision can proceed. It is a drawing on which final review for adherence to design standards and improvement proposals is based before construction of a proposed subdivision is started. It may have to be modified before approval, but changes should be minor. 
(b)  If the situation is changed; for example, if a highway is being built across the proposed subdivision, then the preliminary plat may be invalidated and a new sketch map required. 
(c)  If the Planning Commission approves the plat, the subdivider may proceed with the installation of site improvements, subject to obtaining work permits from the City Engineer, and proceed with preparation of the final plat. 
(d)  If, after one year, improvements have not been started, approval of the preliminary plat shall expire. 
(e)  The preliminary plat and engineering drawings shall show or be accompanied by: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision and the engineer or surveyor, who shall be licensed by the Colorado Board of Examiners for Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
(2)  Name of the subdivision. 
(3)  Topography at five-foot intervals or less. 
(4)  Location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 
(5)  Zoning on the tract. 
(6)  Date of preparation, scale (not less than one inch equals 200 feet) and north arrow indicating true north. 
(7)  Primary control points approved by the City Engineer, or descriptions and "ties" to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
(8)  Location and description of monuments. 
(9)  Location and principal dimensions for all proposed areas to be reserved for parks, schools or other public uses. 
(10)  Proposed sites, if any, for multi-family residential use, business areas, industrial areas, churches and other nonpublic uses, exclusive of single-family residential areas. 
(11)  Number to identify each lot or site and block number in conformance with the City system. 
(12)  Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and total acres in the subdivisions. 
(13)  Location and dimensions, angles, bearings, lines and radii and arcs of: 
a.  Utilities; 
b.  Tract boundary lines; 
c.  Streets, including their names; 
d.  Easements and other rights-of-way; 
e.  Property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
f.  Section lines; and 
g.  Alleys. 
(14)  A map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area, including: zoning on the property adjacent to the tract, the names of abutting subdivisions or the names of the owners of abutting unplatted property and reference to permanent survey monuments with a tie to a section corner or a quarter-section corner. 
    The engineering drawings are to furnish more details, including profiles and cross-sections of site improvements and grading plans for streets and lots. For regulations governing these drawings, the subdivider should see the City Engineer's regulations. 
(f)  Progressive subdivision: 
(1)  The final plat may be submitted covering only a portion of the area covered by the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Provided that the partial final plats are submitted within nine months of each other, the period between approvals can extend up to three years. 
(3)  The Planning Commission, the City Engineer and the subdivider may agree on: 
a.  The installation of off-site improvements and connecting links, such as roads and sewers that are outside the area covered by the partial plat but are needed to provide access and services to it. 
b.  The amount of performance guarantee. 
(g)  Ten copies of the preliminary plat and required supplemental material shall be presented by the subdivider to the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least ten days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting. 
(h)  At the next regular Planning Commission meeting, the preliminary plat shall be reviewed in general and, if acceptable, shall be referred by the Planning Commission to the following offices for study: City Engineer's office, electric companies, gas companies, telephone companies, cities and towns located within three miles of the area to be subdivided, school districts and, where applicable, special utility districts and the Colorado Department of Transportation. Each of these offices shall return their recommendations to the Planning Commission within 20 days of receipt of its copy of the preliminary plat. If not received by this time, the Planning Commission shall proceed without its recommendations. 
(i)  At the next regular Planning Commission meeting, following discussions with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the Planning Commission shall disapprove, approve as submitted or approve as modified the preliminary plat. Such approval of a preliminary plat shall be conditional for purposes of guidance in the preparation of the final plat. 
(Prior code,  13.06.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-3-40. - Final plat. 
(a)  The final plat is a record of the subdivision as surveyed in the field. The items to be shown are the same as those on the preliminary plat, but once work is started on the site, minor changes in property line and utility layout to meet surveying and installations problems are to be expected. The final plat shall record these minor changes, but it should closely agree with the preliminary plat. Changes that are in violation of this Chapter are not permitted. 
(b)  Building permits shall not be issued (except for work permits for construction that is part of the required utility system) until the final plat is approved. 
(c)  Approval of the final plat is given only if improvements have been installed according to plan or if a performance guarantee approved by the City Attorney or Finance Director has been given by the subdivider for those improvements not yet installed. 
(d)  Approval of the final plat does not constitute acceptance of preferred dedications. Dedications can only be accepted by the City Council. 
(e)  Drawings shall be made at a scale of one inch equals ten feet with India ink or some other equally substantial solution, on vellum or other stable base, such as Mylar. Good draftsmanship shall be required in order for all information shown on the final plat to be accurate and legible. 
(f)  The following information shall be required on the final plat or information accompanying it: 
(1)  Certification of title showing that the applicant is the land owner. 
(2)  Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public uses. 
(3)  Certification by a surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat. 
(4)  Certification showing approval by the Planning Commission. 
(g)  Processing of the final plat shall be not more than 12 months after approval of the preliminary plat. 
(h)  The original and three copies of the final plat and required supplemental material shall be presented by the subdivider to the Secretary of the Planning Commission, provided that such time is at least ten days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting. 
(i)  At the next regular Planning Commission meeting, not less than 60 days, the Planning Commission shall check the final plat for conformity with the approved preliminary plat and other requirements of this Chapter and shall approve as submitted or disapprove the final plat. 
(j)  Recording: 
(1)  Not more than three months after approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall record the final plat in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder; otherwise, the approving action of the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(2)  The subdivider shall immediately upon recording furnish the City Engineer with three copies of the final plat as officially recorded. 
(k)  A final survey of utilities, as installed, shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The survey can be a simplified version of the engineering drawings, but it should record any necessary minor changes of location that may be made in the course of construction. Certificates of improvements completion will be withheld until this survey is made. 
(l)  The fee for approval of the final plat shall be as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code,  13.06.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Design Standards 

Sec. 17-4-10. - Streets. 
(a)  The design standards shall be coordinated with the Zoning Map and Chapter 16 of this Code, and with the Development Policy and Future Land Use Plan. 
(b)  Development in floodplain land must comply with the requirements of Chapter 18, Article 11 of this Code. 
(c)  The arrangement, width, grade and location of all through streets shall conform to the City Circulation Plan. Streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served. 
(d)  Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(e)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. 
(f)  Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than 50 feet. 
(g)  Half-streets shall be prohibited, except, where an existing half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted. 
(h)  Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 300 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 110 feet. 
(i)  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. 
(j)  Street grades, wherever feasible and with due allowance for reasonably vertical curves, shall not exceed seven percent. 
(k)  No street grade shall be less than one-half percent. 
(Prior code,  13.08.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-4-20. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in all districts, except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite provision is made for service access and parking, adequate for the uses proposed. 
(b)  The width of an alley shall be 20 feet. 
(c)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end. 
(Prior code,  13.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-4-30. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course and such further width as may be required for the construction of necessary flood control measures. 
(Prior code,  13.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-4-40. - Blocks. 
    The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
a.  Block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet or be less than 300 feet. 
b.  Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than four and one-half feet wide, shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities. 
(Prior code,  13.08.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-4-50. - Lots. 
(a)  Residential lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(b)  Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from expressways and major arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the property line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(c)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Prior code,  13.08.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Improvements 

Sec. 17-5-10. - Engineering drawings. 
    The following items shall be required prior to the start of construction: 
(1)  Approval of the drawings. 
(2)  Exhibits. 
(3)  Source of the drawings. 
(4)  Qualifications of contractors. 
(5)  Time schedule and sequence of construction. 
(6)  Modification of design of improvements during construction. 
(7)  As-built drawings. 
(Prior code,  13.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-5-20. - Required improvements. 
    The following improvements shall be required prior to approval of the development: 
(1)  Policy on sharing cost of oversize improvements. 
(2)  Monuments. 
(3)  Grading. 
(4)  Streets. 
(5)  Storm drainage. 
(6)  Culverts and bridges. 
(7)  Curbs and gutters. 
(8)  Sidewalks. 
(9)  Street trees. 
(10)  Street signs. 
(11)  Street lights. 
(12)  Water supply. 
(13)  Fire hydrants. 
(14)  Sanitary sewers and facilities. 
(15)  Planting screens. 
(16)  Guarantees of performance: 
a.  Form and amount. 
b.  Conditions. 
c.  Duration and release. 
d.  Extension of time. 
e.  Default. 
(17)  Maintenance bonds. 
(18)  Protection and repair of existing improvements. 
(Prior code,  13.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-5-30. - Inspection of improvements. 
    The following items shall be required for inspection of improvements: 
(1)  Inspection required. 
(2)  Notification. 
(3)  Timing. 
(4)  Reports. 
(5)  Subdivider responsible in any case. 
(6)  Approval, not acceptance. 
(7)  Fees. 
(Prior code,  13.10.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Cost of Improvements 

Sec. 17-6-10. - Responsibility for costs. 
    The owner and subdivider of any subdivision, as defined in Section 17-6-20 below, shall pay and be responsible for the cost and installation of water and sewer utility lines to and within such subdivision. In addition, such owner and subdivider shall pay and be responsible for the installation of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters within such subdivision. 
(Prior code,  13.22; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-6-20. - Definition. 
    The terms subdivision is defined as follows: Any parcel of land in the City of Rocky Ford which is divided into two or more parcels, separate interests or interests in common, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The term subdivision shall not apply to any division of land which creates parcels of land, each of which comprises 35 acres or more of land, none of which is intended for use by multiple owners. 
(2)  The term subdivision shall not apply to any division of land which is: 
a.  Created by order of any court in the State or by operation of law; 
b.  Created by a lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument; or 
c.  Created by security or a unit of interest in any investment trust regulated under the laws of the State or any other interest in an investment entity. 
(Prior code,  13.22; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 17-6-30. - Specifications. 
    Installation of utilities, streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters within a subdivision shall be according to the specifications of and under the supervision of the City Manager. 
(Prior code,  13.22; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - Building Code 

Sec. 18-1-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted as the building code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Building Code , 2012 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the City and further provides for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor and providing penalties for the violation of such provisions. 
(Prior code,  11.08.010; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Building Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Prior code,  11.08.180; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-30. - Materials and assemblies. 
    All material and assemblies of materials and appliances, installation of appliances, arrangements of occupancies, segregation of occupancies and all exits, aisles, stairs, doors and appurtenances thereto in buildings and/or structures shall be so arranged, assembled and of such size and so protected as to hold to a minimum all exit, fire and health hazards. 
(Prior code,  11.08.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-40. - Quality of materials. 
    The quality of all materials, methods of connecting or assembling such materials, stresses allowed and live and dead loads assumed in the design and construction of all buildings and structures shall be in accord with nationally recognized and well-established methods of structural design and construction. 
(Prior code,  11.08.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-50. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with all the provisions of the adopted code shall be and is hereby declared to be prima facie evidence of the reduction of fire and exit hazards, acceptable types and quality of materials and sound generally recognized established methods of structural design and construction. 
(Prior code,  11.08.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-60. - Enforcement of provisions. 
    The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the adopted code and, for such purposes, he or she shall have the powers of a police officer. 
(Prior code,  11.08.050; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-70. - Determination of value. 
    The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of the adopted code shall be made by the Building Official. 
(Prior code,  11.08.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-80. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments, alterations and deletions: 
(1)  Section 104(e), Moved buildings and temporary buildings, is amended by the addition of the following provisions: 
    "a) No person shall move, remove or relocate any building within the limits of the City of Rocky Ford that is required by state law to have an oversize permit, except a state-approved house mover or owner of said structure after having been cleared by the applicable State of Colorado departments. 
    "b) All applications for a relocation permit shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to cover the cost of the Building Official inspecting the condition of the building or structure to be moved and for the inspection of the proposed new location. Such fee is to be in addition to the regular building permit fee required by the building code. All relocation permits shall expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. 
    "c) The Building Official shall cause an inspection to be made of the building or structure to be relocated and of the site upon which it is to be located in order to determine whether or not said permit shall be granted. If the building or structure to be relocated presently lies outside the city limits, the applicant shall pay a mileage fee at the prevailing city rate for each mile actually and necessarily traveled by the Building Official and a travel fee of $30.00 per hour for each hour actually and necessarily spent in travel by the Building Official to make such inspection. 
    "The homes/houses covered by this section must be set and installed in compliance with the appropriate manufacturer's installation manual. 
    "If Manufacturer's Installation Instructions are not available, then the following standards must be used: 
    "Non-Permanent Installations: Permanent Foundation, Guide for Manufactured Home Installation (amended); 
    "Permanent Foundation Installations: Permanent Foundation, Guide for Manufactured Housing, September 1996 (amended); and 
    "Engineered Foundation Systems as required by local jurisdictions. 
    "If the Colorado Division of Housing Installation Handbook (updated 5/18/01) is utilized, the following will apply: pages 15 and 16 of the Handbook will be amended for use in the City of Rocky Ford as follows: 
    "Footings: 
    "Footings shall be not less than the width of the pier being supported. Footing material shall be one of the following: 
    "1. 8 inch (20 cm) nominally thick poured-in-place individual concrete footings (see Figure 2.9) 
    "2. A minimum of 8 inch (20 cm) nominally thick continuous concrete footings, not less than 18 inches (46 cm) wide with two continuous #4 rebar. Rebar shall be lapped in 12 inches (30 cm) centered vertically in the footings and shall not be closer than 3 inches (8 cm) from the edge of the footing. Rebar shall be located 10 inches (25 cm) apart in the footings and centered beneath the pier location; 
    "3. A minimum 8 inch (20 cm) nominally thick slab not less in area than the manufactured dwelling and cabana, reinforced with approved fibers or with 10 gauge 6 inch (15 cm) by 6 inch (15 cm) wire fabric centered vertically within the slab; 
    "4. Footings designed by a Colorado licensed professional engineer or architect so long as the footings are at least 8 inch (20 cm) nominally thick; or 
    "5. Other equivalent materials approved for the intended use by Otero County so long as the footings are at least 8 inch (20 cm) nominally thick. 
    "Figure 2.9 - Poured Concrete Footing is attached and incorporated into amendment of the Colorado Division of Housing Installation Handbook as though fully set forth herein. 
    "In no event shall less than an eight-inch nominal thickness be used on any footings in the City of Rocky Ford. 
    "Set up inspection fees for a single-wide mobile home, manufactured home and factory-built house will be a minimum of $252.00, and if the value of the home/house is greater than $25,000.00, the fee will be calculated as provided under the Rocky Ford Municipal Code for any other structure." 
(2)  Section 204, Board of Appeals, is amended to read as follows: 
(3)  Section 206, Liability insurance, is amended to read as follows: 
    "All state laws and county resolutions dealing with insurance for the safety of workmen and the public shall be observed in addition to any requirements contained herein." 
(4)  Section 304, Fees, (a) Permit fees, is amended as follows. The following valuation schedule shall be used by the Building Official in determining the valuation of the work to be done: 
    "Valuation: The following valuations shall be used in computing permit fees under this Section: 
"Item Description Valuation per sq. ft. 1 New Residences 1-1 Wood Frames $20.00 1-2 Masonry 22.00 1-3 Basements - finished 5.00 1-4 Basements - unfinished 4.00 2 Private Garages and/or Agricultural Buildings 2-1 Attached - frame $ 4.00 2-2 Attached - masonry 5.00 2-3 Detached - frame 7.00 2-4 Detached - masonry 9.00 2-5 Carports open on 2 or more sides 3.50 2-6 Detached metal buildings 2.50 2-7 Mobile homes 15.00 3 Additions 3-1 Wood frames $15.00 3-2 Masonry 17.00 3-3 Open patios with roof 3.50 3-4 Family fallout shelter No Fee 4 Moved In 4-1 Building or structure $25.00 5 Wrecking Permits $15.00 (flat fee) 6 Sign Permits $15.00 (flat fee) 7 Moving Permits $10.00 (flat fee) 8 Alterations or Repairs 8-1 Contracted Actual contract price, including plumbing, mechanical and electrical 8-2 By owner Actual cost of materials plus 50% 9 Commercial Buildings 9-1 Contracted Actual contract price, including plumbing, mechanical and electrical 9-2 By owner Actual cost of materials plus 50%  
" Table 3-A
Building Permit Fees 
Total Valuation Fee $1.00 to $500.00 $5.00 $501.00 to $2,000.00 $5.00 for the first $500.00 plus $1.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 $2,000.01 to $25,000.00 $20.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 $25,000.01 to $50,000.00 $112.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 $50,000.01 to $100,000.00 $187.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,000.01 to $500,000.00 $287.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,000.01 and up $887.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof"  
(5)  Section 304, Fees, (b), Plan review fees, is deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  Section 304, Fees, (c), Expiration of plan review, is deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 307, Certificate of occupancy, is amended to include a Group R, Division 3 occupancy. 
(8)  Section 1105(a), Garage floor surfaces, is amended by the addition of the following wording at the end: 
    "and shall be a minimum of six (6) inches lower than any other adjacent floor opening into the garage." 
(9)  Table No. 23-C, Minimum roof live loads, Reference #1, "Where snow loads occur," is amended to read as follows: 
    "Snow (live) loads to be calculated upon 30 pounds per square foot of projected area. Combined load (dead and live) to be calculated upon a minimum of 45 pounds per square foot of projected area." 
Note: Reductions of miscellaneous structures, 2311(h), and wind loading as per Tables 23-I and 23-F. 
(10)  Table No. 29-A, Foundation for Stud Bearing Walls - Minimum Requirements, is amended to read as follows: 
" Table 29-A
Foundation for Stud Bearing Walls - Minimum Requirements 
Number of Stories Thickness of
Foundation Wall
(inches) Width of Footing
(inches) Thickness of
Footing (inches) Depth of Foundation
Below Finished Grade 1 8 * 18 * 8 * 30 * 2 8 22 * 8 * 30 * 2 10 24 * 10 * 30 *  
;p0; * Asterisk after figure indicates the figure is amended. 
NOTE: All footings shall have a minimum of two #4 reinforcing bars continuous horizontally and shall be dowelled vertically to foundation every 6 feet or provided with a continuous keyway." 
___________ 
(11)  Section 2907, Footings, (a) General, is amended by the addition of Exhibit A, Monolithic Footing and Foundation Designs for Unheated and/or Cooled Detached Garages, a copy of which is available from the Building Official. Sheds and agricultural buildings with clear roof spans or not more than 30 feet and for heated and/or cooled buildings, footing systems must extend below a frost line of 30 inches below the finished exterior grade level. Note: alternate designs may be submitted to the Building Official for approval. 
(12)  See Exhibit A, a copy of which is available from the Building Official, for the specifications required for monolithically poured concrete footings for detached non-habitat structures, as stated above. 
(13)  Section 4904, Footings, is amended as follows: 
    "A patio cover shall be supported on a spread of concrete footing and foundation as required by Table No 29-A as amended and contained herein or on concrete piers and 18 inches in diameter (or 18 inches square) and thirty inches below finished grade if attached to or within five feet of a habitable structure or on concrete piers as above, or a monolithic slab and foundation as shown as "Exhibit A," System #3, as herein attached, if not attached to or within five feet of a habitable structure and to or within five feet of a habitable structure and if the live and dead loads are in excess of the above 750 pounds per column as stated above." 
(14)  Chapter 32 of the Appendix is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(Prior code,  11.08.150; Ord. No. 774,  1, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-1-90. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine not more than $300.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code,  11.08.190; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 2 - Residential Code 

Sec. 18-2-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the residential code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Residential Code , 2012 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  11.08.100; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-2-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Residential Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-2-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 3 - Electrical Code 

Sec. 18-3-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the electrical code of the City, by reference thereto, the National Electrical Code , 2011 edition, and all appendices, tables and examples thereto, published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269, with such other additions and/or deletions as stipulated by the State of Colorado Electrical Board, as the Code of Rules for all electrical methods, materials and fixtures within the City. Said code shall be administered by the Electrical Inspector as set forth in the Electrical Inspection Agreement approved July 7, 1980. The purpose of the adopted code is to protect the health, safety and lives of the residents of the City. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive rules and regulations governing materials, methods of installation, inspection and other matters pertaining to the practical safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. 
(Prior code,  11.08.070; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 754,  1, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-3-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Building Official and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-3-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 4 - Mechanical Code 

Sec. 18-4-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the mechanical code for the City, by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code , 2012 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards relating to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling and refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  11.08.090; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-4-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Mechanical Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Building Official and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-4-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 5 - Plumbing Code 

Sec. 18-5-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the plumbing code of the City, by reference thereto, the Technical Plumbing Code of the State of Colorado , as amended, 1982 edition, and all appendices and tables thereto, published by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive regulations governing materials, installation methods and other matters pertaining to plumbing for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. The adopted code shall be administered by the Otero County Health Department. 
(Prior code,  11.08.080; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Plumbing Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-30. - Inspections. 
    The Examining Board of Plumbers of the Department of Regulatory Agencies of the State of Colorado is requested to provide inspectors and charge fees for making inspections of plumbing work as defined by state statutes, in the City. 
(Prior code,  11.16; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-40. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 6 - Fire Code 

Sec. 18-6-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the fire code for the City, by reference thereto, the International Fire Code , 2012 edition, and all appendices and tables thereto published by the International Code Council, Inc., and the Western Fire Chiefs Association, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards designed to prevent fires. The purpose of the adopted code is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Prior code,  11.08.120; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-6-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Fire Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Building Official and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-6-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 7 - Sign Code 

Sec. 18-7-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the sign code for the City, by reference thereto, the International Sign Code , 2012 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards relating to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of signs within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  11.08.110; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-7-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the International Sign Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Building Official and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-7-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 8 - Dangerous Buildings Code 

Sec. 18-8-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is adopted as the dangerous buildings code for the City, by reference thereto, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings , 1997 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601. The subject matter of the adopted code concerns inspections of dangerous buildings, enforcement of orders of the Building Official for abatement thereof and procedures for recovery of cost of abatement within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  11.08.130; Ord. No. 753,  3, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 783,  1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-8-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the Dangerous Buildings Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Building Official and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-8-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: none. 
(Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 9 - Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings 

Sec. 18-9-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted as the energy efficiency construction and renovation standards for nonresidential buildings of the City, by reference thereto, the Colorado Model Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings , adopted November, 1977, and published March, 1978, by the Colorado Office of State Planning and Budgeting, Board for Energy Efficient Nonresidential Building Standards, 1525 Sherman Street, Denver, Colorado 80203, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted standards include comprehensive provisions and standards regulating energy efficiency in the design, construction, renovation, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, conversion, occupancy, equipment and maintenance of certain nonresidential buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code,  11.12.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-9-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one copy of the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Buildings, certified to be a true copy, is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours, except that one copy of the adopted code may be kept in the office of the Chief Enforcement Officer instead of the office of the City Clerk. The standards as finally adopted will be available for purchase by the public through the office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Prior code,  11.12.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-9-30. - Amendments. 
    The standards adopted herein are hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(2)  Section 107.0 is deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  A new Section 108.0 is added, to read: 
    "108.0. Administrative and Appeal Procedures. Administrative and appeal procedures set forth in Sections 8, 9 and 10 of Ordinance No. 475 of the City of Rocky Ford, Colorado, shall be applicable and followed in the administration of this Code." 
(4)  Section 302.1 is amended by the inclusion of the following temperatures: 
"Winter Design Dry-Bulb 1 degree F Summer Design Dry-Bulb 97 degrees F Summer Design Wet-Bulb 71 degrees F Degree Days Heating 5,400 Degrees North Latitude 38 degrees"  
(5)  Section 502.2(a), Table 5-1, is amended by the addition of the following specific values: 
(6)  Section 701.0 is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Prior code,  11.12.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 10 - Mobile Home Parks and Campgrounds 

Sec. 18-10-10. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be referred to as the "Rocky Ford Mobile Home Park, Transient Mobile Home Park, Campground and Individual Mobile Home Regulations." 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-20. - Authority. 
    The Rocky Ford Mobile Home Park, Transient Mobile Home Park and Campground Regulations are authorized by Section 31-15-101, et seq., C.R.S., and are hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these statutes. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-30. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article shall be: 
(1)  To establish minimum standards governing the construction and maintenance of mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks and campgrounds; 
(2)  To establish minimum standards governing the provided utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions to make mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks and campgrounds safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; 
(3)  To fix the responsibilities and duties of owners and operators of mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks and campgrounds; 
(4)  To provide an amortization schedule for all nonconforming mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks and campgrounds; and 
(5)  To fix penalties for violations. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-40. - Control over mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks and campgrounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or alter any mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground within the incorporated area of the City without first complying with the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-50. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Article, the following criteria shall govern: Whenever both a provision of these regulations, and any other provisions of these regulations or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations of any kind, contain any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-60. - Jurisdiction. 
    The territorial jurisdiction of this Article shall include all of the incorporated land located within the City. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-70. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or alter any mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground within the incorporated area of the City unless he or she holds a valid permit or license issued by the City Council in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground. All applications for permits or licenses shall be made to the City Council, which shall issue a permit or license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this Article, of any regulations adopted pursuant hereto and of any other applicable legal requirements. 
(b)  No mobile home or camping unit shall be occupied on any site until all improvements have been made as submitted in the approved site plan, and until proper inspections by the City Council have been made. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-80. - Rules of construction of language. 
(a)  The particular controls the general. 
(b)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Article and the Section names, the text shall control. 
(c)  The word shall is always mandatory and not directory. The word may is permissive. 
(d)  Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(e)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and the words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-90. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. 
    Camp unit space means a plot of ground within a camping unit campground designed for the accommodation of one camping unit as herein defined for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
    Camping unit means any pickup camper, motor home, travel trailer, tent trailer or similar mobile unit not exceeding either eight feet in body width or 32 feet in body length and designed specifically for recreational and vacation purposes. 
    Camping unit campground means any plot of improved property utilized for camping and parking of camping units as herein defined for a period not to exceed 30 days. Such a camping unit campground shall be referred to as a campground for the purposes of this Article. 
    Dependent mobile home means any camping unit as herein defined and any mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Dwelling means a structure used exclusively for residential occupancy for one or more persons or families and includes facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Independent mobile home means a mobile home that has a flush toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Individual mobile home means a mobile home parked on a private lot and used for living quarters in compliance with Section 18-10-130 of this Article. 
    License means a written license issued by the City Council authorizing the operation of a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground under the provisions of this Article. 
    Mobile home means a structure designed to be transported after fabrication and exceeding either eight feet in body width or 32 feet in body length. Such a structure is built on a chassis and retained the chassis on which it was built, whether or not such structure is placed on a permanent foundation. Such a structure is suitable for human habitation on a year-round basis when provided with the required plumbing, heating and electrical facilities. 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located for periods of longer than 90 days, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
    Mobile home place means a plot of ground within a mobile home park or transient mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Modular home means a structure designed to be transported after fabrication and located as a permanent addition to, and becoming a part of, the real property. Such a structure must meet minimum construction requirements of the building code as adopted by the City or similar requirements as accepted by the Federal Housing Administration, Farmers' Home Administration or Veterans' Administration. Such structure must be set in a permanent foundation and is subject to all local building, zoning and housing regulations. Any such modular home meeting the requirements herein defined is not considered a mobile home and is not subject to these regulations. 
    Nonconforming mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground means any mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground which is not in compliance with this Article at the time of adoption of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
    Permit means a written permit issued by the City Council permitting the construction or alteration of a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground under this Article. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, company or association. 
    Service building means a building housing toilet and building facilities for men and women, with laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be required by this Article. 
    Transient mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes and/or camping units are located and occupied, or intended to be occupied, for dwelling or sleeping purposes, for periods of 90 days or less, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
(Prior code,  11.10.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-100. - Requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Application for permit . Application for approval of a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground shall be made to the City Council prior to the commencement of any construction, alteration, extension, maintenance or use of the mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground, and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A site plan at a scale of 1" = 100'. 
(2)  Typical plot plans for individual mobile homes or camping units at a scale of 1" = 10'. 
(3)  Typical street and walk sections. 
(4)  Grading and drainage plans. 
(5)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces. 
(6)  The location and width of roadways, sidewalks and pedestrian ways. 
(7)  The location and size of automobile parking lots and recreation areas. 
(8)  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
(9)  Source of water supply and methods to be used for sewage and garbage disposal. 
(10)  Plans and specifications of all buildings, utilities and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground. 
(11)  Such further information as may be required by the City Council to enable it to determine that the proposed mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground will comply with the legal requirements. 
(12)  An application fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule, plus an amount set forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each mobile home space or camping unit space. 
The developer must file a plat of the mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground concerning the location of all existing and proposed utilities and public lands prior to or at the time of final approval of the mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground. 
(b)  Zoning regulations . The site for a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground shall be subject to all applicable zoning regulations of the City. 
(c)  Permits . All buildings and utilities to be constructed, altered or repaired in a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground shall comply with all applicable codes of the City and the State, including building, electrical, plumbing, liquefied petroleum gases and similar codes, and shall require a permit issued by the City Council. 
(d)  Licenses . Any person making application for a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground shall obtain the approval of the City Council, which shall issue a license upon compliance by the person making application with this Article with any regulations adopted pursuant thereto and with any other information as may be requested by the City Council to enable it to determine that the proposed mobile home park or campground will comply with all applicable legal requirements. A license fee in the sum as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be payable upon issuance of the license, which license shall be renewable annually upon the payment of a like license fee. 
(Prior code,  11.10.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-110. - Mobile home parks. 
(a)  Existing regulations . Existing zoning and health regulations must be considered prior to selection of the site for a mobile home park. Sparsely wooded sites providing shade trees are advantageous. Rock formations close to the surface shall be avoided. The mobile home park shall be on a well-drained site and shall be located so that its drainage will not cause adverse effect on surrounding areas. Mobile home parks shall not be subject to flooding, fire or safety hazards and shall not be exposed to chronic nuisances such as noise, smoke, fumes or odors. The topography shall be favorable to minimum grading and ease of maintenance. 
(b)  Mobile home park density . The mobile home park shall have a gross density of not more than six units per acre. 
(c)  Setbacks . 
(1)  Each mobile home park shall set aside along the perimeter of the park the following setbacks, which shall be landscaped except for those portions used for ingress and egress. The minimum setback requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Abutting a state or federally designated highway or City-designated major arterial: 50 feet. 
b.  Abutting any public right-of-way other than Subparagraph a. above, including alleys: 30 feet. 
c.  Abutting any exterior boundary other than Subparagraph a. or b. above: 15 feet. 
The provisions of this Paragraph shall not apply to mobile home parks in existence on January 8, 1973, wherein mobile home units on said date were established and set upon foundations. 
(2)  All mobile homes shall be parked in spaces so that there will be a minimum of 15 feet between mobile homes. Mobile homes parked end-to-end shall have an end-to-end clearance of not less than ten feet. Enclosed additions to the mobile home structure shall be considered a part of the mobile home in measuring required yard distance. The required area for each mobile home space shall not include additional area required for access roads, off-street parking, service buildings, recreation areas, offices and similar mobile home park needs. 
(3)  It is unlawful to park a mobile home so that any part of such mobile home will obstruct any roadway or walkway in a mobile home park. 
(4)  It is unlawful to allow any mobile home to be occupied in a mobile home park unless the mobile home is situated on a mobile home space. 
(d)  Mobile home space requirements . The following minimum area requirements shall apply to mobile home spaces: 
(1)  The minimum area of a mobile home space shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(2)  Groups or clusters of mobile homes may be placed on a combined lot where the area of the combined lot is equal to the minimum lot area required for an equal number of mobile homes on standard lots and where the minimum setbacks are honored on the combined lots' perimeter line. 
(e)  Access and interior roadways . 
(1)  The site shall have at least one direct access to a public street by a roadway at least 32 feet in width. When the number of units within the mobile home park exceeds five units, this roadway shall be paved. 
(2)  Roadways shall be provided to each mobile home space. When the number of units within the mobile home park exceeds seven units, interior roadways shall have a paved surface not less than 24 feet in width. 
(3)  The mobile home park shall be so designed that all mobile home spaces and accessory buildings abut an interior roadway. 
(4)  It is unlawful to allow any mobile home to be occupied in a mobile home park unless the mobile home is situated on a mobile home space. 
(f)  Walkways, paving and lighting . When required, all roadways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt or concrete. All roadways and walkways within a mobile home park shall be well-lighted at night. 
(g)  Public sites, open space and recreation areas . A mobile home park shall provide an amount not less than eight percent of the gross mobile home park area for private recreational areas. The area allowed for recreation shall not include any area designated as a roadway, mobile home space, storage area or any area required for setbacks as set forth in Subsection (c) above. 
(h)  Off-street and on-street parking . Areas shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(1)  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home shall be provided for each mobile home space. The minimum size of each such off-street parking space shall be 8 feet by 20 feet. Said area shall be in addition to the minimum area of a mobile home space, as set forth in Paragraph (d)(1) above. 
(2)  On-street parking may be permitted in place of required off-street parking by widening roadways. On-street parking shall be equal to the minimum area required for an equal number of off-street parking spaces. The minimum width of on-street parking spaces shall be eight feet. 
(i)  Storage areas . 
(1)  An outdoor storage area surfaced with gravel, asphalt, concrete or similar substance for boats, boat trailers, camping units and horse trailers shall be provided for within the mobile home park, in an amount equal to 50 square feet per mobile home space. 
(2)  An indoor storage area, either individual or common, for the personal use of mobile home occupants shall be provided in an amount equal to 50 square feet per mobile home space. 
(j)  Individual mobile homes . 
(1)  All mobile home units shall have a skirting of a rigid type material. Such skirting must be in place within 30 days after the mobile home is set on the mobile home space. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the person to whom the license for the mobile home park is issued to see that the skirting is in place in compliance with this Subsection. 
(k)  Dependent mobile homes . Dependent mobile homes shall not be allowed in mobile home parks. 
(l)  Fire protection . Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire-extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size and number and so located within the mobile home park as prescribed by the local fire prevention authority, or to satisfy reasonable fire regulations. 
(m)  Utilities . 
(1)  Water supply. An assessable, adequate, safe and potable supply of water under pressure shall be provided in each mobile home park, capable of furnishing a minimum of 1,000 gallons per day per mobile home space. The number of mobile home spaces to be occupied in a mobile home park shall be limited to the quantity of water available to supply each such mobile home space with the minimum requirements. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. The development of an independent water supply to service the mobile home park shall be made only after plans and specifications for the water system have been approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. All plumbing in the mobile home park shall comply with state and local plumbing regulations. 
(2)  Sewage disposal. 
a.  Mobile home parks shall be serviced by a public sewer system. All sewage disposal apparatus, including appurtenances thereto, shall be provided, maintained and operated so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard. 
b.  All plumbing in the mobile home park shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations. Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a four-inch sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be closed when not linked to a mobile home and shall be capped so as to prevent any escape of odors. 
c.  The mobile home drain shall be watertight and self-draining. This drain shall be constructed of smooth plastic pipe or of other material approved by the state or local plumbing laws and regulations. 
(3)  Electricity. An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts, or 110/220 volts, shall be provided for each mobile home space. The installation shall comply with all state and local electrical regulations. 
(4)  Refuse disposal. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing or blowing away. Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be provided at permanent locations convenient to mobile home spaces in areas screened by appropriate landscaping features. Methods of storage, collection and disposal are subject to approval of any local laws or regulations. 
(n)  Registration of occupants . It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home or camping unit owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home. 
(2)  The name and address of the occupant of each mobile home, if different from the owner. 
(3)  The make, model, year and current license number of each mobile home. 
(4)  The state, territory or county issuing such license. 
(5)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home. 
The mobile home park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the mobile home park. 
(Prior code,  11.10.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-120. - Transient mobile home parks and campgrounds. 
(a)  Site selection criteria . Existing zoning and health regulations must be considered prior to selection of the site for a transient mobile home park or campground. Sites providing shade trees are advantageous. The transient mobile home park or campground shall be on a well-drained site and shall be located so that its drainage will not cause adverse effect on surrounding areas. Existing streams and creeks shall be preserved. Transient mobile home parks and campgrounds shall not be exposed to chronic nuisances, such as noise, smoke or fumes. The topography shall be favorable to minimum grading and ease of maintenance. 
(b)  Density . 
(1)  A transient mobile home park shall have a gross density of not more than 12 units per acre. 
(2)  A campground shall have a gross density of not more than 25 units per acre. 
(c)  Setbacks . 
(1)  Each transient mobile home park or campground shall set aside along the perimeter of the park the following setbacks: 
a.  Abutting a state or federally designated highway or City-designated major arterial: 50 feet. 
b.  Abutting any public right-of-way other than Subparagraph a. above, including alleys: 25 feet. 
c.  Abutting any exterior boundary other than Subparagraph a. or b. above: 15 feet. 
(2)  All mobile homes or camping units shall be parked so that there will be a minimum of 15 feet between mobile homes or camping units. Mobile homes or camping units parked end-to-end shall have an end-to-end clearance of not less than ten feet. The required areas for each mobile home or camping unit space shall not include additional area required for access roads, off-street parking, service buildings, recreation areas, office and similar transient mobile home park or campground needs. 
(3)  It is unlawful to park a mobile home or camping unit so that any part of such mobile home or camping unit will obstruct any roadway or walkway in a transient mobile home park or campground. 
(4)  It is unlawful to allow any mobile home or camping unit to be occupied in either a transient mobile home park or campground for which there are no available spaces conforming to the provisions of these regulations. 
(d)  Access and interior roadways . The site shall have at least one direct access to a public street by a roadway which shall be at least 32 feet in width. Access roads shall be provided to each mobile home or camping unit space. Interior roadways shall not be less than 20 feet in width if providing for one-way traffic, and 32 feet in width if providing for two-way traffic. Roadways shall be surfaced with gravel, asphalt or concrete. 
(e)  Lighting . Roadways and walkways within the transient mobile home park or campground shall be lighted at night to provide safe access. 
(f)  Public sites, open space and recreation areas . A transient mobile home park shall provide an amount not less than eight percent of the gross mobile home park area for private recreational areas. The area allowed for recreation shall not include any area designated as a roadway, mobile home space, storage area or any area required for setbacks as set forth in Subsection (c) above. Such recreational areas shall not be required for campgrounds. 
(g)  Service buildings . 
(1)  Every transient mobile home park or campground shall be provided with one or more service buildings adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures, lavatories, showers and laundry facilities meeting minimum Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment standards. 
(2)  Service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the day and night and shall be well-ventilated with screened openings. 
(3)  Service buildings shall be subject to the approval of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(h)  Fire protection . Every transient mobile home park and campground shall be equipped at all times with fire-extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size and number and so located within the park or campground as prescribed by the local fire prevention authority, or to satisfy reasonable fire regulations. 
(i)  Maximum residency . 
(1)  No mobile home or camping unit shall be allowed to occupy space within a transient mobile home park for periods exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  No camping unit shall be allowed to occupy space within a campground for periods exceeding 30 days. 
(3)  Transient mobile home parks and campgrounds are designed for short-term residency, and it is the intent of these provisions to ensure that occupancy within a transient mobile home park or campground will not be perpetuated beyond the time limits set forth above. 
(j)  Utilities . 
(1)  Water supply. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water under pressure shall be provided in each transient mobile home park or campground. The number of mobile home spaces or camping unit spaces to be occupied in a transient mobile home park or campground shall be limited to the quantity of water available to supply each such mobile home space or camping unit space with the minimum requirements. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. The development of an independent water supply to serve the transient mobile home park or campground shall be made only after plans and specifications for the water system have been approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. All plumbing in the transient mobile home park or campground shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations. 
a.  A minimum of 500 gallons of water per day shall be supplied to each space within a transient mobile home park. 
b.  A minimum of 125 gallons of water per day shall be supplied to each space within a campground. 
(2)  Sewage disposal. 
a.  Transient mobile home parks shall be served by a public sewer system. All sewage disposal apparatus, including appurtenances thereto, shall be provided, maintained and operated so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard. 
1.  All plumbing in transient mobile home parks shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations. 
2.  Transient mobile home parks shall provide each space with at least a four-inch sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be closed when not linked to a mobile home and shall be capped so as to prevent any escape of odors. 
3.  The transient mobile home drain shall be watertight and self-draining. This drain shall be constructed of smooth plastic pipe or of other materials approved by the state or local plumbing laws and regulations. 
b.  Each campground shall provide sufficient facilities at sanitary stations for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of wastes from all holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner. 
1.  Each sanitary station shall consist of a drainage basin constructed of impervious material, containing a disposal hatch and self-closing cover, and related washing facilities. The disposal hatch of sanitary station units shall be connected to the sewage disposal system. Related facilities required to wash housing tanks and the general area of the sanitary station shall be connected to the campground water supply system. 
2.  Sanitary stations shall be approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(3)  Electricity. All spaces in a transient mobile home park or campground shall be provided with an electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts, or 110/220 volts. The installation shall comply with all state and local electrical regulations. 
(4)  Refuse disposal. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the transient mobile home park or campground shall be managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing or blowing away. Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be provided at permanent locations convenient to mobile home or camping unit spaces, in areas screened by appropriate landscaping features. Methods of storage, collection and disposal are subject to approval of any local laws or regulations. 
(k)  Registration of occupants . It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home or camping unit owners and occupants located within the park or campground. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home or camping unit and motor vehicle by which it is towed. 
(2)  The make, model, year and license of each mobile home or camping unit and motor vehicle. 
(3)  The state, territory or country issuing such licenses. 
(4)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home or camping unit. 
The park or campground shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the transient mobile home park or campground. 
(Prior code,  11.10.040; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-130. - Individual mobile homes. 
(a)  On public rights-of-way . No mobile home shall be parked or permitted to stand upon any public street, highway, road, alley or other such right-of-way for more than a period of 24 hours. If so parked for less than a period of 24 hours, it shall be parallel to the edge of the right-of-way safely out of the flow of moving traffic. 
(b)  Storage . No mobile home shall be stored in any required front or side yard as specified for principal buildings by applicable zoning regulations. 
(c)  Occupied on private property . 
(1)  Where an individual mobile home is proposed to be parked on a private lot and used for living quarters, it shall be considered as a dwelling and, as such, shall comply with applicable zoning, housing, building, safety and health regulations. The structure shall meet minimum construction requirements of the adopted building code or final requirements as accepted by the Federal Housing Administration, Farmers' Home Administration or Veterans' Administration and which complies with all applicable provisions of the adopted electric, plumbing and heating codes. The mobile home shall be converted to a permanent improvement or structure supported on a permanent masonry foundation and completely enclosed beneath or skirted with masonry or material matching the mobile home side, except for necessary openings for access and ventilation, not to exceed ten percent of the skirt wall. 
(2)  Two or more mobile homes parked and occupied on any plot of ground shall constitute a mobile home park, and all provisions of this Article in regard to mobile home parks shall be complied with. 
(Prior code,  11.10.050; Ord. No. 766,  B, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-140. - Supervision; penalties. 
(a)  The person to whom a license for a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground is issued shall at all times operate the park or campground in compliance with this Article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park or campground, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(b)  The City Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this Article. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(c)  Any person who violate any provision of these regulations shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00; and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Prior code,  11.10.060; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-10-150. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Amortization of nonconforming mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks, campgrounds and individual mobile homes . It is unlawful for any owner, lessee or operator of any mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground within the City to fail to comply with all the provisions of this Article. All mobile home parks, transient mobile home parks or campgrounds annexed to the City shall comply with all the provisions of this Article within three years after the effective date of the ordinance annexing said mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground. Failure to comply with all of the provisions of this Article within said three-year period shall constitute a separate violation for each day that the violation continues to exist. The City Council may, in order to compel compliance with this Article, discontinue water and sewer services to any mobile home park, transient mobile home park or campground failing to comply within the time provided for herein. Such power to discontinue said water and sewer services shall be in addition to any other penalty provided herein for violation of these regulations. 
(b)  Severability clause . It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the provisions of these regulations shall be severable in accordance with the provisions set forth below: 
(c)  Amendments or additions . After study and recommendations by the City Council and upon public hearing, these regulations may be amended and sections added thereto and repealed by the City Council. 
(Prior code,  11.10.070; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 11 - Flood Damage Regulations 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 18-11-10. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Colorado has, in Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S., delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City hereby adopts the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-30. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities, such as water, sewer and gas mains, electric and communications stations, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-40. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-50. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application: 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms one-hundred-year flood and one-percent-chance flood are synonymous with the term 100-year flood. The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-annual-chance flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500 years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base Flood Elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of a stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent Rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into 50 titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including but not limited to cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 18-11-280 of this Article, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Section 18-11-280. 
    Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM database means a database, usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses, that accompany DFIRMs. The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) means the FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building: (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for Rules, proposed Rules and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
(3)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas, such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine Base Flood Elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain Administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain Development Permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this Article. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of Map Revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood, such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
    Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR,  65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use, such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment and spill-handling procedures. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). 
    Physical Map Revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Special Flood Hazard Area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year; i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this Article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-60. - Lands to which this Article applies. 
    The Article shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-70. - Basis for establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
    The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Rocky Ford," dated June 30, 1980, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article. These Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the FIRM are the minimum area of applicability of this Article and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the City Council. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-80. - Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. 
    A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-90. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed within the Special Flood Hazard Area without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-100. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-110. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-120. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the City or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-130. - Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
    The City Manager is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-140. - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Article, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Paragraph 18-11-150(a)(3) of this Article. 
(2)  Review, approve or deny all applications for Floodplain Development Permits required by adoption of this Article. 
(3)  Review Floodplain Development Permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.,  1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Article, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(6)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(7)  When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 18-11-70 of this Article, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Article. 
(8)  For waterways with Base Flood Elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the City. 
(9)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM (Conditional Letter of Map Revision) revision through FEMA, fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(10)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(11)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-150. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Paragraph 18-11-180(2) of this Article. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Paragraph 18-11-140(2) above. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-160. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Appeal Board, as established by the City Council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the relevant factors in Section 18-11-150 above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Article, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Article as stated in Section 18-11-30 of this Article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the Base Flood Elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in Subsections (a) through (h) above are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Division 2 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

Sec. 18-11-210. - General standards. 
    In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-220. - Specific standards. 
    In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 18-11-70, (ii) Paragraph 18-11-140(7), or (iii) Section 18-11-270, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 18-11-280 of this Article, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that, at one foot above the Base Flood Elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Section. Such certification shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator, as proposed in Section 18-11-150 of this Article. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above Subparagraph shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 18-11-150 of this Article and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Paragraph (4) above. 
b.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-230. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in Section 18-11-70 of this Article are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in all Section 18-11-280 of this Article, new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 18-11-150, are satisfied. 
b.  Within Zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-240. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see the definition of floodway in Section 18-11-50 of this Article). Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in Section 18-11-70 of this Article are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Paragraph (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Division. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in Base Flood Elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-250. - Alteration of watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project, as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and City floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions in the floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 18-11-240 above. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-260. - Properties removed from floodplain by fill. 
    A Floodplain Development Permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-270. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of Section 18-11-80 and Section 18-11-150 and the provisions of this Division. 
(c)  Base Flood Elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 18-11-70 or 18-11-140 of this Article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-11-280. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. It is the responsibility of the City Council to identify and confirm that specific structures in its community meet the following criteria: 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities and transportation lifelines. 
1.  These facilities consist of: 
a)  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage and emergency operation centers); 
b)  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions and non-ambulatory surgical structures, but excluding clinics, doctors' offices and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
c)  Designated emergency shelters; 
d)  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables and conduits); 
e)  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines and service lines); and 
f)  Air transportation lifelines (airports [municipal and larger], helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure [aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency equipment aircraft hangars]). 
2.  Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), nonpotable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
3.  Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
1.  These facilities may include: 
a)  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
b)  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
c)  Refineries; 
d)  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
e)  Aboveground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
2.  Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, AND the chemical is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 CFR,  302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 CFR,  1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 CFR,  302 (2010), and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 CFR,  1910 (2010), are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this Article, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
3.  Specific exemptions to this category include: 
a)  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials inended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
b)  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local authority having land use jurisdiction) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
c)  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this Article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care and schools. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Elder care (nursing homes). 
2.  Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals (day care and assisted living). 
3.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children). 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services, including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); and 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices and classrooms only). 
    These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City Council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this Article, protection shall include one of the following: 
a.  Location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the Base Flood Elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the City Council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. No. 900, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
ARTICLE 12 - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 18-12-10. - Building permit applications. 
    The City Manager and/or the Planning Commission shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, must use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage and must use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(Prior code,  11.04.010; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-12-20. - Review of proposed and new developments. 
    The City Manager and/or the Planning Commission shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and that adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Prior code,  11.04.020; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-12-30. - Water and sanitary sewage systems. 
    The City Manager shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and shall require on-site waste disposal systems to be located as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Prior code,  11.04.030; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-12-40. - Building Official authorization. 
    The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code, Chap. 11.14; Ord. No. 914,  1, 2-9-2016) 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1.02.010 Deleted 1.02.020 Deleted 1.02.030 1-2-10-1-2-40, 1-3-20 1.02.040 1-2-50 1.02.050 1-4-60 1.02.060 1-3-30 1.02.070 1-3-40 1.02.080 1-1-10 1.02.090 1-1-20 1.02.100 Deleted 1.02.110 Deleted 1.02.120 1-3-10 1.02.130 Deleted 1.02.140 Deleted 1.02.150 1-1-50-1-1-70 1.02.160 1-3-70, 1-3-90, 1-3-100 1.02.170 1-4-20 1.02.180 1-3-120 2.02.010 2-2-60 2.02.020 2-2-70 2.02.030 2-2-70 2.02.040 2-2-90 2.02.050 2-2-90 2.02.060 Deleted 2.02.070 Deleted 2.02.071 2-2-100 2.02.080 2-2-10 2.02.090 2-2-30 2.02.100 2-2-50 2.02.110 2-2-10 2.02.112 2-1-20, 2-1-30 2.02.112.03 Deleted 2.02.114 2-1-40 2.04.010 1-6-10 2.06.010 2-8-10-2-8-70 2.06.020 2-6-10-2-6-110 2.06.030 2-10-10-2-10-80 2.06.040 2-11-10-2-11-60 2.06.050 2-12-10-2-12-70 2.06.050.09 Deleted 2.06.060 2-7-10-2-7-40 2.06.070 2-14-10-2-14-60, 7-6-30, 7-6-40 2.06.080 Deleted 2.08.010 4-8-10 2.08.020 4-8-20 2.08.030 4-8-30 2.10.010 2-1-10 2.10.020 2-1-10 2.12 4-1-10 2.14 Deleted 2.16 Deleted 2.18 Deleted 2.20.010 Deleted 2.20.020 2-3-70 2.20.020.01 Deleted 2.20.020.02 Deleted 2.20.020.03 Deleted 2.22.010 5-1-10 2.22.020 5-1-20 2.22.030 5-1-30 2.22.040 5-1-40 2.22.050 5-1-50 3.02 Deleted 3.04.010 4-2-40 3.06 Deleted 3.08 4-2-10 3.10.010 4-5-10 3.10.020 4-5-20 3.10.030 4-5-30 3.10.040 4-5-40 3.10.050 4-5-50 3.10.060 4-5-60 3.10.070 4-5-70 3.10.080 4-5-80 3.10.090 4-5-90 3.10.100 4-5-100 3.12.010 4-6-10 3.12.020 4-6-20 3.12.030 4-6-30 3.12.040 4-6-40 3.12.050 4-6-50 3.12.060 4-6-60 3.12.070 4-6-70 3.12.080 4-6-80 3.13.010 4-7-10 3.13.020 4-7-20 3.13.030 4-7-30 3.13.040 4-7-40 3.13.050 4-7-50-4-7-70 3.13.060 4-7-80 3.13.070 4-7-90 3.14.010 4-3-10 3.14.020 4-3-20 3.14.030 4-3-30 3.14.040 4-3-40 3.14.050 4-3-50 3.14.060 4-3-50 3.14.070 4-3-50 3.14.080 4-3-50 3.14.090 4-3-50 3.14.100 4-3-60, 4-3-70 3.14.120 4-4-10 3.14.130 4-4-50 3.14.140 4-4-60 3.14.150 Deleted 3.14.160 Deleted 3.14.170 Deleted 3.14.180 Deleted 3.14.190 Deleted 3.14.200 4-4-70 3.14.230 Deleted 3.14.240 Deleted 3.16 Deleted 4.02.010 6-2-120 4.02.020 6-2-20, 6-2-220, 10-7-50 4.02.020.02 Deleted 4.02.020.05 Deleted 4.02.020.08 Deleted 4.02.020.09 Deleted 4.04.010 6-3-10-6-3-150, 6-3-180 4.04.030 6-3-210, 6-3-220 4.06.010 6-1-30 4.06.020 6-1-120 4.06.030 6-1-90 4.06.040 6-1-50, 6-1-60 4.06.050 6-1-50 4.06.060 6-1-160 4.06.070 6-1-160 6.02.010 10-10-10 6.02.020 10-10-20 6.02.030 10-10-30 6.02.040 10-10-50 6.02.050 10-10-60 6.02.060 10-10-70 6.02.070 10-10-80 6.02.080 10-10-90 6.02.090 10-10-100 6.02.100 10-10-110 6.02.110 Deleted 6.04.010 7-3-10 6.04.020 Deleted 6.04.030 7-3-20 6.04.040 7-3-40 6.04.050 7-3-50 6.04.060 7-3-60 6.04.070 7-3-70 6.04.080 7-3-80 6.04.090 7-3-90 6.04.100 7-3-100 6.04.110 7-3-110 6.04.120 7-3-120 6.04.130 Deleted 6.06.010 7-1-20, 7-1-30 6.06.020 7-1-10 6.06.030 7-2-30, 7-2-50-7-2-90, 7-2-120, 7-2-140-7-2-270, 10-5-80 6.06.040 7-1-40 6.06.050 7-1-70 6.06.060 7-1-80 6.06.070 7-1-90 6.06.080 7-1-100 6.06.090 7-1-110 6.06.100 7-1-120 6.06.110 7-1-130 6.06.120 7-1-140-7-1-170 6.06.130 7-1-180 6.06.140 7-1-190 6.06.150 Deleted 6.08.010 7-7-560 6.08.020 Deleted 6.08.030 10-5-50 6.08.040 Deleted 6.08.050 Deleted 6.08.060 Deleted 6.08.070 Deleted 6.08.080 Deleted 6.08.090 10-3-60 6.08.100 10-5-90 6.08.110 Deleted 6.08.120 Deleted 6.08.130 Deleted 6.08.140 Deleted 6.08.150 Deleted 6.10.010 7-4-30 6.10.020 7-2-40 6.10.030 7-2-40 6.10.040 Deleted 6.10.050 7-2-130 6.10.060 7-4-50 6.10.070 Deleted 6.10.080 Deleted 6.10.090 7-4-60 6.10.100 7-4-70 6.12.010 7-5-30 6.12.020 7-5-40 6.12.030 7-5-50 6.12.040 7-5-60 6.12.050 7-5-70 6.12.060 7-5-80 6.12.070 7-5-20 6.12.080 7-5-90 7.02.010 10-5-110 7.04.010 10-6-10, 10-6-80, 10-6-90 7.04.020 10-6-60 7.04.030 Deleted 7.06.010 10-5-120 7.08.010 6-2-10 7.08.020 6-2-240 7.08.030 6-2-250 7.08.040 6-2-130 7.08.050 6-2-260 7.10.010 10-1-10 7.10.020 10-5-10 7.10.030 10-5-10 7.10.040 Deleted 7.10.050 Deleted 7.12.010 Deleted 7.12.020 Deleted 7.12.030 6-2-140 7.12.040 6-2-140 7.12.050 Deleted 7.13.010 Deleted 7.13.020 10-8-40 7.13.030 10-8-60 7.13.040 Deleted 7.13.050 Deleted 7.14.010 10-4-110 7.14.020 10-4-120, 10-4-130 7.14.030 10-4-140 7.14.040 10-4-150 7.14.050 10-4-160 7.14.060 10-4-170 7.14.070 10-4-180 7.14.080 10-4-190 7.14.090 10-4-200 7.15.010 2-4-210 7.15.020 2-4-220 7.15.030 2-4-230 7.15.040 2-4-240 7.15.050 2-4-250 7.15.060 2-4-260 7.15.070 2-4-270 7.15.080 2-4-280, 2-4-290 8.02.010 8-5-10 8.04.010 8-1-10, 8-1-20 8.04.020 8-1-30 8.04.030 8-1-30 8.04.040 8-1-60 8.04.050 8-1-40 8.04.060 Deleted 8.04.070 8-1-20 8.04.080 8-1-50 8.06 Deleted 8.07.010 8-4-10 8.07.020 8-4-20 8.07.030 8-4-30 8.07.040 8-4-40 8.07.050 8-4-50 8.07.060 8-4-60 8.07.070 8-4-70 8.07.080 8-4-80 9.02.010 11-3-10 9.02.020 11-3-20 9.02.030 11-3-30 9.02.040 11-3-40 9.02.050 11-3-50 9.02.060 11-3-60 9.02.070 11-3-70 9.02.080 11-3-80 9.02.090 11-3-90 9.02.100 11-3-100 9.02.110 11-3-110 9.02.120 11-3-120 9.02.130 11-3-130 9.04.010 11-4-10 9.04.020 11-4-20 9.04.030 11-4-30 9.04.040 11-4-40 9.04.050 11-4-50 9.04.060 11-4-60 9.04.070 11-4-70 9.04.080 11-4-80 9.06.010 11-5-10 9.06.020 11-5-20 9.06.030 11-5-30 9.06.040 11-5-40 9.08.010 6-4-10 9.08.020 6-4-20 9.08.030 6-4-30 9.08.040 6-4-40 9.08.050 6-4-50 9.08.060 6-4-60 9.08.070 6-4-70 9.10.010 11-6-10 9.10.020 11-6-20 9.10.030 11-6-30 9.10.040 11-6-40 10.02.010 13-2-210 10.04.010 13-2-10 10.04.020 13-2-20 10.04.030 13-2-30 10.04.040 13-2-40 10.04.050 13-2-50 10.04.060 13-2-100 10.04.080 13-2-140 10.04.090 13-2-150 10.04.100 13-2-160 10.04.110 13-2-170 10.04.120 13-2-180 10.04.130 13-2-190 10.04.140 13-2-200 10.06.010 13-4-10 10.06.020 13-4-20-13-4-60 10.08.010 13-5-10 10.08.020 13-5-20 10.08.030 13-5-30 10.10.010 13-2-310 10.10.020 13-2-320 10.10.030 13-2-330, 13-2-360 10.10.040 13-2-340 10.10.050 13-2-350 10.11.095 Deleted 10.12.010 13-2-410 10.12.020 13-2-420 10.12.030 13-2-430 10.12.040 13-2-440 10.12.050 13-2-440 10.14.010 13-3-20 10.14.020 13-3-30 10.14.030 13-3-40 10.14.040 13-3-50 10.14.050 13-3-10, 13-3-110-13-3-170 10.16.130 13-6-210 10.16.140 Deleted 10.16.150 Deleted 10.16.160 Deleted 10.18.010 5-2-10 10.18.020 5-2-20 10.22.010 5-5-10-5-5-40 10.22.020 5-5-50-5-5-130 10.22.030 5-5-210-5-5-280 10.22.040 5-5-290 10.22.050 5-5-310 10.22.060 5-5-320 10.22.070 5-5-330 10.22.080 5-5-340-5-5-360 11.04.010 18-12-10 11.04.020 18-12-20 11.04.030 18-12-30 11.06.010 18-11-110 11.08.010 18-1-10 11.08.020 18-1-30 11.08.030 18-1-40 11.08.040 18-1-50 11.08.050 18-1-60 11.08.060 18-1-70 11.08.070 18-3-10 11.08.080 18-5-10 11.08.090 18-4-10 11.08.100 18-2-10 11.08.110 18-7-10 11.08.120 18-6-10 11.08.130 18-8-10 11.08.140 Deleted 11.08.150 18-1-80 11.08.160 Deleted 11.08.170 Deleted 11.08.180 18-1-20 11.08.190 18-1-90 11.10.010 18-10-10-18-10-90 11.10.020 18-10-100 11.10.030 18-10-110 11.10.040 18-10-120 11.10.050 18-10-130 11.10.060 18-10-140 11.10.070 18-10-150 11.12.010 18-9-10 11.12.020 18-9-30 11.12.030 18-9-20 11.12.040 Deleted 11.12.050 Deleted 11.12.060 Deleted 11.12.070 Deleted 11.14 18-12-40 11.16 18-5-30 12.02.010 16-1-10 12.02.020 16-1-20 12.02.030 16-1-30 12.02.040 16-1-40 12.02.050 16-1-50 12.02.060 16-1-60 12.04.010 16-1-70 12.04.020 16-1-80 12.06.010 16-4-10 12.06.020 16-4-20 12.06.030 16-4-30 12.06.040 16-4-40 12.06.050 16-4-50 12.06.060 16-4-60 12.06.070 16-4-80 12.08.010 16-5-10 12.08.020 16-5-20 12.08.030 16-5-30 12.08.040 16-5-40 12.08.050 16-5-50 12.08.060 16-5-60 12.08.070 16-5-70 12.08.080 16-5-80 12.08.090 16-5-90 12.10.010 16-6-20 12.10.020 16-6-10 12.12.010 16-7-10 12.12.020 16-7-20 12.12.030 16-7-30 12.12.040 16-7-40 12.12.050 16-7-50 12.12.060 16-7-60 12.12.070 16-7-70 12.14.010 16-8-10 12.14.020 16-8-20 12.14.030 16-8-30 12.14.040 16-8-40 12.14.050 16-8-50 12.14.060 16-8-60 12.16.010 16-2-10 12.16.020 16-2-20 12.16.030 16-2-30 12.16.040 16-2-40 12.16.050 16-2-50 12.18.010 16-3-10 12.18.020 16-3-20 12.18.030 16-3-30 12.18.040 16-3-40 12.18.050 16-3-50 12.18.060 16-3-60 12.18.070 16-3-70 12.18.080 16-3-80 12.18.090 16-3-90 12.18.100 16-3-100 12.18.110 16-3-110 12.20.010 16-9-10 12.20.020 16-9-20 12.20.030 16-9-30 12.20.040 16-9-40 12.20.050 16-9-50 12.20.060 16-9-60 12.20.070 16-9-70 12.20.080 16-9-80 12.20.090 16-9-90 12.20.100 16-9-100 12.22.010 16-10-10 12.22.020 16-10-20 13.02.010 17-1-10 13.02.020 17-1-20 13.02.030 17-1-30-17-1-50 13.04 17-1-60, 17-1-70 13.06.010 17-3-10 13.06.020 17-3-20 13.06.030 17-3-30 13.06.040 17-3-40 13.08.010 17-4-10 13.08.020 17-4-20 13.08.030 17-4-30 13.08.040 17-4-40 13.08.050 17-4-50 13.10.020 17-5-10 13.10.030 17-5-20 13.10.040 17-5-30 13.12 17-2-10 13.14 17-2-20 13.16 17-2-30 13.18 17-2-40 13.20 17-2-50 13.22 17-6-10-17-6-30  
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Title of Legislation Date Section Section this Code Ord. No. 709 1-22-1996 2 2-3-210 3 2-3-220 4 2-3-230 5 2-3-240 Ord. No. 711 4-22-1996 1 10-4-110 2 10-4-120 3 10-4-130 4 10-4-140 5 10-4-150 6 10-4-160 7 10-4-170 8 10-4-180 9 10-4-190 10 10-4-200 Ord. No. 716 6-24-1996 1 4-4-10 2 4-4-50 3 4-4-60 Ord. No. 732 9-8-1997 8-4-10-8-4-80 Ord. No. 737 4-28-1998 1 6-2-120 Ord. No. 738 5-26-1998 6-2-20, 6-2-210 Ord. No. 739 6-9-1998 1 16-1-80 2 16-2-30 3, 4 16-4-10 5, 6 16-4-20 7, 8 16-4-30 Ord. No. 740 9-22-1998 1 7-5-50 2 7-5-60 3 7-5-90 Ord. No. 743 12-8-1998 1 10-10-110 Ord. No. 747 1-12-1999 1 10-9-10 2 10-9-20 3 10-9-30 4 10-9-40 5 10-9-50, 10-9-60 6 10-9-70-10-9-100 Ord. No. 748 1-26-1999 1-13 6-2-230 Ord. No. 749 2-9-1999 1 2-10-20 2 2-10-30 3 2-10-40 4 2-10-50 5 2-10-80 7 2-11-20 8 2-11-40 9 2-11-50 10 2-11-60 Ord. No. 750 2-23-1999 2, 3 16-1-80 4, 5 16-4-10 6, 7 16-4-20 8, 9 16-4-30 10 16-3-30 Ord. No. 752 3-9-1999 1-4 10-4-20, 10-4-40 Ord. No. 753 3-23-1999 3 18-1-10, 18-3-10, 18-4-10, 18-5-10, 18-6-10, 18-7-10, 18-8-10 Ord. No. 754 3-23-1999 1 18-3-10 Ord. No. 757 9-28-1999 1 13-6-10 2 13-6-20 3 13-6-30 4 13-6-40 5 13-6-50 6 13-6-70-13-6-90 7 13-6-100 8 13-6-110 9 13-6-120 10 13-6-130 11 13-6-140 12 13-6-150 13 13-6-160 14 13-6-170 15 13-6-180 16 13-6-190 18 13-6-200 Ord. No. 764 5-23-2000 1 11-4-30 Ord. No. 765 9-12-2000 1 7-3-10-7-3-120 Ord. No. 766 9-12-2000 A 7-2-200 B 18-10-130 C 16-5-50 Ord. No. 767 11-28-2000 1 7-6-30 Ord. No. 773 12-11-2001 1 2-2-20 2 2-2-80 3 2-3-60 4 2-4-30, 2-4-40 5 2-3-110 6 2-3-120 7 2-3-130 8 2-3-140 9 2-3-150 10 2-3-160 11 4-2-60 12 1-3-110 13 2-3-40 14 2-3-30 Ord. No. 774 12-11-2001 18-1-80 Ord. No. 777 2-12-2002 1 11-3-70 Ord. No. 783 3-11-2003 1 18-1-10, 18-3-10, 18-4-10, 18-5-10, 18-6-10, 18-7-10, 18-8-10 Ord. No. 786 8-19-2003 1 7-1-110 Ord. No. 788 8-23-2003 1 8-1-10, 8-1-20 2 8-1-60 3 8-1-40 6 8-1-50 Ord. No. 789 9-23-2003 1-3 2-4-100 Ord. No. 790 11-25-2003 1 7-6-30 Ord. No. 793 12-9-2003 10.11.010 13-1-10 10.11.020 13-1-20 10.11.030 13-1-30, 13-1-40 10.11.040 13-1-50 10.11.050 13-1-60 10.11.060 13-1-70 10.11.070 13-1-80 10.11.075 13-1-90 10.11.080 13-1-100 10.11.085 13-1-110 10.11.090 13-1-120 Ord. No. 794 12-9-2003 10.04.070 13-2-120 10.04.075 13-2-130 Ord. No. 799 3-9-2004 1 2-9-10 2 2-9-20 3 2-9-30 4 2-9-40 5 2-9-50 6 2-9-60 7 2-9-70 8 2-9-80 9 2-9-90 Ord. No. 800 3-9-2004 1 13-6-60 Ord. No. 801 12-9-2004 2 13-2-50 3 13-2-60 4 13-2-70 5 13-2-80 6, 7 13-2-90 Ord. No. 802 8-10-2004 2 2-8-30 Ord. No. 803 8-24-2004 6.16.010 7-8-410 6.16.020, 6.16.030 7-8-420 6.16.040 7-8-430 6.16.050 7-8-440 6.16.060 7-8-450 6.16.070 7-8-460 6.16.080 7-8-470 6.16.090 7-8-480 6.16.100 7-8-490 6.16.120 7-8-500 6.16.130 7-8-510 6.16.140 7-8-520 Ord. No. 809 1-25-2005 16-8-20, 16-8-30 Ord. No. 812 3-8-2005 4-3-30, 4-3-40 Ord. No. 814 4-26-2005 6-2-20, 6-2-210 Ord. No. 817 11-8-2005 7-5-10 Ord. No. 822 4-25-2006 2 6-2-20, 6-2-220, 10-7-50 Ord. No. 831 5-8-2007 10.04.065 13-2-110 Ord. No. 834 6-12-2007 10-10-10-10-10-110 Ord. No. 836 9-11-2007 8-2-10-8-2-90 Ord. No. 837 9-11-2007 8-3-10-8-3-40 Ord. No. 838 9-11-2007 6-3-10-6-3-150, 6-3-180 Ord. No. 839 9-25-2007 2-14-10-2-14-60 Ord. No. 843 12-11-2007 16-2-30 Ord. No. 846 12-11-2007 6-2-120 Ord. No. 849 6-10-2008 1 13-7-10 2 13-7-20 3 13-7-30 4 13-7-40 5 13-7-50 6 13-7-60 7 13-7-70 Ord. No. 850 9-23-2008 a-c 2-4-110 Ord. No. 858 5-12-2009 1 6-2-20, 6-2-220 Ord. No. 859 7-14-2009 1 6-2-310 Ord. No. 864 1-26-2010 1 16-1-80 2 16-4-10 3 16-4-20 4 16-4-30 5 16-4-40 6 16-4-50 7 16-4-60 8 16-4-70 9 16-5-10 10 16-5-30 Ord. No. 865 2-23-2010 1 13-1-20 2 13-1-50 3 13-1-70 Ord. No. 872 5-24-2011 2-13-10-2-13-100 Ord. No. 874 6-28-2011 1-3 10-10-120 Ord. No. 875 9-13-2011 5-4-10-5-4-190 Ord. No. 880 2-14-2012 1 5-3-10 2 5-3-20 3 5-3-30 4 5-3-40 5 5-3-50 6 5-3-60 7 5-3-70 Ord. No. 881 2-14-2012 1 6-2-320 Ord. No. 882 7-10-2012 5.01.010 7-7-10 5.01.020 7-7-20 5.01.030 7-7-30 5.01.040 7-7-40 5.02 7-7-50 5.03.010 7-7-60 5.04.010, 5.04.020 7-7-110 5.04.030, 5.-4.040 7-7-120 5.04.050 7-7-130 5.04.060 7-7-140 5.04.070 7-7-30 5.04.080 7-7-150 5.04.090 7-7-160 5.04.100 7-7-170 5.04.110 7-7-180 5.04.120 7-7-190 5.04.130 7-7-200 5.04.140 7-7-210 5.04.150, 5.04.160 7-7-220 5.05.010 7-7-310 5.05.020, 5.05.030 7-7-320 5.05.040 7-7-330 5.05.050 7-7-340 5.05.060 7-7-350 5.05.070 7-7-360 5.05.080 7-7-370 5.05.090 7-7-380 5.05.100 7-7-390 5.05.110 7-7-400 5.05.120 7-7-410 5.05.130 7-7-420 5.06.010 7-8-310 5.06.020 7-8-320 5.06.030 7-8-330 5.07.010 7-7-510 5.07.020 7-7-520 5.07.030 7-7-530 5.07.040 7-7-540 5.07.050 7-7-550 5.08.010 7-7-70 5.09.010 7-7-610 5.09.020 7-7-620 5.09.030 7-7-630 5.09.040 7-7-640 5.09.050 7-7-650 5.12.010 7-8-110 5.12.020 7-8-120 5.12.030 7-8-130 5.12.040 7-8-140 5.12.050 7-8-150 5.12.060 7-8-160 5.12.070 7-8-170 5.12.080 7-8-180 5.12.090 7-8-190 Ord. No. 883 6-26-2012 1-3 10-10-120 Ord. No. 884 9-11-2012 16-4-10-16-4-30 Ord. No. 886 9-25-2012 1 6-2-120 Ord. No. 887 10-23-2012 1 13-8-10 2 13-8-20 3 13-8-30 4 13-8-40 5 13-8-50 6 13-8-60 7 13-8-70 Ord. No. 888 10-23-2012 1 13-9-10 2 13-9-20 3 13-9-30 4 13-9-40 5 13-9-50 6 13-9-60 7 13-9-70 Ord. No. 891 3-26-2013 1 4-4-10-4-4-130 Ord. No. 892 4-23-2013 2-4-110 Ord. No. 893 4-23-2013 1 8-1-10, 8-1-20 2 8-1-60 3 8-1-40 6 8-1-50 7 8-1-20 Ord. No. 896 7-23-2013 4-3-50 Ord. No. 897 10-8-2013 2 10-7-210 3 10-7-220 4 10-7-230 Ord. No. 900 12-10-2013 18-11-10-18-11-160, 18-11-210-18-11-280 Ord. No. 901 9-9-2014 10-6-70 Ord. No. 902 9-9-2014 1 6-5-10 2 6-5-20 3 6-5-30 4 6-5-40 5 6-5-50 6 6-5-60 7 6-5-70 8 6-5-80 9 6-5-90 10 6-5-100 11 6-5-110 12 6-5-120 13 6-5-130 14 6-5-140 15 6-5-150 16 6-5-160 17 6-5-170 19 6-5-180 Ord. No. 904  2-24-2015 7-7-510, 7-7-660 Ord. No. 905  8-25-2015 A 16-4-40(l) Ord. No. 914  2- 9-2016 1 Chapters 1 through 18, Tables, Index Ord. No. 916  4-26-2016 II 6-6-10 III 6-6-20 IV 6-6-30 V 6-6-40 VI 6-6-50 VII 6-6-60 VIII 6-6-70 IX 6-6-80 X 6-6-90 XI 6-6-100 XII 6-6-110 XIII 6-6-120 XIV 6-6-130 XV 6-6-140 XVI 6-6-150 XVII 6-6-160 XVIII 6-6-170 XIX 6-6-180 XX 6-6-190 XXI 6-6-200 XXII 6-6-210 XXIII 6-6-220 XXIV 6-6-230 XXV 6-6-240 XXVI 6-6-250 XXVII 6-6-260 XXVIII 6-6-270 XXIX 6-6-280 XXX 6-6-290 Ord. No. 919  9-13-2016 2-11-30 Ord. No. 924  9-12-2017 1 6-6-190(b) Ord. No. 928  3-13-2018 1 4-3-50(b)       Rpld 4-3-50(c) Ord. No. 929  3-13-2018       Added 16-11-10-16-11-30 Ord. No. 930  3-13-2018       Added 6-7-10-6-7-190 Ord. No. 931  3-13-2018 1       Added 4-9-10 2       Added 4-9-20 3       Added 4-9-30 4       Added 4-9-40 Ord. No. 933  5-22-2018 1 16-1-80 2 16-4-10(c) 3 16-4-20(c) 4 16-4-30(c) 5 16-4-40(c) 6 16-4-50(c) 7 16-4-60(c) 8 16-4-70(c) Ord. No. 935  5-22-2018 1       Added 11-5-10(4) Ord. No. 936  7-24-2018 1 13-6-40(b) Ord. No. 938 11-27-2018 1 10-5-40 2       Added 10-5-130  
