THE CODE OF THE CITY OF STERLING, COLORADO 
____________ 
Adopted January 8, 1991 
Effective January 11, 1991 
____________ 
Published in 1990 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
STERLING, COLORADO 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Edith M. Evans 
Mayor 
____________ 
James Allen 
Jack Bowey 
R. Douglas Robinson 
Lee Roth 
Robert Squier 
Darrell E. Wood 
City Council 
____________ 
Randy Gustafson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joseph H. Miller, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michael J. Harman 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1961 Code, as supplemented through August 13, 1985, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1961 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Randy Gustafson, City Manager, Joe Miller, City Attorney, and Kathy Sanger, Legal Assistant, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 17 
Series of 1990 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Sterling, Colorado; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Sterling, Colorado That: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of the City of Sterling, Colorado" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 31, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Whenever in the Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City hereafter enacted or in any section of a rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of the Code of Ordinances any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful for an offense or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provisions of the Code of Ordinances or other ordinance of the City hereafter enacted or of such rules or regulations shall be punished as provided in the Code of Ordinances, Section 1-15 et seq. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the City hereafter enacted or of any rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. The City Clerk shall distribute such sets of the Code and amendments thereto as may be necessary to the various departments of the City for official use of City officers, boards and commissions, and for exchange purposes for similar publications of other cities. All volumes designated for official use shall remain the property of the City for the use of such City officials and their successors and shall bear such designation. The City Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared a list of the City officers and boards and commissions who shall receive for official use copies of such Code. The City Clerk shall make the Codes and supplements thereto available to the public, and shall charge therefor such fees as are reasonable. 
    Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted after August 31, 1990 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective upon final publication. 
    Introduced, Read and Ordered Published this 11th day of December, 1990. 
    Published this 14th day of December, 1990. 
    Adopted and Approved this 8th day of January, 1991. 
    Final Publication: January 11, 1991. 
/s/ Edith M. Evans 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ James V. Thompson 
      Ex-Officio City Clerk   REVIEWED BY CITY MANAGER: 
/s/ Randy Gustafson 
      City Manager   APPROVED AS TO FORM & LEGALITY: 
/s/ Joseph H. Miller, Jr. 
      City Attorney   ORDINANCES ADOPTING SUPPLEMENTS 
ORDINANCE NO. 19 
Series of 1992 
An Ordinance Adopting Supplements Nos. 1 and 2 to the Code of Ordinances for the City of Sterling. 
Introduced by Councilmember Finch. 
Whereas, the City Council of the City of Sterling adopted a new Code of Ordinances (Sterling City Code) upon adoption of Ordinance No. 17, Series of 1990, on January 8, 1991; and 
Whereas, Sections 1-11, 1-12 and 1-13 provide for amendment to said Sterling City Code; and 
Whereas, the Sterling City Code has been revised by Supplements Nos. 1 and 2; 
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Sterling That: 
    Section 1. The code entitled "Sterling City Code," published by Municipal Code Corporation, is hereby amended by inclusion of Supplements Nos. 1 and 2. 
    Section 2. It is the intention of the City Council that Supplement Nos. 1 and 2, adopted by this ordinance, and every provision thereof, shall be considered severable and the invalidity of any section, clause, or provision or part or portion of any section, clause, or provision of said supplements and this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other portion of the Sterling City Code. 
    Section 3. A violation of any provision of Supplements Nos. 1 and 2 to the Sterling City Code shall be punishable in accordance with the penalty clause set forth in Section 1-15 of the Sterling City Code. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance; the City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days after passage and final publication. 
    Introduced, Read and Ordered Published This 9th day of June, 1992. 
    Published this 12th day of June, 1992. 
    Adopted and Approved this 23rd day of June, 1992. 
    Final Publication: June 26, 1992. 
/s/ Edith M. Evans 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ James V. Thompson 
      City Clerk   REVIEWED BY CITY MANAGER: 
/s/ Randy Gustafson 
      City Manager   APPROVED AS TO FORM & LEGALITY: 
/s/ Joseph H. Miller, Jr. 
      City Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 20-2007 11-13-07 Included 36 11-2010  9-14-10 Included 36 12-2010 10-12-10 Included 36 14-2010 11- 9-10 Included 36 15-2010 11- 9-10 Included 36  1-2011  2- 8-11 Included 37 11-2011 11- 8-11 Included 37 14-2011 12-27-11 Included 37  3-2012  6-12-12 Included 38 1-2008  3-25-08 Included 39 11-2013  7- 9-13 Included 39 17-2013  9-24-13 Included 39 18-2013  9-24-13 Included 39 19-2013 10-22-13 Included 40 3-2014  1-28-14 Included 40 6-2014  2-25-14 Included 40 9-2014 10-14-14 Included 40 10-2014 10-14-14 Included 40 13-2014 11-10-14 Omitted 40 16-2014 11-25-14 Included 40 2-2015  3-24-15 Included 41 13-2015  1-12-16 Included 41 14-2015  1-12-16 Included 41 2-2016  3- 8-16 Included 42 5-2016  4-12-16 Included 42 6-2016  6-14-16 Included 42 1-2017  2-28-17 Included 43 3-2017  3-28-17 Included 43 4-2017  4-25-17 Included 43 11-2017 11-28-17 Included 43 13-2017 11-28-17 Included 43 4-2018  3-13-18 Included 44 11-2018  9-12-18 Included 44 12-2018 10- 9-18 Included 44 13-2018 10- 9-18 Included 44 17-2018 11-13-18 Included 44  
PART I - THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF STERLING[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of Sterling, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain and establish, for the municipal government, this Charter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Sterling adopted by the members of the Charter in convention on March 20, 1950 and adopted in a referendum on May 2, 1950. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

ARTICLE 1. - NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES 

Section 1-1. - Name-Boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore and now existing and known as Sterling, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate under this Charter, with the same name and boundaries, until changed in the manner authorized by law. 
Section 1-2. - Rights-Liabilities. 
    By the name of "Sterling," the city shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal, heretofore owned, possessed and held by said city, and shall assume and manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits, and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said City of Sterling; by that name may sue and defend, plead and be impleaded, in all courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
Section 1-3. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereafter referred to as "the council", which will enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 1-4. - Powers. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and general laws of this state together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within and without its corporate limits for any city purpose, by purchase, gift, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this Charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, and privileges of every nature whatsoever. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all powers which, under the constitution of this state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
ARTICLE 2. - MUNICIPAL OFFICERS 

Section 2-1. - City council. 
    The city council shall consist of seven (7) members elected as provided in this Charter. The members of the city council, including the mayor, shall receive such compensation as the council shall by ordinance prescribe; provided, however, that the salary of any councilmember shall not be increased or decreased during the term of office for which he was elected in which the ordinance was passed. 
(Ord. No. 12-1973, § 1, 9-11-73, election 11-6-73; Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 2-2. - Municipal employees. 
    The incumbents of all other positions in the municipal service are hereby declared to be employees. 
Section 2-3. - Qualifications of elective officers. 
    Each elective officer when elected, or appointed, shall have the following qualifications: 
(a)  Is a citizen of the United States; 
(b)  Shall be a registered elector of the city who has resided in the city for twelve (12) consecutive months and in his or her respective ward for at least ninety (90) days immediately preceding the election or appointment; and 
(c)  Shall continue to reside within the boundaries of the ward in effect at the time of his or her election throughout the term of office. 
(Ord. No. 20-1983, § 3, 9-27-83, election 11-1-83; Ord. No. 15-2003, § 2, 8-26-03, eff. 9-5-03, election 11-4-03) 
Section 2-4. - Vacancies. 
    All elected officers shall continue to hold office until their successors are duly elected and qualified. An elective office shall become vacant whenever any officer is recalled, dies, resigns, becomes permanently incapacitated and unable either physically or mentally, to perform the duties of office, or ceases to be a resident of Sterling within the boundaries of the ward in effect at the time of his or her election. Any vacancy in an elective office shall be filled by appointment of the council. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term in an elective office shall have the qualifications required of persons to be regularly elected. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 2, 8-26-03, eff. 9-5-03, election 11-4-03) 
Section 2-5. - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, every officer shall take and subscribe before a judge of a court of record, and file with the city clerk, an oath or affirmation that he will support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Colorado, this Charter, the city ordinances, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
ARTICLE 3. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 3-1. - Composition. 
    The council shall consist of six (6) members, two (2) of whom shall be elected from each of three (3) wards, and a mayor who shall be elected at large by the duly registered voters of the city. 
    The terms of the six (6) councilmembers shall be for four (4) years and the term of the mayor shall be for two (2) years. 
    The four-year terms of the three (3) councilmembers elected at the first Tuesday in November 1989 general municipal election shall continue to the general municipal election the first Tuesday of November 1993. The four-year terms of the three (3) councilmembers elected at the November 5, 1991, general municipal election shall continue to the general municipal election of the first Tuesday of November 1995. The two-year term of the councilmember at large elected at the November 5, 1991, general municipal election shall continue to the general municipal election of the first Tuesday of November 1993 and upon the election at large of the mayor at the general municipal election that first Tuesday of November 1993. The four-year terms of the three councilmembers elected at the November 5, 1991, general municipal election shall continue to the general municipal election of the first Tuesday in November 1995. 
    The term of office of any councilmember and the mayor elected at or after the general municipal election held the first Tuesday in November 1993 shall commence on the day of the first regular meeting of the council held subsequent to such election, at which meeting the six (6) councilmembers shall elect from their members a mayor pro tem who shall become the active mayor with the same duties as provided for the mayor, only upon the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 7-1967, § 1, 8-22-67; election 11-7-67; Ord. No. 18-1991, § 2, 10-8-91, eff. 10-21-91, election 11-5-91) 
Section 3-2. - Membership-Rules. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members; shall determine its own rules of procedure; and may compel attendance of members. 
(Ord. No. 18-1991, § 2, 10-8-91, eff. 10-21-91, election 11-5-91) 
Section 3-3. - Mayor-Duties; veto power. 
    The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to speak therein as any other member of the council. The mayor shall have the right to vote as any other member of council, except upon exercise of the mayor veto as hereinafter provided. 
    The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and for the service of civil process. The mayor shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring his/her signature as such an official. 
    The mayor shall have veto power over ordinances passed by the council, which power, in order to have full effect, must be exercised by verbal veto immediately following passage by council at second reading of an ordinance to which the verbal veto is exercised. Within six (6) days of such verbal veto, the mayor shall deliver a complete written explanation of reasons for said veto to each city council member, and the mayor shall, within the same six (6) days, execute his/her signature as to the veto on the ordinance document before the city clerk. 
    The failure of the mayor to deliver a complete written explanation and to explanation and to execute his/her signature as provided above shall cause the verbal veto of the mayor to be void ab initio, such ordinance shall be considered passed on second reading and the city clerk shall publish such ordinance in full. 
    The complete exercise of the veto by the mayor, as above provided, shall be subject to being overridden by an affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the other six (6) councilmembers at a special meeting of the council seven (7) days from the date of original passage on second reading, which special meeting shall automatically occur without special call and at which the mayor pro tem shall preside. 
(Ord. No. 18-1991, § 2, 10-8-91, eff. 10-21-91, election 11-5-91) 
Section 3-4. - General powers. 
    The city council shall have all legislative powers and functions of the municipal government conferred by general law or existing by operation of law, except as provided in this Charter. 
    By way of extension, but not of limitation, the city council shall have power to enact ordinances as follows: 
(a)  To protect life, health, and property; 
(b)  To declare, prevent, and summarily abate and remove nuisances; 
(c)  To preserve and enforce good government; 
(d)  To promote the general welfare, order, and security in the city; 
(e)  To exercise the exclusive right of appropriation and taxation excepting, however, that the city council shall not have the power to assess property, real and personal, at a value which exceeds the assessed valuation of said property made by the duly qualified and elected assessor of Logan County, Colorado. 
    The city council shall provide for the enforcement of ordinances by fines, imprisonment or both in accordance with article XX of the constitution of the State of Colorado regarding home rule. 
    The enumeration of particular powers granted to the city council shall not impair or limit its general powers. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 3-5. - [City attorney; notice of injury.] 
    The council shall appoint a city attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney shall perform all the functions assigned by general law to municipal attorneys, including the institution or the defense of actions or proceedings on behalf of the city, when so directed by the council. 
(a)  Special counsel may be retained by the city council at its discretion. 
(b)  Notice of personal injuries-Before the municipal government shall be liable for damages to a person injured on a street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, the person so injured, or someone in his behalf shall within ninety (90) days after receiving such injuries notify the manager in writing, stating fully the time, place, circumstances and extent of the injuries. 
Section 3-6. - Contracts with other governmental bodies. 
    The city council may enter into contracts with other governmental bodies for any of the following purposes: 
(a)  To furnish governmental services and to make charges for such services; 
(b)  To enter into cooperative or joint activities with other governmental bodies. 
Section 3-7. - Power to make contracts. 
    The city council shall have the authority to enter into contracts on behalf of the municipal government. All written contracts to which the city is a party shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
Section 3-8. - Independent audits. 
    The city council shall contract with an independent practicing individual or firm, permitted to practice public accounting under general law, to perform an annual general audit of all municipal accounts and such other periodic post audits as the council may determine. 
Section 3-9. - City clerk. 
    The council shall, upon recommendation of the city manager, designate an employee of the city who shall have the title of city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of the council's meetings, keep a journal of its proceedings, authenticate by his signature and record in full in the book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions and shall perform such other duties that shall be required by this Charter or by ordinance. 
Section 3-10. - Creation of new departments or offices; change of duties. 
    The council by ordinance may create, change, and abolish offices, departments or agencies, other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this Charter. The council by ordinance may assign additional functions or duties to offices, departments or agencies established by this Charter, but may not discontinue or assign to any other office, department or agency any function or duty assigned by this Charter to a particular office, department or agency. 
Section 3-11. - Licenses and permits. 
    The city council may provide for licenses and permits and fees therefore [therefor] for regulatory and for revenue purposes in amounts sufficient to cover the entire cost of such regulation. The issuance of licenses and permits relating to specific functions shall be assigned to the finance department. The council shall hear and decide appeals relating to the issuance, suspension or revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 3-12. - Surety bonds. 
    The council shall require the director of finance and such other employees transacting the financial business of the city to furnish bonds with such surety and in such amounts as the council may determine. 
Section 3-13. - Meetings. 
    The council may hold regular meetings, twice each month, at the city hall at a date and hour to be fixed from time to time by the rules and procedure of each council; and the council shall have power by ordinance to prescribe the manner of calling meetings thereof. Special meetings may be held at any time the council may direct. All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public. Four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 10-2008, § 2(5), 11-4-08, eff. 12-4-08) 
Section 3-14. - Ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
    In all legislative matters coming before it, the council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. In addition to such acts of the council as are required by the general statutes or by other provisions of this Charter to be by ordinance, every act creating, altering or abolishing any agency, office or employment, or assigning or reassigning the same to departments, fixing compensation, making an appropriation, authorizing the borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. 
Section 3-15. - Form of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance except the annual budget ordinance and an ordinance making a general codification of ordinances, shall be confined to a single subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. All ordinances shall be introduced in written or printed form. All ordinances which amend or repeal existing ordinances shall set forth in full the section or subsection to be amended or repealed and if it is to be amended shall indicate matter to be omitted from the revised section or subsection by enclosing the same in brackets and new matter by underscoring. When published prior to enactment in a newspaper or otherwise the same indications of omitted and new matter shall be used except that italics may be substituted for underscoring. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Council of Sterling." Unless another date is specified therein an ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day following its passage. 
Section 3-16. - Procedure for passage. 
    An ordinance may be introduced at any regular meeting by any member of the council, or any committee thereof, and shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the seven (7) council members for passage. Upon introduction it shall be read a first time and a day and hour set at which the council or a committee shall hold a public hearing thereon. Such hearing may be at a regular meeting of the council or at such time and place as the council may order and may be adjourned from time to time. An ordinance before final passage, shall be read in at least two (2) regular meetings of the council, may be amended on its first reading, and shall be published once in a newspaper in the city in such manner as may be provided by general law at least ten (10) days before its final passage. When the city council deems it appropriate, publication of the title of an ordinance, or the title of an amendment thereto, together with a statement that the text is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk, shall be sufficient publication. 
Section 3-17. - Disposition of ordinances. 
    The mayor shall sign all ordinances approved by the council. All ordinances of Sterling shall be indexed by subject by the city clerk in a book kept for that purpose which shall be public record. 
(Ord. No. 10-2008, § 2(10), 11-4-08, eff. 12-4-08) 
Section 3-18. - Ordinance codification. 
    The city council may from time to time cause the permanent ordinances to be codified. Such codification may be of the entire body of permanent ordinances or of the ordinances on some particular subject. The city council shall provide that in each ten-year period beginning with the effective date of this Charter all the permanent ordinances shall be codified. Such codification may be reenacted by the city council or may be authenticated in such other manner as may be designated by ordinance. No codification ordinance shall be invalid on the ground that it deals with more than one (1) subject. 
ARTICLE 4. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 4-1. - Appointment. 
    The council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the executive head of the municipal government; and shall fix his salary. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. He shall be appointed on the basis of administrative and executive qualifications. No councilman shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of his term. 
Section 4-2. - [Absence or disability of manager.] 
    To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the manager shall designate by letter, filed with the city clerk, a qualified administrative employee of the city. In the event of the failure of the manager to make such a designation, the council may, by resolution, appoint an employee of the city to perform the duties of the manager until he shall return, or his disability shall cease. 
Section 4-3. - [Term of office; removal of manager.] 
    The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by an affirmative vote of a majority of the seven (7) councilmembers. There shall be no such removal until ninety (90) days subsequent to his assuming office; and in the event of such removal, the manager shall be entitled to sixty (60) days notice, or in lieu thereof, sixty (60) days advance pay. 
Section 4-4. - Appointments or removals. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiry, and as otherwise specifically set forth in the City Charter, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council, nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 25-2005, § 1, 7-26-05, election 11-1-05) 
Section 4-5. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall: 
(a)  See that the laws and ordinances of the city are enforced. 
(b)  Except as such powers may be specifically otherwise designated herein, have the power to appoint, suspend and remove all heads of departments and employees of the city; provided, however, that in the classified service all appointments, suspensions, and removals shall be subject to the personnel provisions of the Charter of Sterling. 
(c)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(d)  Prepare and submit to the council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year, and make written or verbal reports to the council at any time required by it, as to any particular matter relating to the affairs of the city within his supervision. 
(e)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city; and make such recommendations to the council for adoption as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(f)  Except as to the municipal court and the office of the city attorney, exercise supervision and control over all city departments, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the establishment, consolidation, or abolition of such departments. 
(g)  Prepare and make available for public inspection a monthly report of activities in each department under his jurisdiction. 
(h)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with the Charter of Sterling. 
(i)  The city manager shall also have the power, whenever the interest of the city requires, to assign any employee of one (1) department to the temporary performance of similar duties in another department. 
(Ord. No. 10-2008, §§ 2(6), (11), 11-4-08, eff. 12-4-08) 
Section 4-6. - Administrative departments. 
    There shall be a department of finance and records, a department of personnel, a department of public works, a department of parks, library and recreation, a department of fire, a department of police, and such other departments as may be established by ordinance upon the recommendation of the manager. 
Section 4-7. - Directors of departments. 
    At the head of each department there shall be a director, who shall have supervision and control of the department subject to the city manager. 
    Two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual, the manager may head one or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. 
Section 4-8. - Departmental divisions. 
    The work of each department may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the manager. Pending the passage of an ordinance or ordinances distributing the work of departments under the supervision and control of the manager, among specific divisions thereof, the manager may establish temporary divisions. 
Section 4-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-2008, § 2(11), adopted November 4, 2008, repealed § 4-9, which pertained to assignment of employees and reenacted it verbatim as subsection 4-5(i). 
ARTICLE 5. - BUDGET 

Section 5-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of January in each year and end on the last day of the succeeding December. 
Section 5-2. - Submission of the budget. 
    On or before the twentieth day of September of each year, or in conformity with the general state law, the city manager shall submit to the council: 
(a)  An annual or current expense budget, hereafter referred to as the budget, which shall be a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year, consisting of the budget proper and the budget message; and 
(b)  A capital budget. 
Section 5-3. - Scope of annual budget. 
    The budget shall contain: 
(a)  An estimate of all revenue cash receipts anticipated from sources other than the tax levy of the ensuing fiscal year; 
(b)  An estimate of the general fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation; 
(c)  The estimated expenditures necessary for the operation of the several departments, offices and agencies of the city; 
(d)  Debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the sum required to be raised by the tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year, assuming a rate of collection not greater than the average rate of collection in the year of levy for the last three (3) completed fiscal years (or ninety-five (95) percent, whichever is lower); and 
(f)  A balanced relation between the total estimated expenditures and total anticipated revenue cash receipts, taking into account the estimated general fund cash surplus or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. 
All estimates shall be in detail showing revenues by sources and expenditures by organization units, activities, character and object. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for receipts and expenditures for prior years and for the current year and the city manager's recommendations for the ensuing year. The budget may provide an additional amount as a reserve to meet and care for expenditures to be made from such fund during the months of January to April in the year following the year for which the budget and appropriation ordinance shall apply but the amount which may be included in such reserve shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total amount appropriated and authorized to be expended during the budget year. 
Section 5-4. - Departmental estimates. 
    The head of every department office or agency, shall submit to the city manager, at such date as the city manager shall determine, estimates of revenue and expenditure for that department, office or agency. Such estimates shall be submitted upon forms furnished by the city manager and shall contain all information which he may require. The city manager shall include on the forms submitted, data regarding expenditures of the last fiscal year. The city manager shall review the estimates and in preparing the budget may revise them as he may deem advisable. 
Section 5-5. - Appropriation and tax levy ordinance. 
    At the same time that he submits the budget the city manager shall also prepare an appropriation ordinance making a levy in mills upon all taxable property within the city for the ensuing fiscal year. The appropriation ordinance shall be based on the budget but need not be itemized further than by departments and the major divisions thereof and by each independent office and agency and by the principal objects of expenditure. The ordinance shall not be acted upon until after the adoption of the budget. The hearing upon the budget shall be taken to be the hearing upon the appropriation and tax levy ordinance. 
Section 5-6. - Budget a public record. 
    The budget shall be a public record in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection and sufficient copies shall be made available for use of the council and the public. 
Section 5-7. - Public hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held by the council two (2) weeks after its submission. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be published within three (3) days after the submission of the budget in the manner provided in this Charter for the publication of ordinances. 
Section 5-8. - Changes by the council. 
    After the conclusion of such public hearing the council may insert new items of expenditure or may increase, decrease, or strike out, items of expenditure, except that no item of appropriation for debt service shall be reduced. The council shall not alter the city manager's estimates of receipts. It may, however, decrease the amount of the tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year, as proposed by the city manager, in proportion to such decrease in the total of expenditures proposed by the city manager. If it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, such increase shall be reflected in full in the total estimated revenue. 
Section 5-9. - Adoption of the budget. 
    Upon the completion of the public hearing, but not later than the date required for submission of the levy to the county officials, the council shall adopt the budget and the tax levy ordinance. If the council fails in any year to adopt said budget and to pass the appropriation and tax levy ordinance as above required, then the levy last fixed shall be the levy for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Section 5-10. - Work program and allotments. 
    After the annual appropriation has been adopted and before the beginning of the fiscal year the head of each department, office or agency shall submit to the city manager, in such form as he shall prescribe, a work program, which shall show the requested allotments of the appropriations for such department, office or agency for the entire fiscal year by monthly or quarterly periods as the city manager may direct. Before the beginning of the fiscal year, the city manager shall approve, with such amendments as he shall determine, the allotments for each such department, office or agency, and shall file the same with the director of finance, who shall not authorize any expenditure to be made from any appropriation except on the basis of approved allotments. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation available to said department, office or agency for the fiscal year. An approved allotment may be revised during the fiscal year in the same manner as the original was made. If at any time during the fiscal year the city manager shall ascertain that the revenue cash receipts for the year, plus general fund cash surplus from the preceding year, will be less than the total appropriations, he shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several departments, offices and agencies, and revise the allotments so as to forestall the incurring of a deficit. 
Section 5-11. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof, from one (1) classification of expenditure to another within the same department, office or agency. At the request of the city manager, but only within the last three (3) months of the fiscal year, the council may by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance in the general fund, or portion thereof, from one (1) department or agency to another. 
Section 5-12. - Additional appropriations. 
    Appropriations in addition to those contained in the budget shall be made only on the recommendation of the city manager and only if the director of finance certifies that there is available a cash surplus sufficient to meet such appropriations. 
Section 5-13. - Appropriations to lapse. 
    Any portion of an annual appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the budget year shall be declared surplus and included in the budget for the ensuing year. 
Section 5-14. - Capital budget. 
    As a part of the budget message or as a separate report attached thereto the city manager shall present a program, previously considered by the board of public works, as provided in article 8, of this Charter, of proposed capital projects for the ensuing fiscal year, and for the four (4) fiscal years thereafter. Estimates of the cost of such projects shall be submitted by each department, office or agency annually in the same manner as estimates of other budgetary requirements are prepared for the city manager. The city manager shall recommend to the council those projects to be undertaken during the ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing the same. 
ARTICLE 6. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND RECORDS 

Section 6-1. - Department created. 
    A department of finance and records is hereby established, the head of which shall be the director of finance. The director of finance shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. 
Section 6-2. - Director of finance-Powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall have charge of administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Compile the current expense estimates for the budget of the city; 
(2)  Compile the capital estimates for the annual budget; 
(3)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded, or payments illegally made; 
(4)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient; 
(5)  Submit to the council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(6)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(7)  Collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees, and other revenues for whose collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from the state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city; 
(8)  Issue all licenses on applications approved by the proper authorities and in conformity with ordinance; 
(9)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, or, if no such resolution be adopted, by the city manager, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(10)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(11)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage, distribution, and maintenance of a perpetual inventory of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city government; 
(12)  Approve all proposed expenditures. No appropriation and no expenditure shall be made unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of both appropriation and available funds. 
Section 6-3. - Accounting, supervision and control. 
    The director of finance shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, accounts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city government; 
(2)  Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable; 
(3)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the city government, and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
Section 6-4. - Purchases. 
    The director of finance shall be the city purchasing agent. The purchasing agent, pursuant to rules, regulations, or ordinance, shall contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office, department, or agency of the city government. He shall also have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials and equipment required by the city government; 
(2)  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, and equipment, and determine their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications; 
(3)  Have charge of general city storerooms and warehouses; 
(4)  Transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies or sell surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, material and equipment with the approval of the manager. 
Section 6-5. - Competitive bidding. 
    Before the director of finance makes any purchase of, or contract for supplies, materials or equipment, exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), he shall give ample opportunity for competitive bidding, in accordance with the procedures for procurement set forth by the council by ordinance, with such exceptions as the council may prescribe; provided, however, that the council shall not exempt any individual, firm or corporation from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 6-6. - Accounting control of purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the director of finance shall be made only upon written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency, whose appropriation will be charged. 
Section 6-7. - Contracts for city improvements. 
    Any city improvement costing more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be provided for by contract except where such improvement is authorized by the council to be executed directly by a city department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All such contracts for more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible responsive bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by the city council; provided the council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. The council shall be empowered to enact procedures for the procurement of improvements under this section by ordinance so long as the same are not inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 6-8. - Bonds; issuance; limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter of Sterling, no bonds or other evidences of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of ad valorem property taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the municipal government are pledged (excluding local improvement district bonds guaranteed pursuant to the provisions of section 8-9), shall be issued for any purpose except pursuant to an ordinance authorizing the same, which ordinance shall be irrepealable until the indebtedness therein provided for, and the bonds or other obligations issued in pursuance thereof, shall have been fully paid. Such bonds or such other evidences of indebtedness of each issue or series shall be payable serially in annual installments, but the first installment may become due within any time not exceeding three (3) years from the date of such obligations, and, further, such obligations may be subject to prior redemption at the city's option upon such terms and conditions as the council may determine. No such bonds or such other evidences of indebtedness shall be issued unless the question of issuing such bonds or such other evidences of indebtedness shall have been submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the city, and a majority of those voting upon the question by ballot shall have voted in favor of issuing such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness. 
    Refunding bonds may be issued by ordinance only, provided, however, that the bonds to be refunded can be refunded at a lower rate of interest, and provided further that in no case shall the amount of such bonds to be refunded be increased nor the life of the same be extended. 
    The city shall not become indebted for any purpose or in any manner in an amount which, including existing indebtedness, shall exceed three (3) percent of the actual valuation of the taxable property within the city, as shown by the last preceding assessment for city purposes; but in any determination of the limitation of the city's power to incur indebtedness there shall not be included bonds issued for the acquisition or extension of a water supply, public utilities, enterprises, works or ways from which the city will derive a revenue, nor local improvement district bonds, nor revenue bonds or other obligations which do not constitute an indebtedness. 
    The director of finance shall see that all proper provisions for the protection of the city's interests are included in all bonds or other obligations issued, and that the term of bonds or other obligations shall be limited to such extent only as shall be required to meet the indebtedness covered thereby. He shall see that all bonds or other obligations are retired as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 6-1955, § 1, 6-14-55, election 8-16-55; Ord. No. 13-1972, § 3, 11-14-72, election 1-16-73) 
Section 6-9. - General fund receipts and expenditures. 
    The general fund of the city shall comprise all receipts and liabilities from the following sources, which shall be paid into said fund: 
(a)  General property, general excise, and other general taxes; 
(b)  Licenses and fees of a general nature and arising by reason of general services rendered; 
(c)  Penalties, fines, forfeits, and escheats; 
(d)  Receipts from investment or sale of assets of the general fund; 
(e)  Refunds of general fund expenditures; 
(f)  All other receipts not specifically classified as belonging to other funds. 
    All general functions of the municipal government shall be financed by appropriations from the general fund. 
Section 6-10. - Special funds. 
    Trust monies, bond funds, retirement and pension funds, money derived from municipally owned business enterprises and special improvement district funds, shall be known as special funds, and may be created only by ordinance. The ordinance creating special funds shall specify the source of receipts of the special funds and the purpose for which expenditures from special funds shall be made. Special funds created by ordinance may be abolished by ordinance, subject to existing trusts, and the remaining assets of any such special fund may be transferred to other funds. 
ARTICLE 7. - [HUMAN RESOURCES/PERSONNEL] 

Section 7-1. - Department created-Merit basis of appointment. 
    There shall be a department of human resources, the head of which shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold the title of director of human resources, also known as the personnel director, which titles shall be interchangeable as used in the Sterling City Charter or Sterling City Code. 
(Ord. No. 20-1983, § 3, 9-27-83, election 11-1-83; Ord. No. 21-2005, § 1, 7-26-05, election 11-1-05) 
Section 7-2. - Powers and duties. 
    The personnel director shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prepare, install, and maintain a classification plan based on the duties, authority and responsibility of positions in the city service; 
(2)  Prepare and maintain a pay plan in the city service; 
(3)  Perform such other and different lawful acts and functions as he may deem necessary or desirable to enforce the purposes and provisions of this article. 
Section 7-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-2018, adopted March 13, 2018, resulting from the election held Nov. 7, 2017, repealed former § 7-3, which pertained to the personnel board, and derived from the original Charter. 
Section 7-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-2018, adopted March 13, 2018, resulting from the election held Nov. 7, 2017, repealed former § 7-4, which pertained to powers and duties of personnel board, and derived from the original Charter. 
Section 7-5. - Unclassified and classified service. 
(a)  The unclassified service shall include members of the city council, and all other employees of the city except those specifically included in the classified service. 
(b)  The classified service shall include regular full-time sworn employees of the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 22-2005, § 1, 7-26-05, election 11-1-05) 
ARTICLE 8. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Section 8-1. - Department created. 
    There shall be a department of public works, the head of which shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Section 8-2. - Functions. 
    The department of public works shall exercise all administrative functions of the municipal government as to: 
(a)  Providing central architectural and engineering services; 
(b)  Preparing plans and designs, and supervising construction of architectural and engineering works; 
(c)  Acquiring or constructing, and maintaining public buildings; 
(d)  Inspecting public and private buildings, and other structures, including their physical appurtenances and services, regulating the construction and maintenance of public and private buildings; 
(e)  Conducting traffic engineering studies and surveys, designing and constructing streets and transportation facilities; 
(f)  Cleaning, maintaining, and marking streets and related structures; supervising street-lighting; controlling street cuts; and conducting trash and garbage removal and like services; 
(g)  Laying out, opening, changing, relocating, vacating, and establishing streets, alleys and other public ways and the grades thereof, subject to approval by ordinance; 
(h)  Constructing, maintaining, and repairing municipal communication, power, and heating systems, and traffic regulation systems; 
(i)  Operating, maintaining, and constructing municipal water, sewage, transportation and public utility systems and facilities; 
(j)  Constructing, operating and maintaining municipal airports and air facilities; 
(k)  Constructing and reconstructing of park, playground and recreational facilities; 
(l)  Operating central garage and equipment repair services; 
(m)  Preparing for the city manager a capital outlay budget and developing a long range capital outlay program; 
(n)  Administering and enforcing zoning ordinances. 
Section 8-3. - Zoning. 
(a)  Grant of power. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community, the council is hereby empowered to properly zone the city. This shall be done by ordinance which may consider and provide for, but which shall not necessarily be restricted to the following: 
(1)  Regulation and restriction of the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures. 
(2)  The percentage of lot that may be occupied. 
(3)  The size of yards, courts, and other open spaces. 
(4)  The density of population and location and use of buildings. 
(5)  Structures and areas for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. 
(b)  Districts. For any or all of said purposes, the council may divide the City of Sterling into districts of such manner, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this Charter; and within such districts it may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(c)  Planning commission. The council may, by ordinance, create a planning commission to have such duties as the council may provide relating to zoning, land use and land use planning. 
(Ord. No. 20-1983, § 3, 9-27-83, election 11-1-83) 
Section 8-4. - Public works board. 
    There shall be a public works board, which shall consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed by the council, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position in the city. The city manager and the mayor shall serve as ex-officio members of the board. The term of the appointed members shall be three (3) years, except that of the three (3) members first appointed, one (1) of whom shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, and one (1) for two (2) years. Any vacancy during the unexpired term of any member shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term. 
Section 8-5. - Function of public works board. 
    The functions of the public works board shall be: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals by any person relating to building inspection, building, housing or related code enforcement, licensing of contractors and related matters as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  To advise the city manager and the director of public works on public works matters, capital outlay budgeting and long range planning for proposed capital projects as provided in section 5-14 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 20-1983, § 3, 9-27-83, election 11-1-83) 
Section 8-6. - Eminent domain. 
    The city in carrying out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this Charter, or the general statutes shall have power to acquire within or without the city, lands, buildings and other structures, any interest in land and air rights over land and may take the same upon paying just compensation to the owner thereof, as provided by the general statutes. 
Section 8-7. - Improvement districts. 
    A public work or improvement, the costs of which, in whole or in part, are to be assessed by the city, may be initiated by the council on recommendation of the director of public works, or on petition of property owners in such number and in such form as may be prescribed by the general statutes. Wherever applicable, general statutes of the State of Colorado relating to improvement districts and the financing thereof shall be followed. 
Section 8-8. - Special or local improvement bonds-Issuance. 
    The City of Sterling shall have power to construct or install special or local improvements of every character within designated districts in said city, which improvements shall confer special benefits on the real property within said districts. The city council shall by ordinance prescribe the method and manner of making such improvements, of letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of constructing or installing said improvements, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to limit the power of the city council to act in accordance with the constitution and statutes of Colorado in carrying out such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6-1955, § 1, 6-14-55, election 8-16-55) 
Section 8-9. - Special or local improvement district bonds-Special surplus and deficiency fund. 
    Where all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the payment of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and cancelled four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and interest due thereon, and there is not sufficient money in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the city shall pay the bonds when due and interest due thereon and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the district. 
(Ord. No. 6-1955, § 1, 6-14-55, election 8-16-55) 
Section 8-10. - Special or local improvement district bonds-General benefits. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the city at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement district, the city council may levy annual taxes on the taxable property within the city, not exceeding two (2) mills in any one year, to be disbursed, as determined by the city council, for the purpose of paying for such benefits, and for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purpose specified herein, provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the city council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the city, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one (1) year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. As long as any bonds issued for special or local improvement districts hereafter organized and in default remain outstanding, the tax levy or equivalent transfer of money to the special fund created for the payment of said bonds shall not be diminished in any succeeding year until all of said bonds and the interest thereon shall be paid in full, unless other available funds are on hand therefor, or such bonds and interests are paid by the city as required above. 
    Whenever there are no bonds of special or local improvement districts outstanding, the funds in the surplus and deficiency fund may be transferred to the general fund by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-1955, § 1, 6-14-55, election 8-16-55) 
ARTICLE 9. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, LIBRARY AND RECREATION 

Section 9-1. - Department created. 
    There shall be a department of parks, library and recreation, the head of which shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Section 9-2. - Functions. 
    The department of parks, library and recreation shall exercise all administrative functions of the municipal government as to: 
(a)  Operation and maintenance of municipal parks, park areas, playgrounds, playfields, lake facilities, swimming pools, fountains, recreation and community buildings, sports arenas, stadium, golf courses and related facilities, both inside and outside the corporate city limits; 
(b)  Maintain and operate the city libraries; 
(c)  Planning, conduct, and supervision of organized public, physical and cultural recreational programs; 
(d)  Cooperation with public and private agencies in library facilities, in public recreational programs, concerts, and other entertainment; 
(e)  Operation of public gardens, and the care and maintenance of lawns, shrubbery and trees in municipal parks, parkways, and other public areas; 
(f)  Maintenance and preservation of public monuments, museums, and collections; 
(g)  Maintenance of restrooms, refreshment facilities, and restaurants in properties under the supervision of the department of parks, library and recreation; 
(h)  Maintenance and operation of city cemeteries. 
Section 9-3. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of parks, library and recreation shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline, and good conduct of the department and for the care and custody of all property of the city entrusted to the department. 
    The construction and reconstruction of all parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities shall be vested in the department of public works. The specific determination of the functions relating to such construction and reconstruction by the department of public works shall be made by the city manager. 
Section 9-4. - Parks, library and recreation board. 
    There shall be a parks, library and recreation board consisting of five (5) members, all of whom shall serve without compensation. One (1) member shall be nominated by the board of education and appointed by city council, and the other four (4) members shall be citizens appointed by the council on the basis of their broad interest in parks, library and recreational development. Ex-officio members of this board shall be the mayor and city manager. Members appointed as above provided shall serve for a term of three (3) years, or until their successors are appointed, and members first appointed shall determine their respective terms of office by lot, so that one (1) member thereof shall serve for a term of one (1) year; two (2) members thereof for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members thereof for a term of three (3) years. As their terms respectively expire, members shall be appointed for the full term of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. 
    Should any member of the parks, library and recreation board be absent for more than three (3) successive, regularly scheduled meetings of said board, without leave of its chairman or the mayor, such member shall be considered as not sufficiently interested in park, library and recreational development, and his position vacated. 
Section 9-5. - Powers and duties of parks, library and recreation board. 
    The duties of the parks, library and recreation board shall be: 
(a)  To make studies and investigations of parks, library and recreational matters, and to report the findings to the director of parks, library and recreation, the council and city manager. 
(b)  To advise the director of parks, library and recreation in matters concerning his department. 
Section 9-6. - Rules and regulations. 
    On recommendation of the city manager, the board shall have power to adopt all needful rules and regulations relating to properties and related facilities under the supervision of parks, library and recreation department, whether inside or outside the city, and for the preservation of order, safety and decency therein. For the purpose of enforcing such rules and regulations, all such properties shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city, or park employee appointed as a special policeman, shall have power to arrest without warrant, on all such properties, any person who has violated any such rule or regulation or committed any offense therein. 
ARTICLE 10. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE 

Section 10-1. - Department created. 
    There is hereby created the department of fire, the head of which shall be the fire chief, appointed by the city manager, with the approval of the council. The department shall consist of a fire chief, and such other employees of such ranks and grades that may be prescribed by ordinance, including volunteers. 
(Ord. No. 23-2005, § 1, 7-26-05, election 11-1-05) 
Section 10-2. - Functions of department. 
    The department of fire shall be responsible for protection of life and property within the city, from fire and for the enforcement of all laws, ordinances, and regulations relating to fire prevention and safety. The department shall be responsible for the installation, operation, maintenance, and supervision of fire department equipment. 
Section 10-3. - Fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall be in direct command of the department of fire. Subject to the provisions of article 7, of this Charter, he shall appoint and remove all other officers and employees of the department. He shall assign all members of the department to their respective posts, shifts, details, and duties. He shall make rules and regulations in conformity with the ordinances of the city, concerning the operation of the department and conduct of all employees thereof. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline, and good conduct of the department, and for the care and custody of all property used by the department. Disobedience to the lawful orders of the chief or to the rules and regulations aforesaid shall be ground for dismissal or for other appropriate disciplinary action taken in accordance with the provisions of article 7 of this Charter. The chief shall, subject to approval by the manager, have further power to make regulations implementing and giving effect to the general laws and ordinances relating to fire prevention and fire safety. 
ARTICLE 11. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE 

Section 11-1. - Department created. 
    There is hereby created a department of police, the director of which shall be the chief of police appointed by the city manager, with the approval of the council. The department shall consist of a chief of police, and such other employees of such ranks and grades as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 11-2. - Functions of the department. 
    The department shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, and enforcement of the laws of the State, and the ordinances of the city, and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. All members of the department shall have the same powers and duties with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers by the general statutes. The department shall also exercise all administrative functions of the municipal government as to: 
(a)  Operation of municipal jails, and 
(b)  Control of traffic, promotion of traffic safety and investigation and analysis of traffic accidents. 
Section 11-3. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be in direct command of the department of police. Subject to the provisions of article 7, of this Charter, he shall appoint and remove all employees of the department, and shall assign all members of the department to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He shall make rules and regulations, in conformity with the ordinances of the city, concerning the operation of the department and the conduct of all employees thereof. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline, and good conduct of the department and for the care and custody of all property used by the department. Disobedience to the lawful orders of the chief or to rules and regulations aforesaid, shall be ground for dismissal, or for other appropriate disciplinary action taken in accordance with the provisions of article 7 of this Charter. 
Section 11-4. - Special police officers. 
    Upon application of any individual, firm, corporation, or association, showing the necessity therefor, the chief of police may appoint one (1) or more special officers to be paid by the applicant. He may also appoint, at the request of the city manager, any employee of any department of the city as a special police officer. Special police officers shall take the oath required of members of the police force; shall wear when on duty, in full sight, a badge in the form prescribed by the chief; and while in or on the premises of the individual, firm, corporation, or association requesting his appointment, and in the case of a city employee while in performance of his official duties, shall have all the powers and duties of police officers of the city and shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the department of police. Such appointments shall be revocable by the chief of police at any time. 
ARTICLE 12. - THE MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 12-1. - [Created; jurisdiction.] 
    There is hereby created a municipal court, vested with exclusive original jurisdiction over all causes and violations arising under the Charter and ordinances of the City of Sterling. The city council shall be empowered to enact ordinances affecting the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 12-2. - [Rules of procedure.] 
    The statutes of the State of Colorado and the rules of the Colorado Supreme Court governing the organizational and procedural aspects of municipal courts shall apply to the municipal court created by this article except when the city council has provided otherwise by ordinance in derogation of state statute and supreme court rule pursuant to the city's home rule powers provided by the constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
Section 12-3. - [Rights not to be abridged.] 
    No ordinance affecting the municipal court shall abridge the rights guaranteed by the constitutions of the United States and the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 23-1981, § 3, 8-25-81, election 11-3-81) 
ARTICLE 13. - ELECTIONS 

Section 13-1. - Applicability of general statutes. 
    Except as specifically provided herein or by ordinance, the general statutes relating to the nominations, registration of voters, the conduct of elections, the counting of votes, and the declaration of the result, shall be applicable to all general or special elections held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The council shall provide for the manner of holding city elections and such additional regulations in respect to elections, not inconsistent with this Charter, as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this article. There shall be no use of the name of or affiliation with national political parties in municipal elections. 
(Res. of 9-28-65, § 1, election 11-2-65) 
Section 13-2. - Municipal elections. 
    A general municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November of 1951, and on the first Tuesday in November of every second year thereafter. Special municipal elections shall be held when required by this Charter. 
Section 13-3. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- This section on judges and clerks was repealed by Ord. No. 20-1983, § 3, 9-27-83 adopted in referendum held on November 1, 1983. 
Section 13-4. - Canvassing board. 
    The city council shall meet as a canvassing board and duly canvass the election returns within two (2) days after any municipal election. Whenever any member of the council is a candidate for re-election, the city council shall appoint some justice of the peace or notary public of said city to take the place of said candidate upon said canvassing board. 
Section 13-5. - Primary elections. 
    There shall be no municipal primary elections. 
Section 13-6. - Election precincts. 
    The boundaries of election precincts for the City of Sterling shall be determined by the city council. The council shall likewise determine the maximum number of electors for each precinct. 
Section 13-7. - Recall from office. 
    Every elective city officer of the City of Sterling may be recalled from office at any time by the electors of the City of Sterling, by recall petition filed with the city clerk, with signatures of qualified electors equal in number to twenty-five (25) percentum of the entire vote cast at the last preceding general municipal election for all candidates for the position which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies. 
    The procedure hereunder to effect the recall of an elective officer, shall be as far as applicable by the method pointed out in article XXI of the constitution of the State of Colorado, known as "recall from office", with power in the city council to provide by ordinance such other and further procedure as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent herewith. 
Section 13-8. - Initiative and referendum. 
    Any proposed ordinance, Charter or Charter amendment may be submitted to the council by petition therefor of qualified electors equal in number to at least five (5) percent of the last preceding vote for all candidates for governor within the City of Sterling, by filing the same with the city or town clerk or other election officer, and such proposed ordinance, Charter, or Charter amendment shall be adopted, without alteration by the council within twenty (20) days after such petition is filed; or the council shall refer such proposed ordinance, Charter or Charter amendment, in the form petitioned for, to the qualified electors at the next municipal election held not less than sixty (60) days after such petition is filed. If such petition contain a request for a special election and is signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the said last preceding vote for governor, the ordinance, Charter, or Charter amendment thereby proposed shall be passed by the council, without amendment or change, within twenty (20) days after such petition shall be filed, or the council shall refer such proposed ordinance, Charter or Charter amendment, in the form petitioned for, to the qualified electors at a special election, which shall be called within said thirty (30) days and held not less than sixty (60) nor more than ninety (90) days after such petition is filed, unless a special election for some other purpose or a general election is held within said period of time, in which case such proposed ordinance, Charter or Charter amendment shall be submitted to a vote at such election. Alternative ordinances, Charter or Charter amendments may be submitted at the same election, and if two (2) or more conflicting measures be approved by the people, then that one (1) which receives the greatest number of affirmative votes shall be adopted in all particulars as to which there is a conflict. 
    The law known as "initiative and referendum", chapter 86, C.S.A. '35, and all laws amendatory thereto, as far as applicable, shall govern the procedure and form of direct legislation by the people of the City of Sterling, with power in the city council to make and publish such ordinances as may be needful to carry out the object and intent of this article, but not inconsistent herewith. 
Const. law reference- Initiative and referendum, art. V, § 1. 
State Law reference- Initiative and referendum, C.R.S. 1-40-115, 1-40-116. 
ARTICLE 14. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Section 14-1. - Definition. 
    The term public utility or public utility corporation, when used in this Charter shall mean any person, firm or corporation operating gas or electric light works, telephone or telegraph systems, water or heating plants, or transportation systems, and serving or supply the public for hire; and shall not include any person, firm or corporation, owning or operating side tracks or switches for the accommodation of manufacturing plants and business houses, or private telephone lines. 
Section 14-2. - Franchises granted by ordinance. 
    No franchise shall be granted except by ordinance. 
    No bill for an ordinance submitting a franchise shall be put on final passage within thirty (30) days of its introduction and until published at length or by reference at least five (5) consecutive times in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the city. 
    No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. 
    No franchise granted by the city shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the city. 
    The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of the city, whether in terms reserved or not, to make all regulations which shall be necessary to secure in the most ample manner the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
(Ord. No. 24-2005, § 1, 7-26-05, election 11-1-05) 
Section 14-3. - Specify streets-Permits. 
    All franchises or privileges hereafter granted to street or other railroads and to other transportation systems, shall plainly specify the particular streets, alleys, avenues, and other public property, or parts thereof, to which they shall apply. All other franchises may be in general terms, and apply to the city generally. 
    The council may grant a permit at any time, in or upon any street, alley, or public place, provided such permit is revocable by the council at its pleasure at any time, whether such right to revoke be expressly reserved in every permit or not. 
Section 14-4. - Books of record. 
    The council shall cause to be kept in the office of the city clerk an indexed franchise record, in which shall be transcribed copies of all public utility franchises heretofore or hereafter granted. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual and inspection reports and such other matters of information and public interest as the council may from time to time require. 
    The city, when owning any public utility shall keep the books of account for such public utility distinct from other city accounts, and in such manner as to show all costs of maintenance, extension and improvement; all operating expenses of every description, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes; if water or other service shall be furnished for the use of such city-owned or operated public utility without charge, the account shall show, as nearly as possible, the value of such service, and also the value of similar service rendered by the public utility to any other city department without charge; such accounts shall show reasonable allowance for interest, depreciation and insurance, and also estimates of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable against such property if owned by a private corporation. 
Section 14-5. - Term; compensation; restriction. 
    No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than twenty (20) years, nor without reserving to the city such just compensation from the use thereof as shall be fixed in the grant of said franchise. This compensation shall not exempt the grantee, or his or its assignees, from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, but shall exempt the grantee or his or its assigns from the payment of any licenses, charges or any other impositions levied by the city. Such compensation shall be paid annually and a failure to pay such compensation shall work a forfeiture of the franchise. 
Section 14-6. - Extensions and enlargements. 
    All extensions or enlargements of an existing franchise shall provide that all of the terms and conditions of this Charter shall apply to and become a part of the original franchise. No such extension or enlargement shall extend beyond the life of the original franchise. 
Section 14-7. - Regulation of public utilities. 
    Unless and until the city council shall make provision, by ordinance for regulating the rates, fares, and rentals charged by any public utility or carrier and for regulating the service furnished by any public utility or any carrier serving the residents of the city, the public utility commission of Colorado shall continue to exercise supervision and regulation thereof under applicable statutes of the State of Colorado; but the right to regulate the rates, fares and rentals of public utilities and carriers serving the residents of the city shall always be reserved to the city to be exercised by ordinance of the city council. Every person or corporation operating under a franchise or grant from the city shall annually submit to the city council a report verified by the oath of the president, the treasurer, or the general manager thereof. Such reports shall be in the form, contain such detailed information, and cover the period prescribed by the council, and the council shall have the power, either through its members or by experts or employees, duly authorized by it, to examine the books and affairs of any such person, persons, or corporations, and to compel the production before them of books and papers pertaining to such report or other matters. 
Section 14-8. - The council may acquire utilities. 
    The council, upon behalf of the city, shall have the power from time to time: 
(a)  Within or without the territorial limits of the city: 
(1)  To construct, condemn, purchase, lease, and otherwise acquire a municipal waterworks system, storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system and sewage transportation and disposal facilities, gas works, light plants, power plants, heating plants, transportation system, telephone system, and other public utilities local in use and extent, in whole or in part, and everything required therefor, for the use of the city and the inhabitants thereof, upon the approval of a majority of the taxpaying electors of the city voting upon a proposal therefor at any regular municipal, primary, general, or special election; 
(2)  To purchase or otherwise acquire, without any election, in relation to or in connection with any such works, facilities, plants, systems, and other utilities of the city, the whole or any part of any real or personal, or both real and personal, property, any interest therein, or any contract appertaining thereto, as the council may determine; and 
(3)  To operate, maintain, conduct, add to, extend, better, reconstruct, and otherwise to improve, without any election, any such works, facilities, plants, systems, and other utilities of the city; 
(b)  To issue city revenue bonds, upon the approval of a majority of the taxpaying electors of the city voting upon a proposal therefor at any regular municipal, primary, general, or special election, for the purpose of defraying wholly or in part the costs of any such acquisition or of any such improvement of any such municipal works, facilities, plants, systems, and other utilities, including without limitation any incidental and other costs of the project; 
(c)  To issue refunding revenue bonds by ordinance only; 
(d)  To redeem any revenue bonds and to pay any other obligations incurred in connection with any such municipal utility from the revenue derived from its operation, but not to issue general obligation bonds for gas works, light plants, power plants, telephone systems, or transportation systems other than airport facilities, nor to redeem any such revenue bonds out of general taxes nor to pay out of general taxes any such other obligations incurred in connection with gas works, light plants, power plants, telephone systems, or transportation systems, other than airport facilities; and 
(e)  To charge fees and rates in connection with each municipally acquired utility, and whenever any utility revenue bonds be outstanding, such fees and rates shall be charged in an amount, at least sufficient annually to pay, as the same become due, the principal of and the interest on the city's outstanding revenue bonds and all expenses of maintaining and operating such public utility. 
(Ord. No. 7-1963, § 1, 8-27-63, election 11-5-63) 
Section 14-9. - Municipally owned utilities. 
    The responsible department or employee shall endeavor to make each utility financially self-sustaining. After providing for depreciation accruals and amortization of bonds, and for reasonable accumulation of surplus, the utility shall apply all annual profits above bond interest to rate reductions. The utility shall not be operated for the benefit of other municipal functions, and shall not be used directly or indirectly as a general revenue-producing agency for the city, but it may pay to the city such property and other taxes as are normally placed upon private business enterprises. 
Section 14-10. - Municipal water utility. 
    Every franchise, right or privilege which has been, or which may be hereafter granted, conveying any right, permission or privilege to the use of the water belonging to the city or to its water system, shall always be subject to the most comprehensive oversight, management and control in every particular by the city; and the rights of the city to such control for municipal purposes is retained by the city in order that nothing shall ever be done by any grantee or assignee of any such franchise, right or privilege which shall in any way interfere with the successful operation of the water works of the city, or which shall, or which shall tend to, divert, impair or render the same inadequate for the complete performance of the trust for the people under which such waterworks are held by the city. 
ARTICLE 15. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 15-1. - Public records. 
    All public records shall be available for inspection, subject only to reasonable restrictions. Upon the payment of a reasonable fee a copy, or if desired a certified copy, of any public record shall be furnished by the custodian thereof. A public record, or duly certified copy, shall be prima facie evidence of its contents. 
Section 15-2. - Present ordinances. 
    All laws, ordinances, resolutions, written rules or regulations in force in the City of Sterling, at the time this Charter takes effect, not inconsistent with its provisions, shall continue in full force and effect until otherwise provided by ordinance. 
Section 15-3. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Charter, for the violation of which no punishment has been provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, not exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the Sterling Municipal Court as set by the Colorado State law at the time the violation occurs, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 10-2008, § 2(6), 11-4-08, eff. 12-4-08) 
Section 15-4. - Definition of misdemeanor. 
    The term "misdemeanor" as used in this Charter, shall mean a violation thereof, of any ordinance, of which the municipal court or magistrate thereof, shall have jurisdiction, and shall not have the meaning attached to it in chapter 48 entitled "crimes", 1935 Colorado Statutes Annotated. 
Section 15-5. - Saving clause. 
    All official bonds, recognizances, obligations, contracts and all other instruments entered into or executed by or to the city before this Charter takes effect, and all taxes, fines, penalties, forfeitures incurred or imposed, due or owing the city, shall be enforced or collected; and all writs, prosecutions, actions and causes of action, except as herein otherwise provided, shall continue without abatement and remain unaffected by this Charter; and all legal acts done by or in favor of the city shall be and remain as valid as though this Charter had not been adopted. 
Section 15-6. - Charter amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by article XX of the constitution of the State of Colorado. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one Charter amendment at any one (1) election. 
Section 15-7. - Reservation of power. 
    The power to supersede any law of this state, now or hereafter in force, in so far as it applies to local or municipal affairs, shall be reserved to the city, acting by ordinance, subject to restrictions of article XX of the state constitution. 
Section 15-8. - Transitional provisions. 
    The period from the effective date of this Charter to ninety (90) days after the city manager assumes his duties, shall be known as the "reorganization period". During the reorganization period, all officers and employees shall proceed with due diligence to effectuate the provisions of this Charter and the city manager shall, by executive order, designate the succession of organization units and employees, and allocate equipment and space. 
    This Charter shall be fully operative ninety (90) days after the city manager assumes his duties. 
Section 15-9. - Constitutionality. 
    In case any portion of this Charter shall at any time be found to be unconstitutional, such finding shall not affect the remainder thereof, but as to such remainder this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed. 
    DONE IN CONVENTION at the council chamber in the City of Sterling in the State of Colorado, this twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and fifty, and of the independence of the United States the one hundred and seventy-fifth. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, We have hereunto subscribed our names. 
Edgar A. Elliff, President John O'Connell C. O. Boggs, Vice President Wm. Pospicil Ruth M. Leh, Secretary Harold Chirnside Charles W. Kreager Ray B. Smith Robert R. Knowles James H. Walker J. L. Mitchell Don C. Poorman H. A. Schlatter Robert M. Jackson R. A. Towne Lawrence W. Ramey John W. Lantz Edna Gaines R. G. Cheairs A. A. Smith Glenn Morris  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Election 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter  3-20-50  5- 2-50 1-1-15-9 1-1-15-9 6-1955  6-14-55  8-16-55 1 6-8 8-8-8-10 7-1963  8-27-63 11- 5-63 1 14-8 (Res.)  9-28-65 11- 2-65 1 13-1 7-1967  8-22-67 11- 7-67 1 3-1 13-1972 11-14-72  1-16-73 3 6-8 12-1973  9-11-73 11- 6-73 1 2-1 23-1981  8-25-81 11- 3-81 3 2-1 3-4 6-5 6-7 12-1-12-3 20-1983  9-27-83 11- 1-83 3 2-3 7-1 8-3, 8-4 18-1991 10- 8-91 11- 5-91 2 3-1-3-3 15-2003  8-26-03 11- 4-03 2 2-3, 2-4 21-2005  7-26-05 11- 1-05 1 7-1 22-2005  7-26-05 11- 1-05 1 7-5 23-2005  7-26-05 11- 1-05 1 10-1 24-2005  7-26-05 11- 1-05 1 14-2 25-2005  7-26-05 11- 1-05 1 4-4 10-2008 11- 4-08 12- 4-08(eff.) 2(5) 3-13  (6) 4-5(f)  (9) 15-3  (10) 3-17  (11)       Rpld 4-9       Added 4-5(i) 4-2018  3-13-18 11- 7-17       Rpld 7-3, 7-4  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Sterling, Colorado" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Sterling City Code." 
(Code 1961, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, §§ 3-15, 3-18. 
State Law reference- Sale of copies of Code, C.R.S. 31-16-206; copies to be kept in office of the clerk, C.R.S. 31-16-206. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Sterling, Colorado printed as part I of this volume. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
    City council. The words "city council" or "council" shall mean the city council of Sterling, Colorado. 
    City officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Sterling, Colorado." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency shall mean and include such officer or any designee or authorized subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed by this Code, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal city holiday, in which event the period runs until the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal city holiday. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal city holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, C.R.S. Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 6. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Logan, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. The abbreviation "C.R.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Gender. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the masculine, females as well as males, and associations and bodies corporate as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular number, the plural and separate matters and persons and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included or vice versa. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, the word shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, tangible and intangible personal property. 
    Public way. The words "public way" shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property. The terms "real property," "premises," "real estate" or "lands" shall be deemed to be coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean the paved walkway parallel to the curbline used for pedestrians, and where there is no paved walkway, sidewalk shall mean that walkway four (4) feet wide for use by pedestrians. 
    Signature. Where the written signature of any person is required, the proper handwriting of such person or his mark shall be intended. 
    State. The word "state" shall mean the State of Colorado. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare. 
    Tangible personal property. The term "tangible personal property" shall include goods, chattels and all personal property except intangible personal property. 
    Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing, lithographing or any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
(Code 1961, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1961, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. The history note of the ordinance includes the adoption date followed by the effective date if the effective date is different from the date the ordinance was adopted. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Sterling, Colorado, 1961, as amended, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
(Code 1961, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
(Code 1961, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following, when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions or setting salaries of city officers and employees, or any personnel regulations. 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(15)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. All ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-11. - Form of amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances of a general and permanent nature and amendments to such ordinances hereafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of or additions to the Code. Amendments to this Code shall be made by reference to the section of the Code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter and section. 
(Code 1961, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1961, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city or in any section of a rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor where no specific penalty is provided therefore, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city or of such rules or regulations shall be punished by a fine of not more than nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) or by imprisonment in jail not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and imprisonment except there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a defendant is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the offense, or 
(2)  When a defendant is charged pursuant to the Model Traffic Code, as amended, for which four (4) points, or less than four (4) points, or no points may be assessed by the State of Colorado against the driver's operators license, or 
(3)  When a defendant is charged with a violation pursuant to sections of the motor vehicles and traffic chapter of the City Code which are not Model Traffic Code, as amended, violations of such chapter, or 
(4)  With the exception of section 4-6, when a defendant is charged with any other violation pursuant to Chapter 4, Animals, of the Sterling City Code or other sections of the Sterling City Code concerning animals 
(b)  Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city or of any rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any of the provisions specified in this section, any sentence imposed pursuant to this section may require a juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian to perform certain acts, so long as the parent, guardian or legal custodian is a party to the proceedings, and the parent, guardian or legal custodian has received notice of the hearing. The court may require: 
(1)  The juvenile or both the juvenile and his or her parent, guardian or legal custodian to perform volunteer service in the community designed to contribute to the rehabilitation of the juvenile or to contribute to the ability of the parent guardian or legal custodian to provide proper parental care and supervision of the juvenile. 
(2)  The parent, guardian or legal custodian of a juvenile or both the parent, guardian, or legal custodian and the juvenile to attend a parental responsibility training program. The court may make reasonable orders requiring proof of completion of such training course within a certain time period. 
(3)  The juvenile or both the juvenile and his or her parent, guardian or legal custodian may be ordered to perform services for the victim designed to contribute to the rehabilitation of the juvenile, if the victim consents in writing to such services. However, the value of the services required to be rendered by the parent, guardian or legal custodian of the juvenile under this subsection shall not exceed the damages as set forth in C.R.S. § 13-21-107, for any one (1) ordinance violation. 
(4)  a.  After a hearing at which the guardian or legal custodian is present, the court may order the guardian or legal custodian of the juvenile to make restitution pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this section; except that the liability of the guardian or legal custodian of the juvenile under this subsection shall not exceed the damages as set forth in C.R.S. § 13-21-107, for any one (1) ordinance violation. If the custodian of the juvenile has made diligent, good faith efforts to prevent or discourage the juvenile from engaging in delinquent activity, the court may absolve the guardian or legal custodian of liability for restitution under this subsection. 
b.  After a hearing at which the parent is present, the court may order the juvenile's parent to make restitution in a reasonable amount pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this subsection; except that the liability of the parent under this section shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any one (1) ordinance violation. If the court finds, after a hearing, that the juvenile's parent has made diligent, good faith efforts to prevent or discourage the juvenile from engaging in delinquent activity, the court may absolve the parent of liability for restitution under this subsection. As used in this subsection, "parent" has the same meaning as in Title 19 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(5)  a.  Restitution-Juvenile. If the court finds that a juvenile has damaged the personal or real property of a victim, that the victim's personal property has been lost, or that personal injury has been caused to a victim as a result of the juvenile's ordinance violation, the court may enter a sentencing order requiring the juvenile to make restitution for actual damages done to persons or property; except that the court may not order restitution if it finds that monetary payment or payment in kind would cause serious hardship or injustice to the juvenile. 
b.  Such order may require payment of insurers and other persons or entities succeeding to the rights of the victim through subrogation or otherwise, if appropriate. Restitution may be ordered in a reasonable amount to be paid in a reasonable manner, as determined by the court. 
(6)  Failure of the juvenile, parent, guardian, or legal custodian to obey any order of the court may subject them to the contempt sanctions of the court. 
(7)  "Victim," as used in this section, means the party immediately and directly aggrieved by the juvenile, that party's spouse, the party's parent, sibling or child who is living with the party, a victim compensation board that has paid a victim compensation claim, a person or entity who has suffered losses because of a contractual relationship with such party, including, but not limited to, an insurer, or, in the absence of any of the above the state. 
(Code 1961, § 1-6; Ord. No. 9-1987, 4-28-87, eff. 5-11-87; Ord. No. 14, 1990, 11-13-90, eff. 11-26-90; Ord. No. 10-2001, § 1, 4-10-01, eff. 4-20-01; Ord. No. 11-13-01, eff. 11-23-01) 
Charter reference- Penalty, § 3-4. 
Cross reference- Municipal court, § 2-191 et seq.; offenses, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 1-16. - Failure to pay penalty, fine, forfeiture or restitution. 
    Every person who has been ordered to pay any penalty, fine, forfeiture or restitution by the municipal court for the violation of any provision of this Code or of the city Charter who refuses or neglects to comply with the court's order for payment shall, upon further order of the court, be committed to jail for a period not to exceed three (3) months. Prior to the issuance of such an order for incarceration, the court shall inquire as to whether or not the person failing to pay the penalty, fine, forfeiture or restitution has made all reasonable efforts to make payment, whether the person is indigent, and whether adequate alternative methods of punishing the person are available. Where the person has made all reasonable efforts to pay and the court finds that he has been unable to do so through no fault of his own, the court will also make a finding as to whether or not adequate alternative methods of punishing the individual are available and the court will consider ordering the person to work for some department of the city, after approval of the personnel department of the city, until the penalty, fine, forfeiture or restitution is paid off at the then-current wage for employees of that department normally working in the job that the personnel department has assigned to the person who is subject to the court's order. 
(Code 1961, § 1-7) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Council-manager form of government, § 1-3; tort claims, § 3-5(b). 
Cross reference- Administration of the flood prevention and protection regulations, § 8-36 et seq.; administration and procedure of the public improvements provisions, § 15-36 et seq.; administration of the personnel ordinances, § 14-26 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance, App. A, Ch. XIV; procedures for amending the zoning ordinance, App. A, Ch. XII. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
(a)  A corporate seal with the word "Seal" in the center and the words "City of Sterling, Colorado" around the outer edge is hereby declared to be the seal of the city. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the keeper of the city seal and shall affix it to all instruments which are required to be attested by the city seal. 
(Code 1961, §§ 1-9, 1-10) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to have and use a common seal and to alter the seal, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-2. - Territorial applicability of ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
    All of the permanent ordinances included in this Code and the ordinances, motions, resolutions, enactments and pronouncements of the council shall apply and be effective within the jurisdictional limits of the city and on any property owned or leased by the city wherever located, unless specifically designated to the contrary. 
(Code 1961, § 1-12) 
Charter reference- Ordinances, resolutions, § 3-14. 
Sec. 2-3. - Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Public servant means any councilmember, appointee to a city advisory board, commission or other committee, or city employee. 
(2)  Substantial financial interest means that the public servant: 
a.  Is a director, president, general manager or similar executive officer in any corporation, partnership or firm; 
b.  Owns or controls, directly or indirectly, ten (10) percent or more of any class of securities of any corporation; or 
c.  Owns or controls, directly or indirectly, ten (10) percent or more of any partnership or firm. 
(b)  Any city public servant who has a substantial financial interest in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city public servant in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city public employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Violation of this section with the express or implied knowledge of the person contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the city manager or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2-1986, § 1-15, 2-11-86, eff. 2-24-86) 
Cross reference- City council, § 2-31 et seq.; boards, committees, commissions, § 2-56 et seq.; board of trustees of the police pension fund, § 2-71 et seq.; planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; departments, § 2-121 et seq.; judge, § 2-206 et seq.; fire department, § 7-26 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 14; zoning board of adjustment, App. A, Ch. XIII. 
Sec. 2-4. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this addition to the City Code is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the municipality. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Unclaimed property means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the municipality and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than three (3) months after it becomes payable or distributable. 
(2)  Municipality means the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
(3)  Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this municipality, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the municipality. 
(4)  Director shall mean the Director of Finance or designee thereof. 
(c)  Procedure for disposition of property. 
(1)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the director shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the municipal department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the director with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(2)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or having no last known address of the owner, the director shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the director with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(3)  If the director receives no written claim within the above sixty-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(4)  If the director receives a written claim within the sixty-day claim period, the director shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The director may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(5)  In the event that there is more than one (1) claimant for the same property, the director may, in the director's sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an inter pleader action. 
(6)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the municipality and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(7)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the director shall be filed pursuant to rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the director pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(8)  Within three (3) years after tangible or intangible property becomes the property of the city, the city manager, at the sole discretion of the city manager, may order retention of any such property for use of the city and/or may order sale of any such unclaimed property. Any sale held under this section shall be by public auction and must be preceded by a single publication of notice, at least three (3) days in advance of public auction, in a newspaper of general circulation in Logan County. 
(9)  The director is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this section, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Ord. No. 17-1992, 6-23-92, eff. 6-26-92; Ord. No. 23-1999, 9-28-99, eff. 10-8-99; Ord. No. 11-2004, 7-24-04, eff. 8-6-04) 
Cross reference- Disposition of lost or confiscated property, § 2-137. 
Secs. 2-5-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal officers and employees, § 2-1 et seq.; city council qualifications, § 2-3; mayor is president of the council, § 3-3; council meetings, § 3-13; elections, §§ 3-1, 13-1 et seq.; election date, first Tuesday in November, § 3-1; recall, § 13-7. 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; the community development department shall be responsible for advising the city council, planning commission, etc., regarding all matters relating to planning and zoning, § 2-153. 

Sec. 2-31. - Salaries of councilmembers, mayor pro tem and mayor. 
    The salaries of the members of the city council, the mayor pro tem and the mayor shall be set by ordinance. The members of the city council shall be paid four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, except the mayor pro tem, who shall be paid five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month, and the mayor, who shall be paid six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month. 
(Code 1961, § 1-14; Ord. No. 15-1999, 8-10-99, eff. 8-20-99; Ord. No. 3-2017, 3-28-17, eff. 4-7-17) 
Sec. 2-32. - Calls for regular and special meetings. 
(a)  Regularly scheduled meetings, without call, shall be provided for by the Rules and Procedures of the Sterling City Council, making specific provisions for such regular meetings which fall on holidays (as set forth in section 14-72), but regular meetings not so provided for shall be called as provided in paragraph (b) below, including notice provisions, but not requiring a list of subjects to be considered as required for special meetings. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by a majority of the members of the council. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the city clerk in written form, except that an announcement of a special meeting during any regular meeting at which all members are present shall be sufficient notice of such special meeting. The call for a special meeting shall specify the day, the hour and the location of the special meeting and shall list the subject or subjects to be considered. Special meetings shall be held only upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' prior notice. Only such business may be transacted at special meetings as may be listed in the call for said meeting or as incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 20-1991, 12-10-91, eff. 12-23-91) 
Sec. 2-33. - Ordinance publication. 
(a)  Ordinances of the City of Sterling shall be published, in accordance with City Charter Section 3-16 once, by title only, in a newspaper in the city in such manner as provided by general law, at least ten (10) days before final passage, but, city council may, by proper approved motion, direct a specific ordinance: 
(1)  To be published after passage by title only or in full, or 
(2)  To be published in full prior to passage as above provided. 
(b)  Copies of the full text of ordinances passed on first reading shall be available in the city clerk's office within two (2) days after passage on first reading. 
(Ord. No. 30-1992, 10-13-92, eff. 10-26-92) 
Secs. 2-34-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Public works board, § 8-4; parks, library and recreation board, § 9-4; canvassing board, § 13-4. 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; personnel board, § 14-51 et seq.; board of adjustment, App. A, Ch. XIII. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-56. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of advisory boards, boards, commissions and other committees appointed by the city council shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for their actual out-of-pocket expenses. Such expenditures shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1961, § 1-14) 
Cross reference- Personnel board, § 14-51 et seq.; zoning board of adjustment, App. A, Ch. XIII. 
Secs. 2-57-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF OLD HIRE POLICE PENSION FUND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; police department, § 2-136 et seq.; pensions and other benefits, § 14-116 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Created; powers. 
    There is hereby created a board of trustees of the old hire police pension fund to be known as the Sterling Board of Trustees of the Old Hire Police Pension Fund, to have those powers created by ordinance and the laws of the state, all as provided by law. 
(Code 1961, § 2-53; Ord. No. 11-2009, 4-28-09, eff. 5-8-09) 
Sec. 2-72. - Composition. 
    The board of trustees of the old hire police pension fund shall consist of the mayor, the director of finance, and the chief of police. 
(Code 1961, § 2-54; Ord. No. 11-2009, 4-28-09, eff. 5-8-09) 
Sec. 2-73. - Applicability of state law. 
    Except as specifically provided in this division, the general statutes relating to the old hire police pension fund shall be applicable to the board of trustees of the old hire police pension fund. 
(Code 1961, § 2-55; Ord. No. 11-2009, 4-28-09, eff. 5-8-09) 
Secs. 2-74-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning, § 8-3; planning commission, § 8-3. 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; community development department, § 2-151 et seq.; the community development department shall be responsible for advising the city council, planning commission, etc., regarding all matters relating to planning and zoning, § 2-153; comprehensive planning, § 2-296 et seq.; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Zoning in cities and towns, C.R.S. 31-23-203. 

Sec. 2-86. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission within and for the city to be known as the Sterling Planning Commission. 
(Code 1961, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-87. - Composition. 
    The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council from among bona fide residents of the city. The city manager or his designated representative shall be an ex officio member of the commission. 
(Code 1961, § 2-6; Ord. No. 1-1986, § 2-6, 2-11-86, eff. 2-14-86) 
Sec. 2-88. - Members to be selected without regard to political affiliation. 
    Members of the planning commission shall be selected without regard to their political affiliation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-89. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses incurred in performing their duties as members of the commission. Such expenditures shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1961, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-90. - Terms of members. 
    The term of office for each appointive member of the commission shall be three (3) years. 
(Code 1961, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-91. - Absences. 
    Any planning commission member who misses three (3) consecutive planning commission meetings without prior notification and permission to be excused by the chairman of the planning commission shall be deemed to have resigned and his position shall be filled in the manner described in this division for the filling of vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of term. 
(Code 1961, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-92. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring on the planning commission otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointments by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1961, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-93. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the planning commission may be removed, after a public hearing, by a majority vote of the city council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1961, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-94. - Chairman. 
    The planning commission shall elect from its membership a chairman, and his term of office shall be for one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(Code 1961, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-95. - Meetings; records. 
(a)  Meetings of the planning commission shall be held monthly or more frequently as the commission deems advisable. 
(b)  The planning commission shall keep a public record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1961, §§ 2-12, 2-20) 
Sec. 2-96. - Rules. 
    The planning commission shall adopt rules for its own organization and for the transaction of business, which rules shall not be in conflict with any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 2-21) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 2-97. - Powers; duties. 
    The planning commission shall recommend to the city council a comprehensive master plan for the districting of the city into different districts or zones, the preparation of zoning maps, and all other matters pertaining to zoning. The zoning ordinance shall remain in effect until changed by the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission. The commission shall be responsible for zoning plans for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Cross reference- Planning commission required to adopt and certify to the city council a comprehensive master plan for the physical development of the city, § 2-96; planning commission to approve certain public improvements, § 2-298; reports and recommendations required by the planning commission, § 2-299. 
Secs. 2-98-2-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 4-1992, adopted Feb. 25, 1992, and effective March 9, 1992, repealed Div. 4 of Art. III in its entirety. Formerly, Div. 4 consisted of §§ 2-105-2-113, which pertained to local licensing authority and derived from Ordinance No. 15-1991, adopted Aug. 27, 1991.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 1-2017, adopted Feb. 28, 2017, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 2-105. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a citizens advisory board within and for the city, for the purpose as set forth in the City Code, Chapter 19, Taxation and Finance, Article VII, Hotel Tax, Section 19-245, Allocation and expenditure of tax revenues, to make recommendations concerning the specific use of tax revenue consistent with the purpose of the City of Sterling Hotel Tax. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-106. - Composition, terms of members. 
(a)  The citizens advisory board shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. The city manager or his designated representative shall be an ex officio member of the board. 
(b)  The term of office for each appointed member of the citizens advisory board shall be three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17; Ord. No. 4-2017, 4-25-17, eff. 5-5-17) 
Sec. 2-107. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the citizens advisory board shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses incurred in performing their duties as members of the board. Such expenditures shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-108. - Absences. 
    Any citizens advisory board member who misses three (3) consecutive advisory board meetings without prior notification and permission to be excused by the chairman of the citizens advisory board shall be deemed to have resigned and his/her position shall be filled in the manner described in this division for the filling of vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of term. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-109. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring on the citizens advisory board otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointments by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-110. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the citizens advisory board may be removed, after a public hearing, by a majority vote of the city council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-111. - Chairman. 
    The citizens advisory board shall elect from its membership a chairman, and his/her term of office shall be for one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-112. - Meetings; records. 
(a)  Meetings of the citizens advisory board shall be held monthly or more frequently as the citizens advisory board deems advisable. 
(b)  The citizens advisory board shall keep a public record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-113. - Rules. 
    The citizens advisory board shall adopt rules for its own organization and for the transaction of business, which rules shall not be in conflict with any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-114. - Powers; duties. 
    The citizens advisory board shall make recommendations to the city council concerning the specific use of tax revenues consistent with the purpose of the City of Sterling Hotel Tax. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, 2-28-17, eff. 3-10-17) 
Sec. 2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - E 9-1-1 AUTHORITY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, Ord. No. 3-1992, adopted Feb. 25, 1992, has been codified herein. At the editor's discretion, §§ 1-3 of said ordinance have been included as § 2-116. 

Sec. 2-116. - Created; charge for emergency telephone service. 
(a)  Creation of authority. The mayor is hereby authorized to execute the intergovernmental agreement creating the E 9-1-1 Authority Board for Logan County, Colorado, to be entered into by the following parties: the Board of County Commissioners of Logan County; the City of Sterling; the towns of Merino, Peetz, Iliff, Crook and Fleming; the Sterling Rural Fire Protection District; the Peetz Fire Protection District; the Crook Fire Protection District; the Fleming Fire Protection District; and the Haxtun Fire Protection District. 
(b)  Charged imposed; amount. There is hereby imposed, pursuant to Title 29, Article 11, C.R.S., an emergency telephone charge in an amount of seventy cents ($0.70) per month per line in those portions of Sterling for which emergency telephone service will be provided. 
(c)  Collection of charge. Telephone service suppliers providing telephone service in the city are hereby authorized to collect the emergency telephone charge imposed by this section in accordance with Title 29, Article 11, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 3-1992, §§ 1-3, 2-25-92) 
Sec. 2-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF OLD HIRE FIRE PENSION FUND[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Board of trustees - firefighters' old hire pension fund, § 31-30.5-202. 

Sec. 2-118. - Created; powers. 
    There is hereby created a board of trustees of the old hire fire pension fund to be known as the "Sterling Board of Trustees of the Old Hire Fire Pension Fund," to have those powers created by ordinance and the laws of the state, all as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-2009, 6-9-09, eff. 6-19-09) 
Sec. 2-119. - Composition. 
    The board of trustees of the old hire fire pension fund shall consist of the mayor, the director of finance, and two (2) old hire retired members of the fire department. If at any time fewer than two (2) old hire members are available or willing to serve on such board, the number of city representatives may exceed the number of member representatives, as provided by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 16-2009, 6-9-09, eff. 6-19-09) 
Sec. 2-120. - Applicability of state law. 
    Except as specifically provided in this division, the general statutes relating to the firefighters' old hire pension fund shall be applicable to the board of trustees of the old hire fire pension fund. 
(Ord. No. 16-2009, 6-9-09, eff. 6-19-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 3-5; city clerk, § 3-9; departments, § 3-10; surety bonds, § 3-12; city manager, § 4-1 et seq.; department of fire, § 10-1; fire chief, § 10-3; chief of police, § 11-3. 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; fire department, § 7-26 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-121. - Operations manuals. 
    Every director or head of a department of the city shall promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the department. The manual, including any amendments to the manual, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 7-26 et seq. 
Secs. 2-122-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Department of police, §§ 4-6, 11-1 et seq.; special police officers, § 11-4. 
Cross reference- Board of trustees of police pension fund, § 2-71 et seq.; burglar, fire and police emergency alarm systems regulated, § 9-296 et seq.; obstructing or resisting police officer, § 12-3 et seq. 

Sec. 2-136. - Operations manual. 
    The chief of the police department shall promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the department. The manual, including any amendments to the manual, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. 
Sec. 2-137. - Disposition of lost or confiscated property. 
(a)  The chief of police shall keep a record of all property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by the police department of the city. Property seized by the police department of the city, pursuant to section 2-245 of this Code shall be subject to disposition order of the municipal court. All other property seized by, confiscated by or forfeited to the police department, pursuant to the laws of the State of Colorado, shall be subject to such laws. 
(b)  If any property so seized or taken possession of, pursuant to section 2-245 of this Code, by the police department is of a perishable nature so as to make it inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time specified in section 2-4(b)(1), the chief of police may cause such property to be forthwith advertised in the official newspaper of the city and sell such property at public auction at any time after three (3) days have elapsed from the seizure or taking possession thereof. 
(c)  Lost property and all other property for which disposition is not provided for in (a) and (b) above, which has been taken into possession by the police department of the city, shall be turned over to the director of finance for disposition under section 2-4 of this Code. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall refer to any impounded animal that may be provided for in any city ordinance. 
(Code 1961, § 1-13; Ord. No. 17-1992, 6-23-92, eff. 6-26-92) 
Cross reference- Disposition of unclaimed property, § 2-4. 
Secs. 2-138-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; subdivisions, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 2-151. - Created. 
    Pursuant to sections 3-10 and 4-6 of the Charter, there is created the department of community development. 
(Code 1961, § 2-22.1; Ord. No. 2-1987, 2-10-87, eff. 2-23-87) 
Sec. 2-152. - Director. 
    The department of community development shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the city manager pursuant to section 4-5 of the Charter and who shall be known as the director of community development. 
(Code 1961, § 2-22.3; Ord. No. 2-1987, 2-10-87, eff. 2-23-87) 
Sec. 2-153. - Duties. 
    The department of community development shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Advising the city council, planning commission and city manager regarding all matters relating to, and administering, planning and zoning and such other land use codes or ordinances as may be enacted from time to time, housing, and economic development, under the Charter, ordinances of the city, and applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Providing staff assistance to the planning commission and to such other boards and authorities as may be directed by the city manager to accomplish the respective responsibilities and duties of the planning commission and such other boards and authorities. 
(3)  Coordinating the submission and administration of federal and state grants. 
(Code 1961, § 2-22.2; Ord. No. 2-1987, 2-10-87, eff. 2-23-87) 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 2-154. - Operations manual. 
    The director of the department of community development shall promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the department. The manual, including any amendments to the manual, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. 
Secs. 2-155-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKS, LIBRARY AND RECREATION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Department of parks, library and recreation, § 9-1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17. 

Sec. 2-166. - Operations manual. 
    The director of the department of parks, library and recreation shall promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the department. The manual, including any amendments to the manual, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. 
Sec. 2-167. - Forestry division. 
    There is hereby created a forestry division of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 1, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 2-168. - Forestry superintendent. 
(a)  Position created. There is hereby created the position of forestry superintendent of the forestry division of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The forestry superintendent shall be the supervisor of the forestry division of the department of parks, library and recreation and shall be responsible to the director of the department in carrying out his duties. 
(2)  The forestry superintendent shall propose rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, removal, pruning and protection of trees on the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other city property. Such rules, regulations and specifications shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the parks, library and recreation board for its approval. Copies of such rules, regulations and specifications shall be made available to the public through the office of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
(3)  The forestry superintendent shall have the authority to issue permits and licenses as provided in section 22-34. 
(4)  The forestry superintendent shall also have the authority to enforce all provisions of chapter 22, article II. In order to accomplish the purposes of chapter 22, article II, he shall have the authority to go upon any property in the city for the purpose of inspecting trees, shrubs and other plants. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, §§ 2, 4, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 2-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5-2016, adopted April 12, 2016, effective April 22, 2016, repealed former § 2-169, which pertained to the library special revenue fund, and derived from Ord. No. 11-2001, adopted April 24, 2001. 
Secs. 2-170-2-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-180. - Created. 
    Pursuant to sections 3-10 and 4-6 of the Charter, there is created the department of public safety communications. 
(Ord. No. 6-2014, 2-25-14) 
Sec. 2-181. - Director. 
    The department of public safety communications shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the city manager pursuant to section 4-5 of the Charter and who shall be known as the director of public safety communications. 
(Ord. No. 6-2014, 2-25-14) 
Sec. 2-182. - Duties. 
    The department of public safety communications shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Providing emergency communications services for a variety of clients and all other operational aspects of a communications center, 
(2)  Providing assistance to such clients, boards and authorities as may be directed by the city manager to accomplish the responsibilities and duties of a communications center, 
(3)  Providing the director's services as public information officer for the city under the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6-2014, 2-25-14) 
Sec. 2-183. - Operations manual. 
    The director of the public safety communications department shall promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the department. The manual, including any amendments to the manual, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. 
(Ord. No. 6-2014, 2-25-14) 
Secs. 2-184-2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal court, § 12-1 et seq. 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of any provision of the Code, § 1-15; offenses, Ch. 12; personnel, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Municipal court, C.R.S. 13-10-101 et seq.; municipal court rules of procedure, C.R.S. Ch. 30, rule 201 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-191. - Created; purpose; divisions. 
    A qualified municipal court of record in and for the city is hereby created and established to hear all municipal charter and ordinance violations, pursuant to, and operated and governed by the provisions of C.R.S. 13-10-101 et seq., except where such provisions are superseded by this article or the charter. Such municipal court shall be a qualified municipal court of record, and a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence at trials therein shall be kept by either electric devices or stenographic means. The municipal court may be divided into as many divisions by the presiding judge as is necessary to handle the business of the court. 
(Code 1961, § 2-23) 
State Law reference- Qualified municipal court of record defined, C.R.S. 13-10-102(3). 
Sec. 2-192. - Jurisdiction, powers and procedures. 
    The municipal court shall have original jurisdiction of all cases arising under this article and other ordinances of the city, with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed by ordinance or court rule. The procedures of the court shall be in accordance with the municipal court rules of procedure as promulgated by the state supreme court. 
(Code 1961, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-193. - Sessions. 
    There shall be regular sessions of the municipal court for the trial of cases. The municipal judge may hold a special session of court at any time. All sessions shall be open to the public. Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceedings, the municipal judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. 
(Code 1961, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-194. - Funding. 
    The city council shall, on an annual basis, budget and appropriate such moneys as may be necessary for the proper operation of the municipal court. 
(Code 1961, § 2-28) 
Secs. 2-195-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3. 
State Law reference- Municipal judge, C.R.S. 13-10-105. 

Sec. 2-206. - Appointment; qualifications. 
    The municipal court shall be presided over by a municipal judge appointed by resolution of the council. Additional judges may be appointed as may be needed to transact the business of the court. Municipal judges shall be attorneys-at-law admitted to and currently licensed in the practice of law in the state. Municipal judges shall not be appointed for a specific term; their appointment to and dismissal from the position of municipal judge for the city shall be entirely at the will of council. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26; Ord. No. 18-1996, 4-23-96, eff. 5-3-96) 
Sec. 2-207. - Salary. 
    The salary of the municipal judge shall be an annual amount set by the council and shall be payable as other salaries to municipal employees. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-208. - Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, a municipal judge shall make an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state and the charter and the laws of the city and will faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-209. - Authority to make rules for conduct of court business. 
    In addition to other powers, a municipal judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the municipal court, consistent with the municipal court rules of procedure promulgated by the state supreme court. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26) 
Secs. 2-210-2-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JUVENILE PROBATION OFFICE 

Sec. 2-221. - Interpretation of division; constitutional and statutory safeguards. 
    Notwithstanding any provisions of this division, all constitutional and statutory safeguards protecting the rights of children under the age of eighteen (18) years are hereby recognized and incorporated in this division, and this division is intended in no way to abrogate such constitutional and statutory safeguards. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-84, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Sec. 2-222. - Office created; supervision. 
    There is hereby created a juvenile probation office, with the person in charge of the office designated as the juvenile probation officer. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-80, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Sec. 2-223. - Appointment of juvenile probation officer. 
    The juvenile probation officer shall be employed as an employee of the city as other city employees pursuant to the classification of the office and upon recommendation of the department of personnel and appointed by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-80, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Sec. 2-224. - Referrals. 
    The juvenile probation officer shall accept referrals of juveniles directly from the police department for disposition informally, and shall accept such referrals from the municipal court for disposition formally upon such terms and conditions as shall from time to time be determined by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-81, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Sec. 2-225. - Informal disposition. 
    Whenever it appears to a law enforcement officer that a child under the age of eighteen (18) years appears to have committed an act which is a violation of a city ordinance, except a traffic ordinance, or a violation of a state statute, the law enforcement officer may refer the matter conferring or appearing to confer jurisdiction to the juvenile probation officer, thus placing the child under the supervision of the juvenile probation officer for a period no longer than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-82, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Sec. 2-226. - Confidentiality of records. 
    In order to encourage juveniles to cooperate with and assist the juvenile probation officer in evaluating and counseling the juvenile concerning the referred problem, and in order to protect the rights of juveniles in informal and formal dispositions, all records of the juvenile probation officer and all other reports of social and clinical studies shall not be open to inspection, except by consent of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 20-1987, § 2-83, 10-13-87, eff. 10-26-87) 
Secs. 2-227-2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-241. - Trial by jury. 
(a)  In any action before the municipal court in which the defendant is entitled to a jury trial by the constitution or the general laws of the state, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a defendant is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the offense and the offense is less than a class 1 misdemeanor under a state counterpart statute; or 
(2)  When a defendant is charged pursuant to the Model Traffic Code, as amended, for which four (4) points, or less than four (4) points, or no points may be assessed by the State of Colorado against the driver's operators license; or 
(3)  When a defendant is charged with a violation pursuant to sections of the Motor Vehicles and Traffic chapter of the city Code which are not Model Traffic Code, as amended, violations of such chapter; or 
(4)  When a defendant is charged with any violation pursuant to Chapter 4, Animals, of the Sterling City Code or other sections of the Sterling City Code concerning animals, 
such party shall have a jury upon request. The jury shall consist of three (3) jurors unless, in the case of a trial for a petty offense, a greater number, not to exceed six (6), is requested by the defendant. Juries shall be selected from a jury list as is provided for courts of record. Jurors shall be paid the sum of six dollars ($6.00) per day for actual jury service, and three dollars ($3.00) for each day of service on the jury panel alone. For the purposes of this section, a defendant waives his right to a jury trial under this section unless, within ten (10) days after arraignment or entry of a plea, he files with the court a written jury demand, stating therein the number of jurors requested, and at the same time tenders to the court a jury fee in an amount as required or permitted, pursuant to Article 10 of Title 13, Colorado Revised Statutes, or the Colorado Municipal Court Rules, unless the fee is waived by the judge because of the indigence of the defendant. If the action is dismissed or the defendant is acquitted of the charge, or if the defendant, having paid the jury fee, files with the court at least ten (10) days before the scheduled trial date a written waiver of jury trial, the jury fee shall be refunded. 
(b)  At the time of arraignment for any petty offense in this state, the judge shall advise any defendant not represented by counsel of: 
(1)  The defendant's right to trial by jury, except when: 
a.  The defendant is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the offense and the offense is less than a class 1 misdemeanor under a state counterpart statute; or 
b.  The defendant is charged pursuant to the Model Traffic Code, as amended, for which four (4) points, or less than four (4) points, or no points may be assessed by the State of Colorado against defendant's operators license; or 
c.  The defendant is charged with a violation pursuant to sections of the Motor Vehicles and Traffic chapter of the city Code which are not Model Traffic Code, as amended, violations of such chapter; or 
d.  The defendant is charged with any violation pursuant to Chapter 4, Animals of the Sterling City Code or other sections of the Sterling City Code concerning animals, in which case the defendant is not entitled to trial by jury; 
(2)  The requirement that the defendant, if he desires to invoke his right to trial by jury, demand such trial by jury in writing within ten (10) days after arraignment or entry of a plea; 
(3)  The number of jurors allowed by law; and 
(4)  The requirement that the defendant, if he desires to invoke his right to trial by jury, tender to the court within ten (10) days after arraignment or entry of a plea a jury fee in an amount as required or permitted, pursuant to Article 10 of Title 13, Colorado Revised Statutes, or the Colorado Municipal Court Rules, unless the fee is waived by the judge because of the indigence of the defendant. 
(Code 1961, § 2-29; Ord. No. 7-1988, § 2-29, 4-26-88, eff. 5-9-88; Ord. No. 14, 1990, 11-13-90, eff. 11-26-90; Ord. No. 7-1993, 7-27-93) 
Sec. 2-242. - Appeals from municipal court. 
    Appeals may be taken from any judgment of the qualified municipal court of record created under this division, and such appeal shall be made to the district court of the county. The practice and procedure in such case shall be the same as provided by C.R.S. 13-6-310. 
(Code 1961, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-243. - Fines and penalties. 
    In sentencing or fining a violator, the municipal judge shall not exceed the sentence or fine limitations established by section 1-15 or other appropriate ordinance. The municipal judge is empowered, however, to order, in lieu of, or in addition to sentencing and fines, as provided under the general penalty provision of the city Code, such other forms of punishment as are provided by state statute, such as: 
(1)  Useful public service in cooperation with the personnel department of the city; and, 
(2)  All other state statutory forms of punishment authorized to be imposed by judges in the state. 
The fine limitations contained in this section shall not, however, limit the amounts which may be ordered by the court to be paid in restitution. It shall be the policy of the municipal court to order restitution whenever the amount of damage to the victim can be determined with a reasonable amount of certainty and whenever it is determined by the court that the payment of restitution is fair and reasonable. The municipal judge may suspend the sentence or fine of any violator and place him on probation for a period not to exceed one (1) year. The municipal judge is empowered in his discretion to assess costs up to and including the actual costs incurred in the trial of the case against any defendant who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-31; Ord. No. 15, 1990, 11-13-90, eff. 11-26-90) 
Sec. 2-244. - Contempt of court. 
(a)  Failure by any person, without adequate excuse, to obey a summons or subpoena served upon him may be deemed a contempt of the municipal court from which the summons or subpoena was issued and, for such failure to obey such summons or subpoena, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Failure by any person to conduct himself in a manner consistent with the decorum and respect inherent in the concept of judicial proceedings in the municipal court, failure to obey any lawful order of the municipal judge, or failure to comply with the requirements of any city charter provision or city ordinance provision regarding the conduct of municipal court shall be deemed contempt of court, and the court may impose upon such person such punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(b)  A contempt of court, as described in this section, may be tried immediately and may be tried by the judge against whom the contempt has been committed, unless he specifically requests that the contempt be tried before another judge. State statute shall be complied with in juvenile cases. 
(Code 1961, § 2-31.1) 
Sec. 2-245. - Search and seizure. 
(a)  Authority to issue warrant. The judge of the municipal court shall have the power to issue a search warrant under the authority of this section and C.R.S. Court Rules, ch. 30, rule 241 of the municipal court rules of procedure, only when: 
(1)  It relates to a charter or ordinance violation involving a serious threat to public safety or order; and 
(2)  The violation is not also a violation prohibited by state statute for which a search warrant could be issued by a district or a county court. 
(b)  Grounds for issuance of warrant. 
(1)  A search warrant may be issued to search for and seize property which is located within the municipality and which: 
a.  Is designated or intended for use in committing a charter or ordinance violation; 
b.  Has been used as a means of committing a charter or ordinance violation; or 
c.  The possession of which is prohibited by charter or ordinance. 
(2)  A search warrant may be issued for the inspection of private premises by an authorized public inspector upon showing that: 
a.  The premises are located within the municipality; 
b.  The inspection is required or authorized by charter or ordinance in the interest of public safety; and 
c.  The owner or occupant of such private premises has refused entry to the public inspector or the premises are locked and the public inspector has been unable to obtain permission of the owner or occupant to enter. 
This subsection shall not be construed to require the issuance of a warrant for emergency inspection or in any other case where warrants are not presently required by law. 
(c)  Issuance and contents of warrant. A search warrant shall issue only on affidavit sworn to or affirmed before the judge and establishing the grounds for issuing the warrant. If the judge is satisfied that grounds for the application exist or there is probable cause to believe that they exist, he shall issue a search warrant identifying the property and naming or describing the person or place to be searched. The search warrant shall be directed to any officer authorized by law to execute it in the municipality wherein the property is located. It shall state the grounds or probable cause for its issuance and the names of the persons whose affidavits have been taken in support thereof. It shall command the officer to search forthwith the person or place named for any property specified. The search warrant shall direct that it be served in the daytime, but if the affidavits are positive that the property is on the person or in the place to be searched, the warrant may direct that it be served at any time. It shall designate the judge to whom it shall be returned. 
(d)  Execution of warrant and return with inventory. The search warrant may be executed and returned only within ten (10) days after its date. The officer taking property under the warrant shall give to the person from whom or from whose premises the property was taken a copy of the warrant and receipt for any property taken, or shall leave the copy and receipt at the place from which the property was taken. The return shall be made promptly and shall be accompanied by a written inventory of any property taken. The inventory shall be made in the presence of the applicant for the warrant and the person from whose possession or premises the property was taken, if they are present, or in the presence of at least one (1) credible person other than the applicant for the warrant or the person from whose possession or premises the property was taken, and shall be verified by the officer. The judge, upon request, shall deliver a copy of the inventory to the person from whose possession or premises the property was taken and to the applicant for the warrant. 
(e)  Motion for return of property and to suppress evidence. A person aggrieved by unlawful search and seizure may move the municipal court for the return of the property and to suppress for use as evidence anything so obtained on the grounds that: 
(1)  The property was illegally seized without warrant. 
(2)  The warrant is insufficient on its face. 
(3)  The property seized is not that described in the warrant. 
(4)  There was not probable cause for believing the existence of the grounds on which the warrant was issued. 
(5)  The warrant was illegally executed. 
The judge shall receive evidence on any issue of fact necessary to the decision of the motion. If the motion is granted, the property shall be restored unless otherwise subject to lawful detention, and it shall not be admissible in evidence at any hearing or trial. The motion to suppress evidence may also be made in the court where the trial is to be had. The motion shall be made before trial or hearing unless opportunity therefor did not exist or the defendant was not aware of the grounds for the motion, but the court in its discretion may entertain the motion at the trial or hearing. 
(f)  Scope of section. This section does not modify any statute inconsistent with it regulating search, seizure and issuance and execution of search warrants in circumstances for which special provision is made, and any such state statute or constitutional rule shall take precedence. 
(Code 1961, § 2-31.2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. Court Rules, ch. 30, rule 241. 
Sec. 2-246. - Speedy trial. 
    If the trial of a defendant is delayed more than one hundred eighty (180) days after the arraignment of the defendant, unless the delay is occasioned by the action or request of the defendant, the court shall dismiss the case and the defendant shall not thereafter be tried for the same offense; except that if, on the day of a trial set within the last ten (10) days of the above time limit, a necessity for a continuance arises which the court, in the exercise of sound judicial discretion, determines would warrant an additional delay, then one (1) continuance, not exceeding thirty (30) days, may be allowed, after which the dismissal shall be entered as above provided if the trial is not held within the additional time allowed. 
(Ord. No. 36-1996, 11-12-96, eff. 11-22-96) 
Secs. 2-247-2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-271. - Custodian of city records and documents. 
    The director of finance shall have custody of and safely keep all records and documents belonging to the city, except as provided in the charter and in other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1961, § 2-1) 
State Law reference- Public records, C.R.S. 24-72-201 et seq. 
Sec. 2-272. - Fees for criminal justice and other police records. 
    Fees for criminal justice and other police records, most of which, by law, are open to public inspection, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Where fees for certified copies or other copies, printouts, or photographs of such records are specified by law, such specific fees shall apply. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, all other fees shall be set by resolution of the city council, upon recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Code 1961, § 2-1.2; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94) 
State Law reference- Copies, printouts or photographs of public records, C.R.S. 24-72-205; criminal justice records, C.R.S. 24-72-301 et seq. 
Secs. 2-273-2-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 2-296. - Comprehensive master plan-Preparation; contents. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make, adopt and certify to the city council a comprehensive master plan for the physical development of the city, including other areas outside of its boundaries which, in the planning commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. The comprehensive master plan shall show the planning commission's recommendations and may include, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, parks, parkways, playgrounds, airports, and other public spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned; the acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the extent and layout of the replanning of blighted areas. 
(b)  In the preparation of the comprehensive master plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and probable future growth of the city and its environs. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city in accordance with existing and future needs. 
(Code 1961, § 2-16) 
Cross reference- Powers and duties of the planning commission, § 2-97. 
Sec. 2-297. - Same-Adoption. 
    The planning commission may adopt the comprehensive master plan provided for in section 2-296 as a whole by a single resolution or may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extensions thereof or additions thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by one (1) publication, at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in the official newspaper of the county affected. The adoption of the plan or any part, amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire membership of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary of the planning commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the city council and, after approval by that body, shall be filed with the clerk and recorder of each county affected. 
(Code 1961, § 2-17) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 24-1995, adopted November 14, 1995, effective November 24, 1995, adopted the Sterling Area Land Use Plan in its entirety by reference and incorporated such herein as fully as if it were set out at length in said ordinance. A copy of such plan is on file with the county clerk and recorder, as well as in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, powers and duties, § 2-97. 
Sec. 2-298. - Approval of certain public improvements by planning commission. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the comprehensive master plan of the city or of one (1) or more major sections or districts thereof in accord with the provisions of this article, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, public building or structure, or publicly or privately owned utility shall be constructed or authorized in the municipality or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted for approval by the planning commission. In case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of a majority of the council. The failure of the planning commission to act within sixty (60) days from and after the date of official submission to the planning commission shall be deemed approval. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Cross reference- Powers and duties of the planning commission, § 2-97. 
Sec. 2-299. - Reports and recommendations by planning commission. 
    The planning commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the comprehensive master plan provided for in this article and to the development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens. 
(Code 1961, § 2-19) 
Secs. 2-300-2-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20-2009, adopted Sept. 22, 2009, amended art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 2-310-2-327, pertained to judicial involvement, appearances of impropriety, confidential information, appearances before city boards and commissions, use of city property and employee services, conduct following termination of city employment or conclusion of term of office, receipt of gifts or favors, requests for opinions, violation, whistle-blower protection, penalties, prerogative of police chief, authority of city manager to promulgate administrative directives, and distribution, and derived from Ord. No. 14-1995, adopted Aug. 8, 1995. 

Sec. 2-310. - Purpose and application. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the integrity of city government by defining and proscribing certain conflicts of interest that may arise between the city and elected officials or appointees to city boards, authorities, and commissions. The city council intends to prohibit the appearance of impropriety as well as actual conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-311. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the terms set forth shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    Appearance of impropriety means an action that would give a reasonably prudent person the impression that an elected official or appointee is using his or her public office for private gain, giving preferential treatment to any person or organization, or losing impartiality in conducting city business. 
    Business means any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, trust or foundation, or other individual or organization carrying on a business, whether or not operated for profit, or religious institution or charitable organization. 
    Quasi-judicial capacity means the determination of rights, duties, or obligations of specific individuals by applying existing legal standards or policy considerations to past or present facts developed at a hearing conducted for the purpose of resolving particular interests in a question. 
    Substantial interest means a pecuniary stake in the outcome of a decision or other interest of such weight that would lead a reasonably prudent person observing the situation to expect such interest to make the rendering of an objective decision unlikely. Substantial interest also means ownership of corporate debt securities or equity securities, held either individually or jointly, of more than one percent of debt securities or equity securities issued by such corporation based on current capitalization. 
    Transaction means any contract; any sale or lease of any interest in land, material, supplies, or services; or any granting of a development right, license, permit, or application. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-312. - Persons covered. 
    All city officers and employees shall be bound by this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-313. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
(a)  No elected official or appointee to any city board, authority, or commission shall appear before the city council or any city board, authority, or commission if the city council or such board, authority, or commission is acting in a quasi-judicial capacity. 
(b)  An elected official or appointee who (1) has a substantial interest in any transaction with the city, (2) has a spouse or relative up through the second degree of consanguinity with a substantial interest in any transaction with the city, (3) has a substantial interest as an affiliate of a firm with a substantial interest in any transaction with the city, or (4) has a substantial interest as an affiliate of a firm appearing on behalf of or employed by a person with a substantial interest in any transaction with the city shall disclose the interest above described on the record of a public meeting of the city council or the city board, authority, or commission of which the person is a member. 
(c)  The interested elected official or appointee shall thereafter (1) refrain from voting upon or otherwise acting in an official capacity in such transaction; (2) physically absent himself or herself from the room in which the matter is being considered; and (3) not discuss the matter with any other member of the city council, board, authority, or commission of which the person is a member. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-314. - Ban on use of official position for private gain. 
(a)  No elected official or appointee shall use his or her official position for private gain or for the private gain of any person with whom the elected official or appointee has a business or any other type of relationship, or otherwise engage in any activity that creates an appearance of impropriety. 
(b)  A city official or appointee shall not disclose or use confidential information acquired in the course of his or her official duties in order to further substantially his or her personal financial interests or the financial interest of any other person or organization. 
(c)  A city official or appointee shall not accept a gift of substantial value that would tend to influence a reasonable person to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of his or her duties or that a reasonable person in his or her position should know under the circumstances is primarily for the purposes of rewarding him or her for official action he or she has taken or may take. A gift of substantial value also includes any action that conveys a substantial economic benefit. 
(d)  A gift of substantial value shall include without limitation a loan at a rate of interest that is substantially lower than the commercial rate then currently prevalent for similar loans, and compensation received for private services rendered at a rate substantially exceeding the fair market value of such services. 
(e)  A gift of substantial value shall not include: 
(1)  Campaign contributions and contributions in kind reported as required by C.R.S. 1-45-108; 
(2)  An unsolicited, occasional nonpecuniary gift that is insignificant in value; 
(3)  An unsolicited token or award of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento, or similar item; 
(4)  Unsolicited informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the recipients' performance of official duties; 
(5)  Payment of, or reimbursement for, admission for attendance at a convention or other meeting at which the city officer, employee, or consultant is scheduled to participate; 
(6)  Reimbursement for or acceptance of an opportunity to participate in a social function or meeting where such reimbursement is not extraordinary in light of the position held by the participating city officer, employee or consultant; 
(7)  Anything given by an individual who is a relative or personal friend of the recipient; 
(8)  Items of perishable or nonpermanent value including, but not limited to, meals, lodging, travel expenses, or tickets to sporting, recreational, or cultural events; 
(9)  Payment for a speech, appearance, or publication reported pursuant to C.R.S. 24-6-203; and 
(10)  Monetary payment from employment, including other government employment, in addition to that earned from being a member of the city council or by reason of service in other public office. 
(f)  The provisions of this section are distinct from and in addition to the reporting requirements of C.R.S. 1-45-108 and C.R.S. 24-6-203, and do not relieve an incumbent in, or elected candidate to, the city council from reporting an item described in subsection (e) above if such reporting provisions apply. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-315. - Violation and removal. 
(a)  The city attorney shall refer to the district attorney violations of the Standards of Conduct, C.R.S., title 24, article 18, by an elected official or by an appointee. 
(b)  The city council may, by a majority vote of the entire council, remove any appointee from a city board, authority, or commission who violates any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-316. - Advisory opinions and special counsel or ethicist appointment. 
(a)  Any elected official or appointee to a city board, authority, or commission may request the city attorney for an advisory opinion whenever a question arises as to the applicability of this chapter to a particular situation. The city attorney may recommend retention of either special counsel or an ethicist to assist in preparing an advisory opinion. 
(b)  The city attorney shall render such advisory opinion within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the request for an advisory opinion, unless the city council retains either special counsel or an ethicist, in which case the city attorney shall render such advisory opinion within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the request for an advisory opinion. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Sec. 2-317. - Distribution of code of ethics. 
    All existing officers and employees and new officers and employees upon initiating their respective terms of office or employment shall receive a copy of this code of ethics or any amendments thereto and submit written acknowledgment of such receipt, which acknowledgment shall be retained as an official public record of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20-2009, 9-22-09, eff. 10-2-09) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9; alcoholic beverages prohibited in any park or recreation area, § 13-47; taxation and finance, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq.; Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq.; local licensing authority, C.R.S. 12-46-117, 12-47-135. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Tastings means the sampling of malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensee or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. 12-47-301(10). 
(Ord. No. 16-2007, 8-14-07, eff. 8-24-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  The provisions of C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq., and the provisions of state rules and regulations adopted under the authorization granted by the provisions of C.R.S. 12-47-105, relating to the definitions of terms, licensing, sales, hours of sale, records, inspection, unlawful acts, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic liquors are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. 
(b)  The provisions of C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq., and the provisions of state rules and regulations adopted under the authorization granted by the provisions of C.R.S. 12-46-105, relating to the definitions of terms, licensing, sales, hours of sale, records, inspection, unlawful acts, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of fermented malt beverages are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. 
(Code 1961, §§ 4-1, 4-13) 
Sec. 3-3. - Violation of chapter generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the terms of this chapter, including: 
(1)  Failure to pay taxes and secure and post a receipt therefor; 
(2)  Failure to comply with the provisions of C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq., and C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq., as adopted by section 3-2; and 
(3)  Failure to comply with the regulations as adopted by section 3-2 under the authorization granted by C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq., and C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq. 
(b)  No conviction for any such offense or violation shall cause, because of such conviction as such, a revocation or suspension of the license of the defendant issued pursuant to the laws of the state. 
(Code 1961, § 4-55; Ord. No. 27-1987, 12-8-87, eff. 12-21-87) 
Sec. 3-4. - Licensee's responsibility for conduct of business. 
    Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverages there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by ordinance and the law equally with the employee. 
(Code 1961, §§ 4-11, 4-23) 
Sec. 3-5. - Consumption on licensed premises, generally. 
(a)  No person licensed to sell fermented malt beverages shall allow the consumption or display of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with alcoholic liquor. The presence of alcoholic liquor on the premises of such a licensee shall be prima facie evidence of possession of alcoholic liquor for the purpose of sale; and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie evidence that alcoholic liquor is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this section. 
(b)  No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on any licensed premises unless the premises is licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. No fermented malt beverage shall be consumed on any licensed premises unless the premises is licensed to sell fermented malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted to consume alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1961, § 4-26; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-26, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 4-1990, § 4-26, 5-22-90, eff. 7-30-90; Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92) 
State Law reference- Lawful drinking age, C.R.S. 12-47-128. 
Sec. 3-6. - Age requirement for employees serving alcoholic beverages. 
    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed or employed to serve alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or employed to serve fermented malt beverages on any licensed premises. This section does not prohibit the employment of a person under the age of twenty-one (21) or eighteen (18) respectively for any lawful purpose on the licensed premises other than the service of alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverages. 
(Code 1961, § 4-27; Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. 12-47-128(5)(a)(I). 
Sec. 3-7. - Gambling prohibited on licensed premises. 
    No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises. 
(Code 1961, § 4-28; Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C.R.S. 12-47-128(n)(I). 
Sec. 3-8. - Sale to underage or intoxicated persons prohibited. 
    No alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Code 1961, § 4-25; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-25, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 4-1990, § 4-25, 5-22-90, eff. 7-30-90; Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92) 
State Law reference- Lawful drinking age, C.R.S. 12-47-128. 
Sec. 3-9. - Procurement by underage person; procurement for underage person. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure or attempt to procure for such person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, any article which the person himself is forbidden by law to procure, including but not limited to malt, vinous, spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, whether for remuneration or not, for any person to procure or attempt to procure for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years any article which the person under the age of twenty-one (21) years himself is forbidden by law to procure, including malt, vinous spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages. 
(Code 1961, § 4-30; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-30, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 4-1990, § 4-30, 5-22-90, eff. 7-30-90; Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92) 
Sec. 3-10. - Illegal possession or consumption of alcohol by underage person. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group, or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
(2)  Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
(3)  Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his immediate presence and control. 
(4)  Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. "Private property" shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to C.R.S. title 12, articles 46, 47 or 48; or 
b.  Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or consume ethyl alcohol anywhere within the city. It shall further be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to consume alcohol outside of the city limits who has been found within the city while manifesting any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment. Illegal possession or consumption of alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (b) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of such person's parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. 25-5-410(1)(i)(11) or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(3)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this article if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (b) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in this city; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this city. 
(e)  During any trial for a violation of subsection (b) of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "wine cooler," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(f)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age may give, or permit the possession and consumption of, ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in subsection (c)(1) of this section. This subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code, Colorado Liquor Code or the provisions of C.R.S. title 12, article 48, or any members, employees, or occupants of any such establishment, to give, provide, make available, or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to any other applicable law or ordinance. 
(h)  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection (b) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the executive director of the department of health. 
(i)  During any trial for a violation of subsection (b) of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of health for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(j)  No law enforcement officer shall enter upon any private property to investigate any violation of this section without reasonable suspicion. 
(Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92; Ord. No. 3-1999, 2-23-99, eff. 3-2-99) 
Sec. 3-11. - Making false representation to procure alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to obtain malt, vinous, spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages by any method or make false statements or furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card or note or other document or present, furnish or exhibit such a document which was issued to a person other than the one presenting the document for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of articles which he is prohibited from obtaining by any law or ordinance, including but not limited to malt, vinous, spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages. 
(b)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be the same as that provided in section 1-15 of this Code, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty. 
(Code 1961, § 4-31; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-31, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 4-1990, § 4-30, 5-22-90, eff. 7-30-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions C.R.S. 12-47-128(b). 
Sec. 3-12. - Open containers. 
    No person shall carry or have any open container of alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverage in any vehicle or on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public place or in any public place, except in a licensed premises, and except at the Overland Trail Museum under a specifically regulated permitting process as adopted by the parks, library and recreation board, as recommended by the city manager. 
(Code 1961, § 4-29; Ord. No. 2-2015, 3-24-15, eff. 4-3-15) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; parks and recreation, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 3-13. - Penalty for violation. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be the same as that specifically provided in section 2-243, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty and such other restrictions on the penalty as may be set forth in section 1-15. In the event that a violation occurs pursuant to this article and a specific penalty is not set forth in section 2-243, the penalty shall be at the court's discretion. It shall, however, still be subject to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 8-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92; Ord. No. 37-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 3-14. - Beer keg identification. 
(a)  For the purpose of tracking beer kegs, retail stores shall be supplied by the police department with self-locking seals and accompanying forms. 
(b)  Retail stores shall attach the seals to beer kegs as they are sold and shall record the purchaser's name, address, telephone number, date of birth, driver's license number, brand of beer, type (size) of keg, and the seal number. 
(c)  If the keg is not returned, or if the seal has been removed or tampered with, the retailer shall immediately notify the city police department. The department shall then begin an investigation to determine what charges can be brought against the purchaser. Further, if the keg is discovered at a party where there is underage drinking, the department shall begin an investigation to identify and prosecute the person who purchased the keg. 
(d)  The retailer shall be provided with an advertisement which shall be given to each purchaser stating: 
(1)  It is illegal to give or sell alcohol to a person under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(2)  If the keg tap or any other part of the keg is not returned, the purchaser's deposit shall be forfeited. 
(3)  If the keg is returned without the numbered seal, the deposit shall be forfeited. 
(4)  If the keg is not returned, or if the seal has been removed or tampered with, the retailer must immediately notify the city police department and the purchaser shall be prosecuted by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 26-1996, 7-23-96, eff. 8-2-96) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 26-1996, adopted July 23, 1996, and effective August 2, 1996, amended the Code by adding § 3-314. For purposes of classification, such provisions were included herein as § 3-14 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-15. - School distance restriction exemption. 
(a)  Full hotel and restaurant licenses and beer and wine licenses shall be permissible, provided the liquor licensing authority allows such license to be granted, within five hundred (500) feet of Northeastern Junior College. Such beer and wine licenses, however, shall be permissible within five hundred (500) feet only if granted for restaurant purposes. 
(b)  Full hotel and restaurant licenses and beer and wine licenses shall be permissible, provided the liquor licensing authority allows such license to be granted, within five hundred (500) feet of any public, parochial, or private high school, with the condition that traffic signs shall be placed at locations approved by the public works department alerting drivers to the presence of children and/or pedestrians. Such beer and wine licenses, however, shall be permissible within five hundred (500) feet of any public, parochial, or private high school only if granted for restaurant purposes. 
(Ord. No. 19-1999, 9-14-99, eff. 9-24-99; Ord. No. 1-2011, 2-8-11, eff. 2-18-11) 
Sec. 3-16. - Tastings authorized; permit required. 
(a)  Tastings on the licensed premises of a retail liquor store licensee or of a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee are authorized to be conducted within the city in accordance with C.R.S. 12-47-301(10) and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city is authorized to issue tastings permits in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct tastings within the city without having first received a permit issued in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Retail liquor store licensees and liquor-licensed drugstore licensees desiring to conduct tastings shall submit a tastings permit application to the city accompanied by an application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The city may change this fee by resolution. 
(e)  The city shall establish the procedures for obtaining a tastings permit, which procedures shall include, without limitation, conducting a noticed public hearing before the city at which hearing the applicant must establish that the applicant is able to conduct tastings without violating the provisions of this chapter. The city may deny the application or any renewal application if it finds that the applicant has violated any provision of the Colorado Liquor Code, rules and regulations, or the City Code pertaining to alcohol sales and service in the previous year, if the applicant has not established the ability to conduct tastings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or if the city finds that the proposed tastings would create a public safety risk to the neighborhood. The notice required for the public hearing shall be the posted and published notices required by C.R.S. 12-47-311. 
(f)  The forms for the tastings permit application, the renewal application, and the tastings permit shall be those prescribed by the city. These forms shall include, without limitation, a schedule of the dates and times of the tastings to be conducted on the licensed premises and by whom during the term of the permit. The licensee may deviate from the approved schedule provided that: 
(1)  The licensee gives the city seven (7) days' prior written notice of such deviation; and 
(2)  Such deviation does not violate any provision of this chapter, the Colorado Liquor Code, Code of Regulations, or any other state law or municipal ordinance or regulation. An applicant for a tastings permit must also include with the filing of the initial and any renewal application, and keep current with the city at all times, written proof that the licensee and each employee of the licensee who will be conducting the tastings have completed a server training program for tastings that meets the standards required by state law. 
(g)  Renewal of tastings permits shall be concurrent with the renewal of licenses for retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drugstores. A licensee's initial tastings permit shall expire on the same date as the date of the licensee's retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore license expires. The initial tastings permit application fee shall not be prorated if the permit expires in less than a year. Tastings permit renewal forms shall be submitted to the city accompanied by a renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The city may change this fee by resolution. 
(h)  Tastings permits shall be conspicuously and prominently posted by the licensee on the licensed premises at all times during business hours. 
(i)  A tastings permit shall only be issued to a retail liquor store or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee whose license is valid, not subject to a current or pending enforcement action by the city or the state and in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 16-2007, 8-14-07, eff. 8-24-07) 
Sec. 3-17. - Limitations on tastings. 
    Tastings within the city shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the liquor enforcement division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of a licensee, and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
(b)  The alcohol used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. 12-47-403 at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost for such alcohol. 
(c)  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one (1) ounce of malt or vinous liquor, or one-half (1/2) of one (1) ounce of spirituous liquor. 
(d)  Tastings shall not exceed a total of five (5) hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive. 
(e)  Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. 
(f)  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
(g)  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tastings. 
(h)  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
(i)  The licensee shall not serve more than four (4) individual samples to a patron during a tasting. 
(j)  The alcohol samples used in the tastings shall be served in clear, open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge. 
(k)  Tastings may occur on no more than two (2) of the six (6) days from a Monday to the following Saturday, not to exceed fifty-two (52) days per year. 
(l)  The licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises a log of all tastings on forms prescribed by the city to be submitted to the city each year with the tastings permit renewal application, and during all business hours the log shall be subject to inspection by city and state officials authorized to enforce the Colorado Liquor Code and/or this Code upon request. 
(m)  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquor shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting and the licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting. 
(Ord. No. 16-2007, 8-14-07, eff. 8-24-07) 
Sec. 3-18. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of a limitation specified in sections 3-16 and 3-17 or in C.R.S. 12-47-301(10) by a retail liquor store or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, whether by the licensee's employees, agents or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who is conducting the tastings. 
(b)  Retail liquor store and liquor-licensed drugstore licensees conducting a tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to those licensees by the city. The city council, sitting as the local licensing authority, shall conduct a hearing with regard to any violation of sections 3-16 through 3-17 in accordance with this Code, the city's rules, regulations and C.R.S. 12-47-601. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall affect the ability of a Colorado winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. 12-47-402 or 12-47-403 to conduct tastings pursuant to the authority of C.R.S. 12-47-402(2) or 12-47-403(e). 
(Ord. No. 16-2007, 8-14-07, eff. 8-24-07) 
Secs. 3-19-3-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq.; local licensing authority, C.R.S. 12-47-135. 

Sec. 3-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means a license to sell alcoholic liquors issued pursuant to this article. 
    Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant to this article. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-42. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for a person to sell, vend, deal in or dispose of, by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale any alcoholic liquors within the city without a license to do so as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 4-2; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-2, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 3-43. - Form and contents of application. 
    Every application for a license to sell alcoholic liquor shall state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as to his character with such references as the council may require, his citizenship, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business, how long he has been in that business at that place, and such other information as the council may require from time to time. In addition to containing such information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be verified and filed with the city. 
(Code 1961, § 4-3; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-3, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 48, adopted Sept. 9, 1997, effective Sept. 19, 1997, deleted § 3-43 in its entirety and renumbered existing § 3-44 as § 3-43. Prior to being deleted, § 3-43 pertained to temporary licenses and derived from § 4-2 of the 1961 Code; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-2, adopted Sept. 15, 1989; and Ord. No. 25-1992, adopted July 28, 1992, effective Aug. 10, 1992. 
Sec. 3-44. - Late renewal application. 
    Any licensee licensed under this article whose license expires and is not renewed may renew the expired license by submitting the renewal application, along with the appropriate license fees and a five-hundred-dollar nonrefundable late application fee, within ninety (90) days of the license expiration date. The licensee may not sell or possess for sale any alcoholic beverage until all licenses have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-45. - Making false application. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement in an application for a license. 
(Code 1961, § 4-4) 
Sec. 3-46. - Application fees. 
    Each application for a license filed with the city shall be accompanied by an application fee in the following amount: 
(1)  For a new license, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, and before July 2, 2009, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); after July 1, 2009, and before July 2, 2010, eight hundred seventy-five dollars ($875.00); after July 2, 2010, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  For a transfer of ownership, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(3)  For a renewal of license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00); after July 1, 2008, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(4)  For a late renewal of license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  For a request to change location, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  For a request to change, alter or modify premises, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(8)  For investigation on change in corporate or limited liability company ownership structure, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each background investigation per person, except if investigated and charged by state authority. 
(9)  For a late renewal of license before expiration date, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1961, § 4-5; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-5, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-5, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 10-1990, § 4-5, 8-28-90, eff. 8-31-90; Ord. No. 14-1992, 5-12-92, eff. 5-25-92; Ord. No. 25-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 8-10-92; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97; Ord. No. 23-2003, 12-9-03, eff. 12-19-03; Ord. No. 15-2007, 7-24-07, eff. 8-3-07; Ord. No. 14-2010, 11-9-10, eff. 11-19-10) 
State Law reference- Fees for processing, C.R.S. 12-47-135. 
Sec. 3-47. - License fees. 
    Each application for a license filed with the city shall be accompanied by a license fee in the following amount: 
(1)  For a retail liquor store license, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  For a liquor-licensed drugstore license, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(3)  For a beer and wine license, with the exception of a beer and wine license issued to a resort hotel, three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00). 
(4)  For a beer and wine license issued to a resort hotel, three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00). 
(5)  For a hotel and restaurant license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(6)  For a tavern license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(7)  For a club license, two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(8)  For an arts license, two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(9)  For a racetrack license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(10)  For each bed and breakfast permit, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(11)  For a special event permit, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(12)  For each optional premises license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(13)  For a brew pub license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(14)  For a temporary permit, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(15)  For a mini bar permit, three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00). 
If an application for a license or permit is rejected, the director of finance shall refund the license or permit fee paid. Eighty-five (85) percent of the local license fees provided for herein shall be paid to the department of revenue, which shall transmit such fees to the state treasurer to be credited to the old age pension fund. 
(Code 1961, § 4-6; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-6, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-6, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89; Ord. No. 25-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 8-10-92; Ord. No. 6-1994, 5-10-94, eff. 5-20-94; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
State Law reference- License fees, C.R.S. 12-47-106, 12-47-139. 
Sec. 3-48. - Investigation; hearing; issuance or refusal. 
    The city council shall cause an investigation to be made of all facts set forth in the license application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No license shall be issued until approved by the state licensing authority. 
(Code 1961, § 4-7; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-7, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-49. - Term. 
    Each license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year. 
(Code 1961, § 4-8; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-8, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-50. - Transfer; temporary permit. 
(a)  Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or place without city council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of stock without prior council approval is grounds for revocation of the license. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the local licensing authority for the purpose of issuing a temporary permit authorizing the sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, as authorized by the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. 12-47-106.5, pending review of an application to transfer a license to sell same. This delegation of local licensing authority pertains strictly to the issuance of said temporary permits, and shall not be construed to vest the city clerk with any other form of local licensing authority. Prior to issuance of a temporary permit, the city attorney shall approve the application by endorsement signature on the completed temporary permit application. 
(c)  Any temporary permit issued by the city clerk under subsection (b) shall only be valid until the permanent annual license application is denied. 
(Code 1961, § 4-9; Ord. No. 14-1992, 5-12-92, eff. 5-25-92; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-51. - Conditions of license. 
    Every license is subject to all of the provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinance, state law or regulation. 
(Code 1961, § 4-10) 
Sec. 3-52. - Suspension; revocation; fine in lieu of suspension. 
(a)  The council may either suspend or revoke any license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to alcoholic liquor. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard. However, any license may be temporarily suspended without notice for a period of not more than fifteen (15) days pending any prosecution, investigation, or public hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a decision of the local licensing authority suspending a retail license for fourteen (14) days or less becomes final, whether by failure of the retail licensee to appeal the decision or by exhaustion of all appeals and judicial review, the retail licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having his retail license suspended for all or part of the suspension period. Upon the receipt of the petition, the local licensing authority may, in its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition, if it is satisfied that: 
(1)  The public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(2)  The books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcoholic beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(3)  The retail licensee has not had his license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license. 
(c)  The fine shall be equivalent to twenty (20) percent of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of alcoholic beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall be not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Payment of any fine pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be in the form of cash or in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(d)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the local licensing authority shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. The city council shall cause such moneys to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(e)  In connection with any petition pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the authority of the local licensing authority is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(f)  If the local licensing authority does not make the findings required in subsection (b) of this section and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the local licensing authority. 
(g)  The local licensing authority shall report all actions taken to impose fines, suspensions and revocations to the state licensing authority in a manner as required by the state licensing authority. 
(Code 1961, § 4-12; Ord. No. 19-1987, § 4-12, 9-22-87, eff. 10-5-87) 
State Law reference- Suspension and revocation, fines, C.R.S. 12-47-110. 
Sec. 3-53. - Bed and breakfast permit. 
(a)  Bed and breakfast means an overnight lodging establishment that provides at least one (1) meal per day at no charge other than a charge for overnight lodging and does not sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(b)  In lieu of a hotel and restaurant license, a person operating a bed and breakfast with not more than twenty (20) sleeping rooms that offers complimentary alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises and only by overnight guests may be issued a bed and breakfast permit. A bed and breakfast permittee shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the drink and shall not serve alcoholic beverages for more than four (4) hours in any one (1) day. 
(c)  A bed and breakfast permit may be suspended or revoked, in accordance with section 3-52, if the permittee violates any provision of this article or any rule adopted pursuant to this article or fails truthfully to furnish any required information in connection with a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, 5-10-94, eff. 5-20-94) 
Secs. 3-54-3-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fermented malt beverages, C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq. 

Sec. 3-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means a license to sell fermented malt beverages issued pursuant to this article. 
    Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant to this article. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-77. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for a person to sell, vend, deal in or dispose of, by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale any fermented malt beverages within the city without a license to do so as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 4-14) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 3-78. - Form and contents of application. 
    Every application for a license to sell fermented malt beverages shall state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as to his character with such references as the council may require, his citizenship, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long he has been in that business at that place, and such other information as the council may require from time to time. In addition to containing such information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be verified and filed with the city. 
(Code 1961, § 4-15; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-15, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88) 
Sec. 3-79. - Making false application. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement in an application for a license. 
(Code 1961, § 4-16) 
Sec. 3-80. - Application fees. 
    Each application for a license or for a temporary permit filed with the city shall be accompanied by an application fee in the following amount: 
(1)  For a new license, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, and before July 2, 2009, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); after July 1, 2009, and before July 2, 2010, eight hundred seventy-five dollars ($875.00); after July 2, 2010, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  For a transfer of ownership, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(3)  For a renewal of license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00); after July 1, 2008, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(4)  For a late renewal of license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  For a request to change location, six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00); after July 1, 2008, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(6)  For a request to change, alter or modify premises, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(7)  For a late renewal of license before expiration date, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1961, § 4-17; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-17, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 14-1989, § 4-17, 9-15-89, eff. 9-15-89; Ord. No. 14-1992, 5-12-92, eff. 5-25-92; Ord. No. 25-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 8-10-92; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97; Ord. No. 23-2003, 12-9-03, eff. 12-19-03; Ord. No. 15-2007, 7-24-07, eff. 8-3-07) 
Sec. 3-81. - License fees. 
    Each application for a license filed with the city shall be accompanied by a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Eighty-five (85) percent of the local license fee provided for herein shall be paid to the department of revenue, which shall transmit such fee to the state treasurer to be credited to the old age pension fund. Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a ten-dollar fee. Each application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a one-hundred-dollar fee. If an application for a license or permit is rejected, the director of finance shall refund the license or permit fee paid. 
(Code 1961, § 4-18; Ord. No. 13-1988, § 4-18, 8-23-88, eff. 9-5-88; Ord. No. 25-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 8-10-92; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-82. - Investigation; hearing; issuance or refusal. 
    The city council shall cause an investigation to be made of all facts set forth in the license application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No license shall be issued until approved by the state licensing authority. 
(Code 1961, § 4-19) 
Sec. 3-83. - Term. 
    Each license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year. 
(Code 1961, § 4-20) 
Sec. 3-84. - Transfer; temporary permit. 
(a)  Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or place without city council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of stock without prior council approval is grounds for revocation of the license. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the local licensing authority for the purpose of issuing a temporary permit authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages, as authorized by the Colorado Beer Code, C.R.S. 12-46-106.5, pending review of an application to transfer a license to sell same. This delegation of local licensing authority pertains strictly to the issuance of said temporary permits, and shall not be construed to vest the city clerk with any other form of local licensing authority. Prior to issuance of a temporary permit, the city attorney shall approve the application by endorsement signature on the completed temporary permit application. 
(c)  Any temporary permit issued by the city clerk under subsection (b) shall only be valid until the permanent annual license application is denied. 
(Code 1961, § 4-21; Ord. No. 14-1992, 5-12-92, eff. 5-25-92; Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Sec. 3-85. - Conditions of license. 
    Every license is subject to all of the provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinance, state law or regulation. 
(Code 1961, § 4-22) 
Sec. 3-86. - Suspension; revocation; fine in lieu of suspension. 
(a)  The council may either suspend or revoke any license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to fermented malt beverages. A license may be summarily suspended for a period of fifteen (15) days or less. However, no suspension for a period in excess of fifteen (15) days or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Whenever a decision of the local licensing authority suspending a retail license for fourteen (14) days or less becomes final, whether by failure of the retail licensee to appeal the decision or by exhaustion of all appeals and judicial review, the retail licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having his retail license suspended for all or part of the suspension period. Upon the receipt of the petition, the local licensing authority may, in its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition, if it is satisfied that: 
(1)  The public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(2)  The books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of fermented malt beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(3)  The retail licensee has not had his license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license. 
(c)  The fine shall be equivalent to twenty (20) percent of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of fermented malt beverages during the period of the proposed suspension, except that the fine shall be not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Payment of any fine pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be in the form of cash or in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(d)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the local licensing authority shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. The city council shall cause such moneys to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(e)  In connection with any petition pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the authority of the local licensing authority is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(f)  If the local licensing authority does not make the findings required in subsection (b) of this section and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the local licensing authority. 
(g)  The local licensing authority shall report all actions taken to impose fines, suspensions and revocations to the state licensing authority in a manner as required by the state licensing authority. 
(Code 1961, § 4-24; Ord. No. 19-1987, § 4-24, 9-22-87, eff. 10-5-87) 
State Law reference- Suspension, revocation, fines, C.R.S. 12-46-107. 
Sec. 3-87. - Late renewal application. 
    Any licensee licensed under this article whose license expires and is not renewed may renew the expired license by submitting the renewal application, along with the appropriate license fees and a five-hundred-dollar nonrefundable late application fee, within ninety (90) days of the license expiration date. The licensee may not sell or possess for sale any fermented malt beverage until all licenses have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 48-1997, 9-9-97, eff. 9-19-97) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 48-1997, adopted Sept. 9, 1997, effective Sept. 19, 1997, amended § 3-87 to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment, § 3-87 pertained to temporary licenses and derived from Ord. No. 25-1992, adopted July 28, 1992, effective Aug. 10, 1992. 
Secs. 3-88-3-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION TAX ON BUSINESSES SELLING 3.2 BEER OR MALT, VINOUS OR SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation and finance, Ch. 19; occupation tax, § 19-26 et seq. 

Sec. 3-111. - Policy; purpose of article. 
    The city council hereby finds, determines and declares that, considering the nature of the business of selling at retail 3.2 beer and malt, vinous and spirituous liquors for beverage purposes, and the relation of such business to the public welfare, as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required of the city and a proper, just and equitable distribution of tax burdens within the city and all other penalties proper to be considered in relation thereto, that the classification of such business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and that the amount of tax imposed by this article is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the city. 
(Code 1961, § 4-50) 
Sec. 3-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    3.2 beer means malt liquor containing not more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Malt liquors includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar products or any combination thereof in water, containing more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Medicinal liquors means any liquor sold by a duly licensed pharmacist or drugstore solely on a bona fide doctor's prescription. 
    Operator means a person licensed by law to sell malt, vinous and spirituous liquors, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes at retail, and who is engaged at any time during the calendar year in such operation within the city. 
    Vinous liquors includes wine and fortified wines not exceeding twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverages obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor except as provided in this definition shall not be construed to be malt or vinous liquor, but shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
(Code 1961, § 4-48) 
Sec. 3-113. - Classification of businesses. 
    The business of selling at retail any 3.2 beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes is hereby defined and separately classified as such occupation for the purposes of this article as follows: 
(1)  Class A operators. All operators who are licensed to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises, either as a hotel, tavern or restaurant, shall be class A operators. 
(2)  Class B operators. All operators licensed to sell malt or vinous liquors only by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be class B operators. 
(3)  Class C operators. All operators licensed as retail liquor stores to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in original containers for consumption off the premises shall be class C operators. 
(4)  Class D operators. All operators licensed as drugstores to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in original containers for consumption off the premises shall be class D operators. 
(5)  Class E operators. All operators who are licensed to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises as clubs are class E operators. 
(6)  Class F operators. All operators who are licensed to sell only 3.2 beer as clubs are class F operators. 
(7)  Class G operators. All other operators, excepting operators who sell 3.2 beer as a grocery, delicatessen or other such similar business establishment who are designated in this section as class H or I operators, who are licensed to sell only 3.2 beer, are class G operators. 
(8)  Class H operators. All operators licensed to sell only 3.2 beer from a grocery, delicatessen or other such similar business establishment or store with an interior floor area not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet are class H operators. 
(9)  Class I operators. All operators licensed to sell only 3.2 beer from a grocery, delicatessen or other such similar business establishment or store with an interior floor area exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet are class I operators. 
(10)  Class J operators. All operators licensed to operate a brew pub and which may also sell malt, vinous, and spirituous liquors in the place where such liquors are to be consumed. 
(Code 1961, § 4-49; Ord. No. 54-1997, 10-14-97, eff. 10-24-97) 
Sec. 3-114. - Levied; amounts. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax upon the business of selling 3.2 beer or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, except medicinal liquors, in the city, as such occupation has been classified in this article, as follows: 
(1)  For all class A operators, the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  For all class B operators, the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  For all class C operators, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(4)  For all class D operators, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(5)  For all class E operators, the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(6)  For all class F operators, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  For all class G operators, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(8)  For all class H operators, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(9)  For all class I operators, the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(10)  For all class J operators, the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1961, § 4-51; Ord. No. 54-1997, 10-14-97, eff. 10-24-97) 
Sec. 3-115. - Payment; receipt; prorating. 
(a)  Such tax as provided for in this article shall be due and payable to the director of finance of the city on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent thereafter. Prepayment of such tax may be made in the month of December preceding the due date. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such tax, the director of finance shall issue a receipt showing the name of the person paying the tax, the annual period for which the tax is paid and the location of the place of business for which the tax is paid. 
(c)  The operator shall, at all times during the year, keep the receipt posted in a conspicuous place in his place of business. 
(d)  If any operators begin business subsequent to January 1 of any year, the tax required shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the remaining portion of the year; provided, however, that no refund shall be made to any person who temporarily closes such business during the year, either voluntarily or involuntarily. All prorated taxes provided for in this subsection shall be due and payable upon the beginning of business. Interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes at the rate of one (1) percent per month. A refund may be granted, upon application of the operator to the director of finance, in the case where business closes permanently. The amount of said refund shall be based on the remaining full quarters of the year for which the tax was paid. 
(Code 1961, § 4-52; Ord. No. 4-1991, 3-26-91, eff. 4-7-91) 
Sec. 3-116. - Delinquency in payment not grounds for suspension or revocation of license issued pursuant to state law. 
    No delinquency in payment of the tax provided for in this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license granted to any such operator by any licensing authority pursuant to the statutes enacted by the general assembly of the state, and in performance of any duties imposed upon the city council as a licensing authority by such statutes the city council shall exclude from consideration any delinquency in payment of the tax provided for in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 4-53) 
Sec. 3-117. - City's right of recovery. 
    The city shall have the right to recover all sums due by the terms of this article by an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such remedy shall be cumulative with all other remedies provided in this Code for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 4-54) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals running at large prohibited in parks, § 13-53; defecation by animals in parks and recreation areas prohibited, § 13-54; horse riding restricted in parks and recreation areas, § 13-55. 
State Law reference- Cruelty, C.R.S. 18-9-201 et seq.; rabies control, C.R.S. 25-4-601 et seq.; estrays, C.R.S. 35-44-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means the leaving of an animal without adequate provisions for the animal's proper care by its owner, the person responsible for the animal's care or custody, or any other person having possession of such animal. 
    Animal means any living dumb creature. 
    Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one (1) neutered or sterilized. 
    Disposal or disposition means adoption of an animal; return of an animal to the owner; sale of an animal under C.R.S. 18-9-202.5(1)(c); release of an animal to a rescue group licensed pursuant to C.R.S. article 80 of title 35; release of an animal to another pet animal facility licensed pursuant to C.R.S. article 80 of title 35, or to a rehabilitator licensed by the division of wildlife or the United States fish and wildlife service; or euthanasia. 
    Dog means a domestic canine of either sex, including one (1) neutered or sterilized. 
    Domestic animal includes all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated, but shall not include any offspring of crossbred domestic and wild animals. 
    Euthanasia means to produce a humane death by techniques accepted by the American Veterinary Medical Association. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. 
    Mistreatment means every act or omission that causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
    Neglect means failure to provide food, water, protection from the elements, or other care generally considered to be normal, usual and accepted for an animal's health and well-being consistent with the species, breed, and type of animal. 
    Owner means any person who has a property right in an animal or who harbors an animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or longer. 
    Pet animal includes dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, nonpoisonous reptiles, and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall not include skunks, non-human primates and any other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
    Rabies vaccination means the vaccination of a dog or cat with an antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of health and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
    Running at large pertains to an animal off the premises of the owner and not under the physical control of the owner or his authorized representative. An animal intruding upon the property of another other than the owner shall be deemed running at large. 
    Shelter operator means the entity or person operating an animal shelter utilized by the city. 
    Stock animal includes any species of horse, cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, swine or llama. 
    Stray animal means any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer. 
    Wild animal includes all species of animals which exist in a natural unconfined state and are usually not domesticated, and shall include all offspring of crossbred domestic and wild animals. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-1, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07; Ord. No. 12-2018, 10-9-18, eff. 10-19-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Enforcement of chapter; animal wardens. 
(a)  There shall be appointed by the police chief animal wardens with such duties as may be assigned to them by this chapter and such other duties as may be assigned to them from time to time by the police chief. 
(b)  The animal wardens, together with all police officers of the city, shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter within the limits of the city, whether on public or private property. 
(c)  (1)  The city council may enter into an agreement with any person or agency for the enforcement of animal control ordinances of the city and related matters. 
(2)  Pursuant to an agreement, the police chief may appoint or the agreement may provide for the appointment of any person or agency, or their employees or agents, as animal control officers. 
(3)  The agreement shall specify the authority to enforce animal control ordinances of the city, investigate city animal control ordinance violations, issue summons and complaints for animal control ordinance violations, impoundment of animals, and any other authority and limitations as the city determines are necessary pursuant to the agreement. 
(4)  Any person appointed pursuant to the agreement shall constitute an animal control officer with powers set forth in the agreement and the powers conferred by this chapter. 
(5)  In addition to the powers conferred by this chapter and set forth in the agreement, an animal control officer shall have the powers as are provided in C.R.S. 30-15-104 and 30-15-105. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, impede or obstruct an animal control officer in the performance of any duties. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-37, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 2-2005, 1-25-05, eff. 2-4-05) 
Cross reference- Personnel, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 4-3 - Interfering with enforcement of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, injure, prevent or attempt to prevent the animal wardens, police officers or other designated city personnel in the discharge of their duties under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-38, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-4. - Animal shelter. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to establish an animal shelter for the city to be operated by city personnel, or, at his election and option, he may, subject to the approval of the city council, contract with a private person or organization to operate an animal shelter for and on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-17, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 4-5. - Duty to report animal bites. 
    Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the police department. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person for such bite shall, within twelve (12) hours, report such treatment to the police department, giving the name, age and sex of the person and precise body location of the bite, and such other information as the police department may require. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-6, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, C.R.S. 25-4-601 et seq. 
Sec. 4-6. - Cruelty to animals; aggravated cruelty to animals; neglect of animals; offenses. 
    Nothing in this section shall affect accepted animal husbandry practices utilized by any person in the care of companion or livestock animals or in the extermination of undesirable pests as defined in C.R.S. articles 7, 10, and 43 of title 35. 
    In case of any conflict between this section or C.R.S. 35-43-126, and the wildlife statutes of the state, said wildlife statutes shall control. 
    Nothing in this section shall affect animal care otherwise authorized by law. 
    Nothing in this section shall affect facilities licensed under the provisions of the federal Animal Welfare Act of 1970, 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as amended. 
    Not every act that causes pain and suffering to animals is prohibited by this section. Where the end or object is reasonable and adequate, the act resulting in pain is, in the sense of the statute, necessary or justifiable, as where a surgical operation is performed to save life, or where the act is done to protect life or property, or to minister to some of the necessities of man. 
(a)  (1)  A person commits cruelty to animals if he or she knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence overdrives, overloads, overworks, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beats, allows to be housed in a manner that results in chronic or repeated serious physical harm, carries or confines in or upon any vehicles in a cruel or reckless manner, or otherwise mistreats or neglects any animal, or causes or procures it to be done, or, having the charge or custody of any animal, fails to provide it with proper food, drink, or protection from the weather consistent with the species, breed, and type of animal involved, or abandons an animal. 
(2)  Any person who intentionally abandons a dog or cat commits the offense of cruelty to animals. 
(b)  (1)  A person commits cruelty to animals if he or she recklessly or with criminal negligence tortures, needlessly mutilates, or needlessly kills an animal. 
(2)  A person commits aggravated cruelty to animals if he or she knowingly tortures, needlessly mutilates, or needlessly kills an animal. 
(c)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires. "Serious physical harm" means any of the following: 
(1)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(2)  Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves some temporary, substantial maiming; or 
(3)  Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that results in substantial suffering. 
(d)  A peace officer having authority to act under this section may take possession of and impound an animal that the peace officer has probable cause to believe is a victim of a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or is a victim of a violation of C.R.S. 18-9-204, and as a result of the violation is endangered if it remains with the owner or custodian. 
(e)  Cruelty to animals is a misdemeanor. 
(f)  In addition to any other sentence imposed for a violation of this section, the court may order an offender to complete an anger management treatment program or any other appropriate treatment program. 
(g)  The court shall order an evaluation to be conducted prior to sentencing to assist the court in determining an appropriate sentence. The person ordered to undergo an evaluation shall be required to pay the cost of the evaluation, unless the person qualifies for court-appointed counsel, then the cost will be paid by the city. If the evaluation results in a recommendation of treatment and if the court so finds, the person shall be ordered to complete an anger management treatment program or any other treatment program that the court may deem appropriate. 
(h)  Upon successful completion of an anger management treatment program or any other treatment program deemed appropriate by the court, the court may suspend any fine imposed, except for a five hundred dollar ($500.00) mandatory minimum fine which shall be imposed at the time of sentencing. 
(i)  In addition to any other sentence imposed upon a person for a violation of any criminal law under this title, any person convicted of a second or subsequent conviction for any crime, the underlying factual basis of which has been found by the court to include an act of cruelty to animals, shall be required to pay a mandatory minimum fine of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) and shall be required to complete an anger management treatment program or any other appropriate treatment program. 
(j)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the court from ordering treatment in any appropriate case. 
(k)  This section does not apply to the treatment of pack or draft animals by negligently overdriving, overloading, or overworking them, or the treatment of livestock and other animals used in the farm or ranch production of food, fiber, or other agricultural products when such treatment is in accordance with accepted agricultural animal husbandry practices, the treatment of animals involved in activities regulated pursuant to C.R.S. article 60 of title 12, the treatment of animals involved in research if such research facility is operating under rules set forth by the state or federal government, the treatment of animals involved in rodeos, the treatment of dogs used for legal hunting activities, wildlife nuisances, or to statutes regulating activities concerning wildlife and predator control in the state, including trapping. 
(l)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge brought under this section involving injury or death to a dog that the dog was found running, worrying, or injuring sheep, cattle, or other livestock. 
(m)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to amend or in any manner change the authority of the wildlife commission, as established in C.R.S. title 33, or to prohibit any conduct therein authorized or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-2(a), 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 13-1996, 3-26-96, eff. 4-5-96; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Sec. 4-6.5. - Impounded animals; costs of impoundment, provision, and care; disposition; procedures; application; definition. 
(a)  (1)  a. The owner or custodian of an animal that has been impounded by the shelter operator because of investigation of charges of cruelty to animals pursuant to section 4-6, animal fighting pursuant to section 4-10, or unlawful ownership of a dangerous dog as described in section 4-42, may prevent disposition of the animal by the shelter operator by filing a payment for impoundment, care, and provision costs with the court in an amount determined by the shelter operator to be sufficient to provide for the animal's care and provision by the shelter operator for at least thirty (30) days, including the day on which the animal was taken into custody. 
b.  To the extent practicable, within seventy-two (72) hours after an impoundment described under subparagraph a. of this paragraph (1), upon request from the owner or custodian of the impounded animal, the shelter operator shall allow a licensed veterinarian of the owner's or custodian's choosing and at his or her expense to examine the animal at a time and place selected by the shelter operator, which examination may include taking photographs of the animal and taking biological samples for the purpose of diagnostic testing. 
(2)  The owner or custodian must file the payment: 
a.  Within ten (10) days after the animal is impounded; or 
b.  If the owner or custodian requests a hearing pursuant to subparagraph a. of paragraph (3) of this subsection (a), in accordance with subparagraph c. of paragraph (3) of this subsection (a). 
(3)  a.  Within ten (10) days after the date of impoundment, the owner or custodian may request a hearing in municipal court. The owner or custodian must provide notice to the city attorney of his or her request for a hearing. If the owner or custodian requests a hearing, the court shall hold the hearing within ten (10) days after the request is made. 
b.  At the hearing, the court shall determine, as appropriate: 
1.  Whether costs associated with the impoundment, care, and provision, as determined by the shelter operator, are fair and reasonable and necessary, which costs shall be specifically itemized by the shelter operator prior to the date of the hearing and shall include, at a minimum, an accounting of the costs of upkeep and veterinary services; 
2.  Whether there was sufficient probable cause for the impoundment; and 
3.  If the court finds probable cause for impoundment existed and the owner or custodian elects not to pay the reasonable impoundment, care, or provision costs to prevent disposition, release of the animal to the shelter operator for disposition. 
c.  If probable cause is found at a hearing conducted under this paragraph (3), the owner or custodian shall file payment for costs at the hearing. 
(4)  At the end of the time for which expenses are covered by an initial or any subsequent impoundment, care, and provision payment: 
a.  If the owner or custodian desires to prevent disposition of the animal, the owner or custodian must file a new payment with the court within ten (10) days prior to the previous payment's expiration. 
b.  If the owner or custodian has not timely filed an additional payment for impoundment, care, and provision costs, the shelter operator may determine disposition of the animal unless there is a court order prohibiting disposition. Unless subsection (d) of this section applies, the owner or custodian is liable for any additional costs for the care of, provision for, or disposal of the animal. 
(b)  (1)  Failure to pay the impoundment, care, and provision costs pursuant to subsection (a) of this section results in the forfeiture of the right to contest those costs and any ownership rights to the animal in question. 
(2)  A dog that is not claimed by its owner within five (5) days after being eligible for release from impoundment for investigation of a charge of unlawful ownership of a dangerous dog as described in section 4-42 is deemed abandoned and may be disposed of as the shelter operator deems proper. 
(3)  If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, an impounded animal is experiencing extreme pain or suffering or is severely injured past recovery, severely disabled past recovery, or severely diseased past recovery, the animal may be euthanized without a court order. 
(c)  The court shall order the shelter operator to refund to the owner or custodian all impoundment, care, and provision payments made for the animal if, after trial, a judge or jury enters or returns in favor of the owner or custodian a verdict of not guilty for all charges related to the original impoundment of the animal. 
(d)  (1)  With respect to the sale of an animal, the proceeds are first applied to the costs of the sale and then to the expenses for the care of and provision for the animal during impoundment and the pendency of the sale, including expenses incurred by the shelter operator that have not been paid by the owner or custodian. If the owner of the animal is convicted of cruelty to animals, animal fighting, or unlawful ownership of a dangerous dog, or is found by court order to have mistreated, neglected, or abandoned the animal, the remaining proceeds, if any, are paid to the shelter operator. If the owner of the animal is not convicted of such charges or is not found by court order to have mistreated, neglected, or abandoned the animal, the shelter operator shall pay over the remaining proceeds, if any, to the owner of the animal. 
(2)  If the owner of the animal cannot be found, the court shall pay any remaining proceeds after all other expenses have been paid to the shelter operator into the City of Sterling General Fund. An owner claiming the remaining proceeds must make the claim within one (1) year after the payment of the proceeds to the shelter operator. A claim not so presented to the court is forever barred unless the court, by proper order made in any case, otherwise decrees. The shelter operator shall pay to the claimant any refund ordered by court decree. 
(3)  At least six (6) days prior to sale of the animal, the shelter operator shall provide written notice to the owner, at the owner's last-known address, of the time and place of the sale of the animal. 
(4)  If the owner of the animal is unknown, the shelter operator shall publish for one (1) week, in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction in which the animal was found, notice of sale of the animal and shall further post notice of the sale of the animal at a place provided for public notices in the jurisdiction in which the sale will take place, at least five (5) days prior to the sale. 
(5)  This subsection (d) does not apply to the disposition of an animal for a fee by: 
a.  Adoption of an animal; 
b.  Release of an animal to a rescue group licensed pursuant to C.R.S. title 35, article 80; 
c.  Release of an animal to another pet animal facility licensed pursuant to C.R.S. title 35, article 80; or 
d.  Release of an animal to a rehabilitator licensed by the parks and wildlife division or the United States fish and wildlife service. 
(Ord. No. 13-2018, 10-9-18, eff. 10-19-18) 
Sec. 4-7. - Poisoning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city manager or his designated representative to poison any domestic animal or to distribute poison or toxicants on public or private property in any manner whatsoever, the natural consequence of which would be the poisoning of any domestic animal. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-2(b), 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-8. - Forfeiture of animals. 
(a)  Upon the motion of the prosecuting attorney or upon the court's own motion, after the conviction of a defendant for cruelty to animals as described in this chapter, or for animal fighting as described in this chapter, the court may order the forfeiture of any animal owned by or in the custody of the defendant that: 
(1)  Was abused, neglected, mistreated, injured, or used by the defendant during the course of the criminal episode that gave rise to such conviction; 
(2)  Participated in or was affected by any act set forth in this chapter pertaining to animal fighting. 
(b)  (1)  If an animal is the subject of a motion made under subsection (a) of this section and is not owned by the defendant, the court may nevertheless enter an order of forfeiture of the animal if the court finds that: 
a.  The animal was abandoned prior to the criminal episode described in subsection (a) of this section; 
b.  The owner of the animal is unknown; or 
c.  The owner of the animal is known but cannot be located. 
(2)  Any person who contests a motion brought under this section shall establish such person's standing as a true owner of the animal. The factors to be considered by the court in determining whether such person is a true owner shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Whether the person was the primary user, custodian, or possessor of the animal; 
b.  Whether there is evidence that ownership of the animal is vested in the person; 
c.  Whether consideration was paid for the purchase of the animal, and, if so, how much of the consideration was furnished by the person. 
(3)  If the court determines that a person other than the defendant is the true owner of the animal, the court may not enter an order forfeiting the animal under this section unless the court finds: 
a.  The true owner was involved in the criminal episode described in subsection (a) of this section; 
b.  The true owner knew or reasonably should have known of the criminal episode described in subsection (a) of this section and failed to take all reasonable steps available to him or her to prevent it; or 
c.  Ownership of the animal was conveyed to the true owner in order to avoid a forfeiture. 
(c)  An order of forfeiture entered pursuant to this section shall provide for the immediate disposition of the forfeited animal by any means described in C.R.S. 18-9-201(2.5), other than return to the owner. The court shall order the immediate disposition of the forfeited animal by euthanasia if, in the opinion of a veterinarian, such animal is experiencing extreme pain or suffering. 
(d)  The owner or custodian of an animal that is the subject of a motion brought under this section shall be liable for the cost of the care, keeping, transport, or disposal of the animal. In no event shall the prosecuting attorney or the office of the prosecuting attorney be liable for such cost. 
(e)  The court in its discretion may order a forfeiture authorized by this section as an element of sentencing, as a condition of probation, or as a condition of a deferred sentence. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-2(c), 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Sec. 4-9. - Display or sale of dyed immature animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, sell, barter or give away dyed, colored or in any way artificially treated baby chicks, ducklings, fowl, rabbits or any animals as pets, playthings, novelties, gifts or for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-2(d), 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-10. - Animal fighting-Penalty. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall cause, sponsor, arrange, hold, or encourage a fight between animals for the purpose of monetary gain or entertainment. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a person encourages a fight between animals for the purpose of monetary gain or entertainment if he or she: 
a.  Is knowingly present at or wagers on such a fight; 
b.  Owns, trains, transports, possesses, breeds, sells, transfers, or equips an animal with the intent that such animal will be engaged in such a fight; 
c.  Knowingly allows any such fight to occur on any property owned or controlled by him; 
d.  Knowingly allows any animal used for such a fight to be kept, boarded, housed, or trained on, or transported in, any property owned or controlled by him; 
e.  Knowingly uses any means of communication for the purpose of promoting such a fight; or 
f.  Knowingly possesses any animal used for such a fight or any device intended to enhance the animal's fighting ability. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit normal hunting practices as approved by the division of wildlife. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the training of animals or the use of equipment in the training of animals for any purpose not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-2(e), 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Sec. 4-11. - Leaving unattended animal hitched to vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any animal unattended and attached to any carriage, wagon, cart, sled, any motorized vehicle or any other vehicle in any street, avenue, alley or public parking area within the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-4, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-12. - Sale, keeping of certain animals prohibited; stock animals. 
(a)  Poisonous reptiles; nondomestic animals . It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep, maintain, harbor or permit in the city any poisonous reptile or any animal other than a domestic animal or pet animal. 
(b)  Animals of endangered species. It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep or maintain, harbor or permit in the city any animal belonging to any endangered species of animal as defined by the United States Department of the Interior or the state department of natural resources. 
(c)  Keeping of stock animals; riding or driving stock animals on street or sidewalk: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to keep stock animals within the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to herd or drive any stock animals through the streets without having the animals under control by means of a rope, strap or other device by which they may be led, unless such animals are being driven in the harness or hauled. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to ride or drive any stock animal upon or across any constructed sidewalk in the city, except where necessary during an authorized parade. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to a bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park, a bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research, a circus duly authorized to do business in the city, or veterinary clinics or veterinary hospitals. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-3, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-2007, adopted June 12, 2007, deleted § 4-13, which pertained to vicious animals and derived from Ord. No. 18-1988, adopted November 22, 1988, effective December 5, 1988. 
Sec. 4-14. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be the same as that specifically provided in section 2-243, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty and such other restrictions on the penalty as may be set forth in section 1-15. In the event that a violation occurs pursuant to this section and a specific penalty is not set forth in section 2-243, the penalty shall be at the court's discretion. It shall, however, still be subject to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 38-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 38-1995, adopted December 12, 1995, effective December 22, 1995, amended Chapter 4 by adding a new Art. IV. For purposes of classification, such new provisions were included herein as § 4-14 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 4-15. - Backyard breeder. 
    Dog breeding license required: Any person, except for someone having a valid kennel license who breeds a female dog must obtain an animal breeding permit issued by the city or its animal control representative. The permit fee is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In order to prevent the overbreeding of animals, each permit authorizes the whelping of no more than one (1) litter per female dog in any twelve-month period and no more than one (1) litter per domestic household in any twelve-month period. 
    Exception: The fee may be waived if the owner provides as proof a certificate of surgical sterilization or spaying of the female dog within two (2) weeks of the breeding date or prior to whelping. 
    The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine set by the court, which fine shall be a minimum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) and a maximum of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00). 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07; Ord. No. 11-2018, 9-12-18, eff. 9-22-18) 
Sec. 4-16. - Tampering or drugging of livestock. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Exhibition means a show or sale of livestock at a fair or elsewhere in this state that is sponsored by or under the authority of the state or any unit of local government or any agricultural, horticultural, or livestock society, association, or corporation. 
(2)  Livestock means any domestic animal generally used for food or in the production of food, including, but not limited to, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry, swine, or llamas. 
(3)  Sabotage means intentionally tampering with an animal belonging to or owned by another person that has been registered, entered, or exhibited in any exhibition or raised for the apparent purpose of being entered in an exhibition. 
(4)  Tamper means any of the following: 
a.  Treatment of livestock in such a manner that food derived from the livestock would be considered adulterated under the Colorado Food and Drug Act, part 4 of C.R.S. article 5 of title 25; 
b.  The injection, use, or administration of any drug that is prohibited by any federal, state, or local law or any drug that is used in a manner prohibited by federal law or the law of this state or any locality thereof; 
c.  The injection or other internal or external administration of any product or material, whether gas, solid, or liquid, to an animal for the purposes of deception, including concealing, enhancing, or transforming the true conformation, configuration, color, breed, condition, or age of the animal or making the animal appear more sound than the animal would appear otherwise; 
d.  The use or administration for cosmetic purposes of steroids, growth stimulants, or internal artificial filling, including paraffin, silicone injection, or any other substance; 
e.  The use or application of any drug or feed additive affecting the central nervous system of the animal; 
f.  The use or administration of diuretics for cosmetic purposes; 
g.  The manipulation or removal of tissue, by surgery or otherwise, so as to change, transform, or enhance the true conformation or configuration of the animal; 
h.  Subjecting the animal to inhumane conditions or procedures for the purpose of concealing, enhancing, or transforming the true conformation, configuration, condition, or age of the animal or making the animal appear more sound than the animal would appear otherwise; 
i.  Attaching to the animal's hide foreign objects, including hair or hair substitutes, cloth, and fibers, for the purpose of deception, including concealing, enhancing, or transforming the true conformation, configuration, color, breed, condition, or age of the animal or making the animal appear more sound than the animal would appear otherwise; 
j.  Substituting a different animal for the animal registered or entered in the exhibition without the permission of a responsible official of the exhibition. 
(5)  Tamper does not include any action taken or activity performed or administered by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with instructions of a licensed veterinarian if the action or activity was undertaken for accepted medical purposes during the course of a valid veterinarian-client-patient relationship or any action taken as part of accepted grooming, ranching, commercial, or medical practices. "Tampering" shall not be construed to include normal ranching practices. 
(b)  (1)  No person shall commit any act in this state that would constitute tampering with or sabotaging any livestock that has been registered, entered, or exhibited in any exhibition in this state. 
(2)  No person shall administer, dispense, distribute, manufacture, possess, sell, or use any drug to or for livestock unless such drug is approved by the United States food and drug administration or the United States department of agriculture; except that, if either agency has approved an application submitted for investigational use in accordance with the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the drug may be used only for the approved investigational use. 
(3)  No person shall administer, distribute, possess, sell, or use any dangerous drug to or for livestock unless the drug is accompanied by a prescription issued by a licensed veterinarian entitled to practice in this state. 
(4)  The name and photograph of any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be made available for publication in newspapers of general circulation and trade journals, unless such person is a minor. 
(Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Secs. 4-17-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-41. - Running at large 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow the dog to run at large in the city unless such dog is under the reasonable control of the owner. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed under such reasonable control when such dog is on its owner's property or on a leash or if it is at heel of its owner. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed not under reasonable control when such dog inflicts damage or injury by biting, by jumping upon, by pollution of vegetation, or by other means whatsoever to the person or property of anyone other than the owner, except in the defense of the owner, his family or property. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-7, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-42. - Unlawful ownership of dangerous dog. 
(a)  Violation of this section is subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-15 and as set forth in this section. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears, or skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment or any physical injury that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
(2)  Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
a.  Inflicts bodily or serious bodily injury upon or causes the death of a person or domestic animal; 
b.  Demonstrates tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may inflict bodily or serious bodily injury upon or cause the death of any person or domestic animal; or 
c.  Engages in or is trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in C.R.S. 18-9-204. 
(3)  Dog means any domesticated animal related to the fox, wolf, coyote, or jackal. 
(4)  Domestic animal means any dog, cat, or livestock. 
(5)  Owner or owns means any person, firm, corporation, or organization owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having financial or property interest in, or having control or custody of a domestic animal, as the term is defined in subsection (a)(4), including a dangerous dog as the term is defined in subsection (a)(2). 
(6)  Serious bodily injury has the same meaning as such term is defined in C.R.S. 18-1-901(3)(p). 
(b)  (1)  A person commits ownership of a dangerous dog if such person owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, has a financial or property interest in, or has custody or control over a dangerous dog. 
(2)  Any owner who violates subsection (b)(1) whose dog inflicts bodily injury upon any person commits an offense against this section. 
(3)  Any owner who violates subsection (b)(1) whose dog inflicts serious bodily injury to a person commits an offense against this section. 
(4)  Any owner who violates subsection (b)(1) whose dog causes the death of a person commits an offense against this section. 
(5)  Any owner who violates subsection (b)(1) whose dog injures or destroys any domestic animal commits an offense against this section. 
(6)  The court shall order any owner of a dangerous dog who has been convicted of a violation of this section to: 
a.  Confine the dangerous dog in a building or enclosure designed to be escape-proof and, whenever the dog is outside of the building or enclosure, keep the dog under the owner's control by use of a leash. The owner shall post a conspicuous warning sign on the building or enclosure notifying others that a dangerous dog is housed in the building or enclosure. The owner shall obtain an insurance policy with a minimum liability amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering the dangerous dog. In addition, if the conviction is for a second or subsequent offense, the dangerous dog shall also be muzzled whenever it is outside of the building or enclosure. 
b.  Immediately report to an animal control officer in writing any material change in the dangerous dog's situation, including but not limited to a change, transfer, or termination of ownership, change of address, escape, or death. 
c.  At the owner's expense, permanently identify the dangerous dog through the implantation of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. A veterinarian or licensed shelter that implants a microchip in a dangerous dog shall report the microchipping information to an animal control officer, in writing, within ten (10) days after implantation of the microchip. 
d.  Prior to the implantation of the microchip, pay a nonrefundable dangerous dog microchip license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city. 
e.  Prior to the dangerous dog receiving any service or treatment, disclose in writing to any provider of the service or treatment, including but not limited to a veterinary health care worker, dog groomer, humane agency staff person, pet animal care facility staff person, professional dog handler, or dog trainer, each acting in the performance of his or her respective duties, that the dangerous dog has been the subject of a conviction of a violation of this section. 
f.  Prior to a change, transfer, or termination of ownership of a dangerous dog, disclose in writing to the prospective owner that the dangerous dog has been the subject of a conviction of a violation of this section. 
(7)  In addition to any other penalty, upon an owner's entry of a guilty plea or the return of a verdict of guilty by a judge or jury or a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution for a violation that results in serious bodily injury to a person or death to a person or domestic animal or for a second or subsequent violation of subsections (b)(2) or (b)(5) resulting in a conviction or a deferred judgment or a deferred prosecution involving the same dog of the same owner, the court shall order that the dangerous dog be immediately confiscated and placed in a public animal shelter and shall order that, upon exhaustion of any right an owner has to appeal a conviction based on a violation of this subsection (b), the owner's dangerous dog be destroyed by lethal injection administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(8)  In addition to any other penalty, for a second or subsequent violation of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(5) resulting in a conviction or a deferred judgment or a deferred prosecution involving the same dog of a different owner, the court may order that the dangerous dog be immediately confiscated and placed in a public animal shelter and that, upon exhaustion of any right an owner has to appeal a conviction based on a violation of this subsection (b), the owner's dangerous dog be destroyed by lethal injection administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(9)  a.  An affirmative defense to the violation of this subsection (b) shall be: 
1.  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a domestic animal, the domestic animal was at large, was an astray, and entered upon the property of the owner and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property. 
2.  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a domestic animal, said animal was biting or otherwise attacking the dangerous dog or its owner. 
3.  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against the dog's owner, and the attack did not occur on the owner's property. 
4.  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against a person on the owner's property or the property itself and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property; or 
5.  That the person who was the victim of the attack by the dangerous dog tormented, provoked, abused, or inflicted injury upon the dog in such an extreme manner which resulted in the attack. 
b.  The affirmative defenses set forth in subparagraph (9)a. shall not apply to any dog that has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as said term is described in C.R.S. 18-9-204. 
(c)  Upon taking an owner into custody for an alleged violation of this section or the issuing of a summons and complaint to the owner, the owner's dangerous dog may be taken into custody and placed in a public animal shelter, at the owner's expense, pending final disposition of the charge against the owner. In addition, in the event the court sets bail for an owner's release from custody pending final disposition, the court may require, as a condition of bond, that the owner's dangerous dog be placed by an animal control officer, at the owner's expense, in a location selected by the animal control officer, including a public animal shelter, licensed boarding facility, or veterinarian's clinic, pending final disposition of the alleged violation of this section. The owner shall be liable for the total cost of board and care for a dog placed pursuant to this subsection (c). 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  To any dog that is used by a peace officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of peace officer duties; 
(2)  To any dog that inflicts bodily or serious bodily injury to any veterinary health care worker, dog groomer, humane agency personnel, professional dog handler, or trainer each acting in the performance of his or her respective duties, unless the owner is subject to a court order issued pursuant to subsection (b)(6) of this section and the owner has failed to comply with the provisions of subsection (b)(6)e.; or 
(3)  To any dog that inflicts injury upon or causes the death of a domestic animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of or under the control of the dog's owner and the injury or death was to a domestic animal naturally associated with the work of such dog. 
(e)  If impoundment of a dangerous dog running at large cannot be made with safety to the animal control officer or other persons, the dog may be destroyed by authorized police officials without notice to the owner or harborer. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-8, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 23-2006, 11-28-06, eff. 12-8-06) 
Sec. 4-43. - Guard dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the dog is physically confined to a specific enclosed area and is under complete and absolute control, and the area posted as required by this section. The area or premises in which a guard dog is confined must be conspicuously posted every fifty (50) feet with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high, with the following legend: "Warning - These Premises Patrolled by Guard Dogs Trained to Attack," accompanied by a decal that provides pictorial warning of a guard dog. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-9, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-44. - Habitual and persistent barking dog. 
(a)  Harboring a habitual and persistent barking dog . A dog owner commits an offense if he/she fails to prevent his/her dog from disturbing the peace of any person by loud, habitual and persistent barking, howling, yelping, or whining, whether the dog is on or off the dog owner's property. 
(b)  Warning notices . An animal control officer will issue a warning notice to the dog owner after receiving a complaint of a barking dog. The complainant must provide the dog owner's address, dog description, and the date and duration of the violation. The dog owner will be allowed three (3) days from issuance of the warning notice to correct the problem before being charged under the summons and complaint process. 
(c)  Citations/summons and complaints . After the three-day grace period and within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the warning notice, a citation, or summons and complaint may be issued if two (2) persons from separate households have signed complaints and are willing to testify at trial. The complainants must provide the dog owner's address, dog description, date and duration of violation, but need not be reporting the same date and time of a violation. In the event there is only one (1) occupied residence in the immediate area of the location of the barking dog, only one (1) complaining witness shall be required to sign the complaint prior to the issuance of a summons and complaint if the complaining witness is willing to testify at trial. 
(d)  Service of warning notices . A dog owner shall be deemed to have received and been issued a warning under this subsection if the warning was personally served on the dog owner, posted on the residence of the dog owner, or placed in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the dog owner. Warning notices so served shall constitute notice to all members of that residence. 
(e)  Second offense . If a second complaint of a barking dog is received within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the first citation or summons and complaint, a citation or summons and complaint for a second offense may be issued if two (2) persons from separate households have signed complaints and are willing to testify at trial, without issuing a warning notice. 
(f)  Proof required for conviction . No person shall be convicted at trial of violating this section unless two (2) persons from separate households in the immediate area have signed complaints and testified to the persistent, habitual, and offensive noise generated by a barking dog. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-10, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Secs. 4-45-4-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-56. - Authority to impound dogs in violation of chapter; notice in lieu of impoundment. 
    The animal wardens or other authorized personnel, at their discretion, may either impound any dog which they reasonably feel to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or, in lieu of impoundment, may notify the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog in writing that they reasonably feel that such dog was at a stated date and location in violation of this chapter. Such notice shall set forth the rabies tag number, the time of violation, the location of the violation and the general nature of the violation. It shall be served upon the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog or upon any person over the age of eighteen (18) years at the residence of such owner, possessor or keeper, or it may be sent by regular mail to the last known address of such owner, possessor or keeper. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-18, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-57. - Proceedings against owner when dog is impounded. 
    If a dog is impounded, the animal warden or other authorized personnel may immediately institute proceedings in the municipal court of the city on behalf of the city against the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog, if known, charging the owner, possessor or keeper with a violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing the animal warden or any other person from instituting a proceeding in the municipal court of the city for violation of this chapter when there is no provision for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-19, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-58. - Care of impounded dogs. 
    Any dog impounded shall be properly and humanely fed and watered and housed. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-20, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-59. - Disposition of impounded dogs-Redemption by owner. 
(a)  Notice of impoundment . As soon as practicable after impoundment, notice of impoundment shall be given to the owner. The notice shall consist of a letter sent by regular mail to the last known address of such owner, possessor or keeper of the dog. 
(b)  Redemption . Any impounded dog which may be redeemed may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the impoundment fee, care and feeding charges, and such other costs as may be assessed. If such dog is not redeemed within three (3) days after mailing of the notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the dog shall be considered abandoned and may be placed for adoption subject to payment of the impoundment fees, care and feeding charges and other such costs, or the dog may be humanely euthanized. 
(c)  Filing of certificate of vaccination . The dog may be redeemed if all charges listed in subsection (b) of this section are paid; however, a current certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented to the police department within three (3) working days, excluding Saturdays and Sundays, of removal of the dog from the impoundment facility. If the certificate of vaccination is not filed within this time period, each day of failure to present the certificate shall constitute a separate and continuing violation. 
(d)  Release to bona fide organization . Notwithstanding the other provisions contained within this section, bona fide organizations dedicated to the placement of animals into suitable homes shall be given dogs from the shelter upon request by the organization. When an organization removes an impounded dog or dogs from the shelter, such organization shall not be required to comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c). Bona fide organization shall be defined as an organization which has been approved by the city manager for the placement of impounded dogs into suitable environments. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-21, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 38-1996, 12-10-96, eff. 12-20-96) 
Sec. 4-60. - Same-Disposition when owner cannot be located. 
    If a complaint has not been filed in the municipal court of the city because the owner, possessor or keeper of an impounded dog is not known or cannot be located, and such dog has not been claimed within three (3) days from the date of impoundment, not counting the first day of impoundment, the dog may be adopted as provided for in this division or may be humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-22, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-61. - Failure to pay fees. 
    All fees provided for in this division shall be set by the city council. If any person fails, neglects or refuses to pay such fees, then such dog becomes the property of the city and may be adopted as provided for in this division or may be humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-23, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-62. - Adoption. 
(a)  Any dog not redeemed from impoundment under this division shall become the property of the shelter operator and may be kept by the shelter operator after the time period provided for in this division in order to place it for adoption in a suitable home. It is the policy of the city to keep healthy, adoptable dogs for at least two (2) more days after the time period provided for in this division, if there is sufficient space available at the city's existing impoundment facility. 
(b)  Animals eligible for adoption become the responsibility of the shelter operator. The shelter operator will establish all rules, conditions, and fees relevant to adoption. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-26, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07; Ord. No. 17-2018, 11-13-18, eff. 11-23-18) 
Sec. 4-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-2007, adopted June 12, 2007, effective June 22, 2007, deleted § 4-63, which pertained to refund of adoption fee and derived from Ord. No. 18-1988, adopted November 22, 1988, effective December 5, 1988. 
Sec. 4-64. - Attempting to avoid payment of fines and fees by applying for adoption of dog. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, possessor, or keeper of a dog to apply for adoption of that dog in order to avoid the payment of fines and impoundment fees properly chargeable against the owner, possessor or keeper under this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-28, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-65. - Voluntary impoundment. 
    The actual owner of any dog who no longer wishes to keep the dog or who is unable or unwilling to care for the dog may deliver the dog to the animal shelter. Upon the signing of a waiver and release by the person, the city shall assume ownership of the dog and shall dispose of the dog by adoption as provided for in this division or by humane euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-24, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-66. - Delivering dog belonging to another for impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deliver to the city a dog belonging to another for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-25, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Secs. 4-67-4-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, C.R.S. 25-4-601 et seq. 

Sec. 4-81. - Vaccination required. 
    Every owner of a dog three (3) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by or under the immediate supervision of a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the state. All dogs vaccinated at three (3) months of age or older shall be revaccinated within one (1) year from the original vaccination. Any person who acquires any dog not properly vaccinated shall, within thirty (30) days following such acquisition, have such dog so vaccinated. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this section within thirty (30) days after having moved into the city. A legally acceptable certificate of vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian to the owner of the dog in any municipality, county or state is hereby deemed acceptable and valid under this section until such time as the certificate expires, whereupon the dog must be revaccinated. 
    Subsequent vaccinations against rabies shall be performed every three (3) years or no more frequently than is recommended in the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control as promulgated by the National Association Of State Public Health Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-11, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 12-2007, 6-12-07, eff. 6-22-07) 
Sec. 4-82. - Duties of person performing vaccination; certificate; tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person legally authorized to perform vaccinations on dogs, when inoculating any dog, to fill out one (1) triplicate certificate of inoculation obtained from the state department of health, or similar form providing the same information, and immediately present a copy thereof to the owner or harborer of the inoculated dog along with a tag approved by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians for the year in which the vaccination occurs. The tag shall be attached to the collar of the inoculated dog. The person performing the vaccination shall retain a record of all vaccinations in his office and shall forward to the city weekly a copy of the certificate of inoculation for any dog so inoculated. Failure or refusal by the person performing the vaccinations to forward to the city a record of all vaccinations shall result in the city attorney filing a letter of complaint with the state board of veterinary medicine. 
(b)  The copy of the certificate given the owner or harborer of the inoculated dog shall be retained by the owner or harborer for inspection by any authorized representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-12, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-83. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a dog to fail to vaccinate the dog as provided in this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or forged rabies vaccination certificate. It shall also be unlawful for any person to use any rabies tag for any dog other than the dog for which such tag was originally issued. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-13, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-84. - Confinement of dogs. 
(a)  A dog which is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin or a dog which appears to be infected with rabies or a dog which is suspected to have been exposed to an animal infected with rabies shall be reported to the police department. Confinement shall be as ordered by the Northeast Colorado Health Department. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs whose owners cannot be located shall be confined in the city animal shelter. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person or appears to be infected with rabies shall, on demand, produce the dog for confinement as prescribed in this section. It shall be unlawful to refuse to produce the dog, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-15, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-85. - Unauthorized removal of confined dogs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog which has been confined as authorized in this division, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-16, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-86. - Euthanization of dogs suffering from rabies. 
    If a licensed veterinarian determines a dog is suffering from rabies, it shall be euthanized forthwith by the police department or a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-14, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 7-2008, 6-24-08, eff. 7-4-08) 
Secs. 4-87-4-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-111. - Authority to dispose of nuisance strays. 
    If it is determined by the city manager or his authorized representative that a cat is a stray and has become a public nuisance, the cat may be disposed of by the police department at the direction of the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-32, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 11. 
Secs. 4-112-4-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-126. - Voluntary impoundment. 
    The actual owner of any cat who no longer wishes to keep the cat or who is unable or unwilling to care for the cat may deliver the cat to the animal shelter. Upon the signing of a waiver and release by the person, the city shall assume ownership of the cat and may dispose of the cat by humanely euthanizing the cat. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-35, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-127. - Delivering cat belonging to another for impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deliver to the city a cat belonging to another for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-36, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Secs. 4-128-4-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 4-141. - Vaccination required. 
    Every owner of a cat three (3) months of age or older shall have such cat vaccinated against rabies by or under the immediate supervision of a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the state. All cats vaccinated at three (3) months of age or older shall be revaccinated within one (1) year from the original vaccination. Subsequent vaccinations shall be performed prior to expiration of the period for which vaccinated. Any person who acquires any cat not properly vaccinated shall, within thirty (30) days following such acquisition, have such cat so vaccinated. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this section within thirty (30) days after having moved into the city. Any legally acceptable certificate of vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian to the owner of a cat in any municipality, county or state is hereby deemed acceptable and valid under this section until such time as the certificate expires, whereupon the cat must be revaccinated. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-29, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-142. - Duties of person performing vaccination; certificate; tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person legally authorized to perform vaccinations on cats, when inoculating any cat, to fill out one (1) triplicate certificate of inoculation obtained from the state department of health, or similar form providing the same information, and immediately present a copy thereof to the owner or harborer of the inoculated cat, along with a tag approved by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians for the year in which the vaccination occurs. The tag shall be attached to the collar of the inoculated cat. The person performing the vaccination shall retain a record of all vaccinations in his office and shall forward to the city weekly a copy of the certificate of inoculation for any cat so inoculated. 
(b)  The copy of the certificate given the owner or harborer of the inoculated cat shall be retained by the owner or harborer for inspection by any authorized representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-30, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-143. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a cat to fail to vaccinate the cat as provided in this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or forged rabies vaccination certificate. It shall also be unlawful for any person to use any rabies tag for any cat other than the cat for which such tag was originally issued. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-31, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-144. - Confinement of cats. 
(a)  A cat which is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin or a cat which appears to be infected with rabies or a cat which is suspected to have been exposed to an animal infected with rabies shall be reported to the police department. Confinement shall be as ordered by the Northeast Colorado Health Department. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray cats whose owners cannot be located shall be confined in the city animal shelter. 
(b)  The owner of any cat which has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person or appears to be infected with rabies shall, on demand, produce the cat for confinement as prescribed in this section. It shall be unlawful to refuse to produce the cat, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-33, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-145. - Unauthorized removal of confined cats prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any cat which has been confined as authorized in this division, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-34, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-146. - Redemption of confined cats. 
    A cat confined as authorized by this division may be redeemed if a current certificate of vaccination is presented to the police department within three (3) working days, excluding Saturdays and Sundays, of removal of the cat from the impoundment facility. If the certificate of vaccination is not filed within this time period, each day of failure to present the certificate shall constitute a separate and continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-32, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-147. - Euthanization of cats suffering from rabies. 
    If a licensed veterinarian determines a cat is suffering from rabies, it shall be euthanized forthwith by the police department or a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 18-1988, § 5-32, 11-22-88, eff. 12-5-88; Ord. No. 7-2008, 6-24-08, eff. 7-4-08) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works board to decide appeals, § 8-5. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention standards and codes adopted, § 7-66 et seq.; standards for flood hazard reduction for construction materials and methods, § 8-66(2); specific standards in all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, § 8-67; contractor's license, § 9-56 et seq.; license required for moving of buildings, § 9-91 et seq.; burglar, fire and police emergency alarm systems regulated, § 9-296 et seq.; trailers and trailer parks, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Adoption of codes by reference, C.R.S. 31-16-201; safety in buildings, C.R.S. 9-1-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Applicability of codes adopted by chapter. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Code and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any of the codes adopted in this chapter. All remedies, fees and penalties provided by such codes are adopted as part of this chapter and shall apply as if specifically set forth in full in this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the maximum penalty for violation of the codes adopted by this chapter shall be as set forth in section 1-15. 
(Code 1961, § 7-7) 
Sec. 5-2. - Conditions on issuance of building permit. 
    In addition to the requirements of the codes adopted by this chapter, the following shall be prerequisites to the issuance of a building permit, and no building permit shall be issued until the requirements contained in this section are met: 
(1)  Flood damage protection. The director of public works must determine that the proposed building site is reasonably safe from flooding; or, if a flood hazard exists, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, must: 
a.  Be designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
c.  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(2)  Installation of public improvements. 
a.  Applications for building permits shall be reviewed by the director of public works or his designated representative to determine whether the proposed construction will require the installation or construction of public improvements such as street paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, or other public improvements. 
b.  If it is determined by the director of public works or his designated representative that any such public improvements are necessitated by the proposed construction, a condition shall be inserted in the building permit which shall require the construction of such public improvement by the permittee and the dedication thereof to the city. The cost of any such improvements shall be borne by the permittee, and the construction thereof shall be at the sole cost, risk and expense of the permittee, subject to the provisions of any applicable city ordinances, regulations or policies. 
c.  Any contractor holding a contractor's license pursuant to section 9-63 is subject to suspension or revocation procedures as provided for in section 9-41 et seq. Failure to comply with the provisions for public improvements required by this section shall be violations of this Code and, as such, shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license. 
d.  All such improvements are to be constructed in full compliance with the City of Sterling Engineering Specifications, which are adopted by reference in their entirety, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Proof of contractor's license. 
a.  A building permit shall not be issued for any construction or project until the applicant shows proof that the general contractor has a current contractor's license or until it is determined by the director of public works that no contractor, as defined in section 9-41 et seq., will be working on the project. 
b.  A building permit may be issued to a general contractor upon showing proof that the general contractor has a current license. It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor to ensure that all subcontractors have obtained necessary licenses. Allowing a nonlicensed subcontractor to work on a project within the city will be sufficient cause for the revocation of the building permit. 
c.  If the building permit is issued to a person exempt from a contractor's license and the person allows work to be completed by a contractor, as defined in section 9-41 et seq., who does not hold a license, the building permit and certificate of occupancy may be revoked. 
(Code 1961, § 7-8) 
Secs. 5-3-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 5-16. - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted. 
(a)  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building officials, together with the appendices, tables, charts, lists and maps contained therein, with the following amendments, is hereby adopted: 
(1)  Sec. 205.1, General is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 205.1. General. The public works board of the City of Sterling shall hear and decide appeals of the orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. All references to the board of appeals in this code shall mean the public works board of the City of Sterling. 
(2)  Sec. 801.2, Costs is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 801.2. Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from such fund as designated in the budgetary section of the general operating budget of the city and as designated by the director of public works. 
(3)  Sec.802.1, General is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 802.1. General. The director of public works shall have the authority to authorize payment to pay from budgeted funds to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings. 
(4)  Sec. 802.2, Maintenance of fund is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 802.2. Maintenance of fund. The director of public works may at any time transfer, upon the approval of the city manager, such funds out of the budgeted funds for the department of public works as he may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of repair or demolition. All funds collected under the proceedings hereinafter provided shall be paid to the director of finance and designated for general revenue income purposes. 
(b)  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition, as amended, is enacted as the code for the abatement of dangerous buildings of the city. At least three (3) copies of the 1994 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as amended hereby, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be available at all times for public use and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 12-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 26-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95; Ord. No. 2-2009, 1-27-09, eff. 2-6-09) 
State Law reference- Copies to be kept in the office of the city clerk, C.R.S. 31-16-206. 
Secs. 5-17-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6-2002, adopted Feb. 26, 2002, effective March 8, 2002, amended the title of Art. III to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 5-31. - International Building Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the appendices, except for appendices A, B, D, G, H, and K, with the following amendments, is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Building Code, 2006 edition, shall be available at the city clerk's office, for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(b)  Any references to plumbing or electrical requirements, with the exception of references made to required fixtures, shall be excepted from the International Building Code. 
(c)  Conflicting provisions. Where this code conflicts with other codes, laws, ordinances or standards, as required by state or federal law, then the most restrictive requirement shall be applied. 
(d)  Interpretations. When necessary to interpret provisions of the building code, the International Building Code Handbook shall be used as a guide. 
(Code 1961, § 7-1; Ord. No. 12-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 21-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 7-31-92; Ord. No. 26-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95; Ord. No. 6-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 16-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
State Law reference- Copies to be kept in office of the city clerk, C.R.S. 31-16-206. 
Sec. 5-32. - Below-grade residential crawl- space construction. 
    New construction and substantial improvement of any below-grade crawlspace shall: 
(a)  Have the interior grade of elevation that is below base flood elevation no lower than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent grade; 
(b)  Have the height of the below-grade crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall, not exceed four (4) feet at any point; 
(c)  Have an adequate drainage system that allows floodwaters to drain from the interior area of the crawlspace following a flood; 
(d)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and be capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads; 
(e)  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(f)  Be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(g)  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(h)  Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 26-2002, 9-10-02, eff. 9-20-02) 
Sec. 5-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 12-1992, adopted April 14, 1992, effective April 27, 1992, repealed § 5-33 in its entirety. Formerly, § 5-33 pertained to fire limits and derived from § 7-2 of the 1961 Code. 
Secs. 5-34-5-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7-2002, adopted Feb. 26, 2002, effective March 8, 2002, amended the title of Art. IV to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 5-43. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
    The International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Mechanical Code shall be available at the city clerk's office for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(Ord. No. 12-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 7-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 17-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
State Law reference- Copies to be kept in the city clerk's office, C.R.S. 31-16-206. 
Secs. 5-44-5-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-2002, adopted Feb. 26, 2002, effective March 8, 2002, amended the title of Art. V to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 5-56. - International Residential Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Residential Code, 2006 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, together with the appendices, except for appendices E, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, and Q, with the following amendments, is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Residential Code, 2006 edition, shall be available at the city clerk's office, for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(b)  Any references to plumbing or electrical requirements, with the exception of references made to required fixtures, shall be excepted from the International Residential Code. 
(Code 1961, § 7-3; Ord. No. 12-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 26-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95; Ord. No. 8-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 18-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
State Law reference- Copies to be kept in office of the city clerk, C.R.S. 31-16-206. 
Secs. 5-57-5-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21-2008, adopted October 14, 2008, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 5-106 and 5-107, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1961. 

Sec. 5-106. - International Energy Conservation Code Adopted. 
(a)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, shall be available at the city clerk's office, for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. Where this code conflicts with other codes, laws, ordinances or standards, as required by state or federal law, then the most restrictive requirement shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 21-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
Secs. 5-108-5-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING INSTALLATION 

Sec. 5-121. - Guidelines for manufactured housing installation. 
    All manufactured homes installed in the city shall be installed pursuant to the C.R.S. § 24-32-3101, et seq., governing the installation of manufactured housing. 
(Ord. No. 26-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95; Ord. No. 34-2001, 12-11-01, eff. 12-21-01; Ord. No. 11-2005, 3-11-05, eff. 3-21-05) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 26-1995, adopted November 28, 1995, effective December 8, 1995, amended § 5-121 to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, § 5-121 pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Administrative Code and derived from Ord. No. 20-1992, adopted June 23, 1992, effective July 6, 1992. 
Secs. 5-122-5-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 5-140. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the appendices, is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, shall be available at the city clerk's office, for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. Where this code conflicts with other codes, laws, ordinances or standards, as required by state or federal law, then the most restrictive requirement shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 6-2003, 4-8-03, eff. 4-18-03; Ord. No. 19-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
Chapter 5.5 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-1990, adopted Oct. 9, 1990, enacted a new Ch. 7A. Such chapter was redesignated as Ch. 5.5 by the editor in order to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapters within this Code. 
Cross reference- Unauthorized connection to CATV system, § 12-18; tampering with CATV facilities, § 12-19; installation of cable television facilities, § 17-1; gas and electric franchise, App. B; cable television franchise, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5.5-1. - Intent. 
    The City of Sterling finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Sterling. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters, and, any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-2. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sterling Cable Communications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meanings. 
    City shall mean the City of Sterling, a home rule municipality of the state and all the territory within its present and future boundaries and including any area over which the city exercises jurisdiction. The city council is the authority of the city. 
    Cable communications system or system, also referred to as "cable television system," "cable system," "CATV system," or "community antenna TV system," shall mean a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, amplifiers, headend equipment, master controls, earth stations, equipment and facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals within the city. 
    Franchise shall mean the right granted through a contractual agreement between the city and a person by which the city authorizes such person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a cable communications system in the city. Any franchise awarded by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be a nonexclusive franchise. 
    Franchise agreement shall mean an agreement entitled "franchise agreement" entered into between the city and grantee which is enforceable by city and grantee and which sets forth the rights and obligations between city and grantee arising out of the franchise. 
    Grantee shall mean the corporation, company, or partnership with which a franchise agreement is entered into by the city, and shall include the grantee's agents, employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
    Grantor or city means the City of Sterling as represented by the city council or any delegate acting within the scope of his jurisdiction. 
    Franchise fees mean any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee solely because of its status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability, including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee; 
(2)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities; 
(3)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, grantor's negotiation of franchise costs, publication costs, election costs and fees, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
    Gross revenues shall mean all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any other person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee, arising from or attributable to operation of the cable television system, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers of entertainment and nonentertainment services (including leased access fees); 
(2)  Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial advertisements upon the cable television system; 
(3)  Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios; 
(4)  Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and reinstatement, connection and reinstatement of equipment necessary for the utilization of the cable television system and the provision of subscriber and other services; and 
(5)  The sale, exchange of use or cablecast of any programming developed for community use or institutional users. 
    Gross revenues shall include value at retail price levels, the value of any goods, services, or other remuneration in nonmonetary form, received by the grantee or others described above in consideration for performance by a grantee or others described above of any advertising or other service in connection with the cable television system. 
    Leased access shall mean the use on a fee-for-service basis of the cable television system by business enterprises (whether profit, nonprofit or governmental) to render services to the citizens of the city and shall include without limitation all use pursuant to Section 612 of the Cable Communications Policy act of 1984 (47 USE 521 et seq.). 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof. 
    Subscriber means any person who legally receives any one or more of the services provided by the cable communications system. 
    Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below the right-of-way of any public street, road, highway, parkway, or driveway now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-4. - Police powers. 
    Nothing in this chapter or in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith shall be construed as an abrogation by the city of any of its police powers. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-5. - Contents of franchise application. 
    Applications for a franchise shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  A clear description of the identify of the applicant, including but not limited to the name of the applicant, the address of the applicant, the nature of the business entity, and evidence of the compliance of the business entity with all applicable law; 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has applied (including the payment of all applicable fees) to the department of public works for all applicable encroachment permits; 
(3)  Evidence that all aspects of the applicant's cable television system comply with applicable zoning laws of the city; 
(4)  A map or maps of a scale of not less than one (1) inch equaling one hundred (100) feet showing the precise geographic area for which applicant seeks a franchise ("franchise area"); 
(5)  Evidence that applicant has applied (including the payment of all applicable fees) to the department of public works for building and electrical code review and approval of the plans and construction of the entire cable television system within the franchise area; 
(6)  Evidence of financial responsibility in the form of a performance bond conforming to section 5.5-27 of this chapter. 
(7)  A nonrefundable application fee equal to one-quarter of one percent (.0025) of the principal penal amount of the initial performance bond established pursuant to section 5.5-27 of this chapter, or such lesser sum as may be established by the city council, to cover the costs of review, issuance and enforcement of franchises issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(8)  A schedule of construction, as established by the applicant and reflected upon the map(s) provided pursuant to subsection (4) of this section, showing by a logical geographic progression which streets within the franchise area shall be constructed by the applicant within each calendar quarter during the period of construction; and 
(9)  Detailed plans and specifications for the cable television system which is proposed by the applicant. 
    Specific request or requests for exemption from specific sections, subsections or terms of this chapter, with which the applicant may have already complied, or, which are inapplicable to the applicant, with good and full reasons and explanations thereof accompanying each specific request may be submitted as a part of the application, but if the same is not so submitted, no exemption requested later shall be incorporated in the franchise without good cause shown by the applicant. Such agreed exemptions shall be specifically set forth in detailed form in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-6. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Authority to grant franchise. The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the city. The service area shall be the entire area defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Grant. In the event that grantor shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a cable communications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing franchise, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include those provisions of the grantee's "application for franchise" that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee. 
    Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and state general laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements shall, without exception, control. 
    Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the other codes and ordinances of the grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction. 
    All franchises granted are subject to Article 14, "Franchises and Public Utilities," of the Charter of the City of Sterling, requiring among other things, submittal of a franchise by ordinance to "the vote of the qualified taxpaying electors." 
(c)  Franchise required. No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Establishment of franchise requirements. The grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and state of the art in the cable industry. Such requirements shall not be retroactive to franchise then in effect, except as set forth in section 5.5-4, but shall become applicable when the franchise is renewed. 
(e)  Duration. The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the franchise agreement, in accordance with limitations imposed by the Charter of the City of Sterling, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. 
(f)  Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate; provided, however, that such additional grants shall not operate to materially modify, revoke, or terminate any rights previously granted to any grantee. 
(g)  Franchise applications. Applications for a franchise shall submit to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized format provided by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the application fees designated by grantor. 
(h)  Grant procedure. All franchise applications when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the grantor. No later than ninety (90) days after the final date for filing applications, one or more public hearings shall be held on the applications. A decision shall be made by the grantor not later than ninety (90) days after the conclusion of all such public hearings based upon an evaluation of the application(s), the hearings, and other information that the grantor may deem relevant. Grantor may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-8. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distributions structures, lines, and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city director of public works, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
(c)  The grantee shall refrain from, and shall prohibit any officer, agent, employee, contractor or subcontractor which it retains, from removing or trimming any tree or portion thereof upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of the city (either above, at or below ground level), without the prior written approval of the city forestry superintendent. Such consent may be given or withheld upon such terms and conditions as the city forestry superintendent deems appropriate. Each grantee shall be responsible for, shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all damages arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of or any injury to any tree or trees proximately caused by the franchisee or its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-9. - Erection of poles. 
(a)  No franchise shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within streets for the purpose of placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise, without the written consent of the City of Sterling. Such consent shall be given upon such terms and conditions as the city council in its sole discretion may prescribe which shall include a requirement that the grantee perform, at its sole expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles clear of obstructions. 
(b)  With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a grantee is authorized to construct and install within streets, a public utility or public utility district serving the city may, if denied the privilege of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures by the grantee, apply for such permission to the city council. If the city council finds that such use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations, the city council may authorize such use subject to such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. Such authorization shall include the condition that the public utility or public utility district pay to the grantee any and all actual and necessary costs incurred by the grantee in permitting such use. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-10. - Undergrounding. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, in all areas of the city where the cables, wires and other like facilities of a public utility or public utility district are placed underground, each grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe. In any area of the city where there are certain cables, wires and other like facilities of a public utility or public utility district underground and at least one operable cable, wire or like facility of a public utility or public utility district suspended above the ground from poles a grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from the same pole. 
(b)  With respect to any cables, wires and other like facilities constructed and installed by a grantee above ground, the grantee shall, at its sole expense, reconstruct and reinstall such cables, wires or other facilities underground pursuant to any project under which the cables, wires or other like facilities of such utilities are placed underground within an area. The duty of a grantee to place its cables, wires and other facilities underground shall arise only if all like facilities of utilities which are existing above ground are placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-11. - Relocation. 
    If, during the term of a franchise the city, a public utility district, a public water district, a public sanitation district, a public drainage district or any other similar special public district elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair, install, maintain, or otherwise alter any above ground or underground cable, wire conduit, pipe, line, pole, wire-holding structure, structure, or other facility utilized for the provision of utility or other services or transportation of drainage, sewage or other liquids, the grantee, shall, except as otherwise hereinafter provided, at its sole expense remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and any other facilities which it has installed. If such removal or relocation is required within the subdivision in which all utility lines, including those for the cable television system were installed at the same time, the entities may decide among themselves who is to bear the cost of relocation; provided that the city shall not be liable to a grantee for such costs. Regardless of who bears the costs, a grantee shall take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are directed by the agency or company undertaking the work. Reasonable advance written shall be mailed to the grantee advising the grantee of the date or dates removal or relocation is to be undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-12. - Movement of buildings. 
    Each grantee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving permit, franchise or other approval issued by the city or state, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wire to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting same, and a grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' oral or written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-13. - Completion. 
(a)  A final order of completion shall be issued by the city council when: 
(1)  Construction of the cable television system has been completed within the entirety of each franchise area in compliance with construction standards and the design and other requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  Cable television services have been made available to one hundred (100) percent of the dwelling units within each franchise area; 
(3)  Any and all studio facilities, equipment, channels and other services, resources or benefits required for public, educational, and governmental access purposes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter have been completed and made available; 
(4)  Complete and accurate "as-built" plans pursuant to section 5.5-7 have been filed by the grantee with the city; and 
(5)  A notice of completion has been filed by the grantee as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, cable television service shall be deemed to be made available when cable television services are offered on a nondiscriminatory basis for immediate provision to the owner or legal representative of the owner empowered to consent to use of the property of such individual dwelling units. 
(c)  For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of determining completion under this section, the total number of dwelling units within each franchise area shall be deemed to be the actual number of units available for occupancy as of a date forty-five (45) calendar days in advance of the date of filing by the grantee of the notice of completion; provided that the grantee files the notice of completion with a good faith belief that it has in fact achieved completion as of the date of filing. 
(d)  A grantee who asserts completion shall file a written notice of completion with the city clerk. The notice of completion shall state the total number of dwelling units available for occupancy within each franchise area forty-five (45) calendar days in advance of the filing of the notice, the total number of dwelling units to which cable television service has been made available within each franchise area as of the date of filing, and shall otherwise certify completion as defined by the first paragraph in this section. Neither the notice of completion nor the statements, assertions or certifications contained therein shall be deemed to be binding upon the city. 
(e)  During the period of construction of the cable television system during the sixty-day period following filing of the notice of completion, all elements and components thereof, and all equipment and studio facilities required by the franchise documents shall be subject to inspection by city employees or authorized agents or representatives thereof, for the purposes of determining whether the system and related facilities comply with the franchise and the provisions of this chapter. The grantee shall authorize such inspection and provide such information and cooperate as is required in order to permit an adequate investigation to determine the existence or nonexistence of such compliance. 
(f)  The grantee shall offer to install, make operational, and render cable communications services to all dwelling units within the city in accordance with this chapter and any agreement awarding a franchise within fifty-four (54) months of the date of execution of any agreement awarding a new franchise. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-14. - Removal. 
(a)  Upon expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if neither the city nor an assignee purchase the cable television system, the grantee may remove underground cable from the streets which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed, except as hereinafter provided. The grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the streets along the extension thereof or otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the city council based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the council, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the city council to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of expiration of the franchise. A grantee shall file written notice with the city clerk not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the franchise of its intention to remove cable intended to be removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the director of public works of the city. Removal shall be completed not later than twelve (12) months following the date of expiration of the franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the streets which is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title thereto shall be vested in the city. 
(b)  Upon expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if neither the city nor an assignee purchase the system, the grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the city remove from the streets all aboveground elements of the cable television system, including but not limited to amplifier boxes, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and cable attached to or suspended from poles, which are not purchased by the city or its assignee. 
(c)  The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by applicable ordinance of the city, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable ordinances, and shall restore the streets to the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later than twelve (12) months following the date of expiration of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-15. - Universal service. 
    Any cable television system franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall provide equal and uniform cable television service, submit only to a reasonable construction schedule established by the applicant pursuant to section 5.5-5 to all dwelling units within the franchise area defined by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-16. - The franchise area. 
    The applicant shall define a franchise area whose contour, so far as is possible, shall follow streets. Within the perimeter of the contour, no dwelling units shall be excluded from service provided to the franchise area defined by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-17. - General capability. 
    Each cable television system shall, at minimum: 
(1)  Relay to subscriber terminals those broadcast signals required by the FCC; 
(2)  Distribute in color all television signals which it receives in color; 
(3)  Make available, upon request by any subscribers receiving channels showing premium services and pay per view events, a lockout device which prevents the unauthorized view of such channels; 
(4)  Make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch (an A-B switch) permitting conversion from cable to antenna reception; and 
(5)  Have a present, activated capacity of four hundred fifty (450) megahertz with all amplifier cascades designed and spaced to accommodate conversion to five hundred fifty (550) megahertz capacity. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-18. - Standby power. 
    Each cable television system shall include equipment capable of providing standby powering for headend, transportation and truck amplifiers for a minimum of two (2) hours. The equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a standby generator powering a "dead" utility line. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-19. - Override capability. 
    Each cable television system shall include an "emergency alert capability" which will permit the city, in times of emergency, to override, by remote control, the audio, and alternatively the video, of all channels simultaneously. Each cable television system shall include the capability to broadcast from the city's headquarters for disaster and emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-20. - Interconnection. 
    The cable television system shall be interconnected with other cable systems within the city and the greater Sterling area so as to enable each system to carry and cablecast the public, educational, and governmental access programming of the other systems. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-21. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its cable television system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinance, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards equivalent to those established by the FCC. Each grantee shall provide to the city council, upon request, written reports of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements. 
(b)  Each grantee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); applicable FCC and other federal, state and local regulations, including the Sterling City Code and all other codes incorporated therein and adopted by the City of Sterling, as well as other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  In any event, the cable television system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(d)  All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring during construction of the cable television system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(e)  Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the city following accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. 
(f)  All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundle with due respect for engineering consideration. 
(g)  Any antenna structure used in the cable television system shall comply with construction, marking and lighting of antennae structures, required by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(h)  RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or communication radio sites to provide no interfere to air navigational reception. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-22. - Public, educational and governmental access. 
    Every cable television system franchised pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall provide not less than the following for public, educational and governmental access pursuant to the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Section 611 (47 USC 531): 
(1)  Three (3) downstream video channels for public and community access; 
(2)  Two (2) downstream video channels for educational access; 
(3)  One (1) downstream video channel for governmental access; and 
(4)  An additional thirty (30) megahertz of band width capacity (activated at all times for both upstream and downstream use) for educational access for video and/or data transmission. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-23. - Support for use of access. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of the grantee to make payments in support of the use of public, educational and/or governmental access. However, such payments are expressly not a requirement of any franchise granted hereunder and shall in no event be considered in the calculation of franchise fees pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-24. - Availability of access facilities. 
(a)  Use of facilities for public, educational and governmental access upon the cable television system pursuant to section 5.5-22 above shall be made available, without rental, deposits, or any other charge whatsoever, for use twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days a week in connection with the production of public, educational and/or governmental access programming cablecast upon the cable television system. A grantee shall: 
(1)  Allow all persons and entities desiring to cablecast public, educational and/or governmental access programming to produce programming upon electronically interface directly with cable television system of grantee so as to effectively cablecast the public, educational and/or governmental access programming; or, in the alternative, 
(2)  Establish such reasonable rules and procedures, designed to promote the utilization of such public, educational and/or governmental access programming and subject to the approval of the city council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, whereby the grantee shall accept and cablecast such public, educational and/or governmental access programming upon the cable television system as shall be provided to the grantee by such persons and entities. 
(b)  A grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the cablecasting of public, educational and/or governmental access programming upon the cable television system at the same time and upon the same channel designations as such programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems within the community. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-25. - Approval of construction by city; inspection; correction of defects in system; breach or default by grantee. 
(a)  Except for individual service drops, the grantee shall not, within the city, run any line, make any attachment, nor shall any construction of any kind be commenced without the prior approval of the city. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld and action shall be taken on any request for approval within three (3) business days of receipt of the request, or it shall be deemed granted. Grantee shall be able to make emergency repairs as needed. The city shall have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the grantee to insure the proper performance of the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  In the event the grantee should violate any of the terms of this chapter or any federal, state or local law or regulation, or any of the rules and regulations as may hereafter be from time to time lawfully adopted, or any provision of the franchise agreement, the city shall promptly give the grantee fifteen (15) days' written notice of the violation, breach, default or noncompliance. The grantee shall, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of written notice from the city, substantially undertake and promptly correct such default, breach, violation or noncompliance and certify the same to the city. In the event that the grantee fails to substantially undertake such corrective action within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such written notice and promptly complete the corrective action, the city may: 
(1)  Make such correction itself and charge the cost of the same to the grantee; and/or 
(2)  Secure the proceeds from any financial performance instrument posted by the grantee or impose the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day of breach or violation following the cure date that grantee fails to meet and agree upon limits for such activity or its contractual or legal obligations; and/or 
(3)  In the case of a material breach of this chapter or the franchise agreement, declare the grantee in default and terminate the franchise and rights granted under the franchise. 
(c)  Upon any termination of the franchise by the city or the city's refusal to renew the same pursuant to applicable federal law, the grantee shall within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of termination or refusal to renew the franchise, remove its facilities and equipment and in the event that the grantee does not remove its facilities and equipment within the time provided in this section, the city may do so, the removal cost to be borne in any event by the grantee. Any enforcement action or remedy provided by this section or this chapter or by the franchise agreement shall not be deemed exclusive but shall be alternative or cumulative in nature. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the city shall not impose any penalty upon the grantee where either the violation or failure to cure the same result from force majeure, labor dispute, declaration of war or other hostilities, act of God, or any other reason beyond the control of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-26. - Transfers. 
(a)  A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city. 
    No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation as a whole or in part to secure an indebtedness, except that which such hypothecation shall exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the property used by the grantee in conducting the business of the franchisee. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
    The proposed assignee must show technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications as determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and such conditions as may be prescribed by council expressed by resolution. The city shall be deemed to have denied a proposed transfer or assignment in the event that its consent is not communicated in writing to grantee within one hundred twenty (120) days following receipt of written notice of the proposed transfer of assignment. 
(b)  The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in the transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling part and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. 
(c)  A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten (10) percent of the voting interest of the grantee. 
(d)  The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall be its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of a franchise. 
(e)  In any absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of a franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of proposed system. 
(f)  The city council reserves the right of "first refusal" to purchase a cable system at the book value price if and when it is placed on the market for sale. 
(g)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-27. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Each grantee shall file with its application for a franchise, and at all times thereafter until the filing of a final notice of completion pursuant to section 5.5-13 of this chapter, maintain in full force and effect an acceptable corporate surety bond issued by a surety licensed therefor by the state in an amount equal to the greater of: 
(1)  The grantee's estimate of the total cost of construction of the cable television system within the franchise area; or 
(2)  The sum of 
a.  The product of the number of miles of aerial plant (to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile) in the franchise area and eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00); and 
b.  The product of the number of miles of underground plant (to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile) in the franchise area and thirty-two thousand dollars ($32,000.00). 
effective for the entire term of the franchise and conditioned that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of the franchise whether or not the franchise is terminated, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond, any damages, delinquent franchise fees, compensation and costs of repairing or completing the cable television system, and compensation and cost of removal or abandonment of property and repair of streets and other public or private improvements, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the franchise and thereafter until the grantee has satisfied all of its obligations which may have arisen from its exercise of any privileges thereunder. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of a final order of completion pursuant to section 5.5-13 of this chapter, the amount of the aforesaid corporate surety bond shall be reduced to an amount equal to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each dwelling unit located within the franchise area upon the date of the notice of final completion and maintained at such an amount at all times thereafter during the operation of the cable television system. 
(c)  Neither the provisions of this section, any bond accepted pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or to limit the liability of the grantee under the franchise or for damages, either to the full amount of the cancellation by the surety during the term of the franchise, whether for failure to pay a premium or otherwise, without thirty (30) calendar days' advance written notice mailed by the surety to the city clerk. The form of the bond and surety shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-28. - Indemnification by grantee. 
(a)  Each grantee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise: 
(1)  For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of the grantee or its officers, agents, employees, or contractors or to which the grantee's or its officers', agents', employees' or contractors' acts or omissions in any way contribute; 
(2)  Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; and 
(3)  Arising out of or alleged to arise out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any statue, regulation or ordinance of the United States, the State of Colorado or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its business. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at the grantee's sole expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the grantee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-29. - Grantee insurance. 
(a)  As a part of the indemnification provided by section 5.5-28, but without limiting the foregoing, each grantee shall file with the application, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, an acceptable policy or policies of liability insurance, including comprehensive general liability insurance products/completed operations liability, personal injury liability, owners and contractors protective liability, broad form property damage, contractual liability, automobile liability (owned; non-owned and hired automobiles), workers compensation and employer liability. The policy or policies shall name as primary insured the city, and in their capacity as such, its officers, agents and employees. The grantee and said city and officers, agents and employees shall be named as coinsureds, and the policy or policies shall contain cross-liability endorsements. Policies of insurance shall be in the minimum single limit amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence. The insurance policy or policies shall contain contractual liability insurance naming the grantee, and shall insure against the types of liabilities covered by the indemnification and hold harmless provisions of section 5.5-28. 
(b)  The insuror or insurors shall be authorized to write the required insurance, approved by the insurance commissioner of the state, and subject to the reasonable approval of the city council. The form and substance of the policy or policies of insurance shall also be subject to approval by the city council. 
(c)  The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insuror will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the grantee or for other reasons, except after thirty (30) calendar days' advance written notice mailed by the insuror to the city clerk, and that such notice shall be transmitted postage prepaid, with return receipt to subject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing. 
(d)  If the hearing is conducted by the city council, upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. If the decision by the city council is that there are grounds for termination of the franchise and that the franchise shall be terminated, the council shall adopt a resolution which terminates the franchise and includes its decision. The effective date of termination shall be such date as is prescribed by the city council, within its sole discretion, shall be set forth in the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-30. - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
(a)  In the event that the city determines that grantee has violated any material provision of the franchise, the city may make a written demand on grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation is not remedied, or in the process of being remedied, to the satisfaction of the city within thirty (30) days following such demands, the city shall determine whether or not such demands, the city shall determine whether or not such violation by grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations of franchise violations. 
(2)  If, after notice is given and, at grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, city determines that such violation by grantee was excusable as provided in section 5.5-25, the city shall direct grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the city may reasonably direct. 
(3)  If, after notice is given and, at grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, city determines that such violation was inexcusable, then grantor may impose a remedy in accordance with section 5.5-25. 
(4)  Any hearing held may be conducted either by the city council or, at the sole discretion of the council, by a hearing officer appointed by the council to conduct the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice under the laws of the state. 
(5)  The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, compensation for the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to record the proceedings shall be borne by the city. The costs incurred by the parties for attorneys' fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. 
(6)  All witnesses testifying at any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be sworn witnesses and shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the state shall not be applicable to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(7)  If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer shall upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare a recommended decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be filed with the city clerk and mailed to the parties not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon receipt of such a recommended decision, the city council may, without a hearing except as otherwise required below, either: 
a.  Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and conclusions submitted by the hearing officer; 
b.  Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; 
c.  Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact, conclusions or decisions, and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; or 
d.  Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing. 
(b)  If the hearing is conducted by the city council, the city council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. 
(c)  If the decision by the city council is that there are grounds for termination of the franchise and that the franchise shall be terminated, the council may adopt a resolution which terminates the franchise and includes its decision. The effective date of termination shall be such date as is prescribed by the city council, within its sole discretion, as set forth in the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-31. - Alternative remedies. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in said chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the city to recover monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee, or judicial enforcement of the grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-32. - Nonenforcement. 
    A grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the city or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-33. - Communications with regulatory agencies. 
    Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, and reports submitted by a grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or operation of a cable television system or services provided through such a system, shall be filed simultaneously with the city. Copies of responses or any other communications from the regulatory agencies to a grantee likewise shall be filed immediately upon receipt with the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-34. - Rates. 
(a)  City council expressly reserves the right to approve the rates which the grantee charges it subscribers for basic service and the rates for such other services as city council may hereafter be permitted to regulate by law. The grantee shall not deny, delay, interrupt or terminate cable communications services or the use of community communications facilities to subscribers or users because city council denies a request for a rate increase; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to limit the grantee's right to seek judicial review of such action. 
(b)  No rate, fee or charge of any kind shall be charged to or collected from subscribers by the grantee for basic service or other regulated services without the written authorization of city council. Violation of this section shall subject the grantee to the provisions of section 5.5-25 and shall be deemed to be a material breach of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith and shall subject the grantee to all remedies and penalties prescribed therein and to all other remedies, legal and equitable, which are available to the city. 
(c)  The grantee may request rate increases or decreases at any time in accordance herewith; provided, however, that the initial rates to be charged and collected from subscribers for basic service shall be established in the agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith and shall remain in force for a minimum of thirty (30) months from and after the date of execution of the agreement. 
(d)  The grantee shall file with the city on December 31 of each year a full schedule of all subscriber and user rates and all other charges including, but not limited to, pay TV, lease channel and discrete services, made in connection with the cable communications system. 
(1)  All rates shall be published and on file with the city. 
(2)  The grantee shall not discriminate in the assessment, levy, charge, imposition or collection of rates on the basis of age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users. 
(f)  The grantee may require all subscribers to pay for basic service not more than two (2) months in advance. The grantee shall require no other advancement of payment for basic service; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit an advancement of payment for installation of cable communications services. 
(g)  The grantee shall neither impose nor collect any additional charge for the disconnection of any installation or outlet. 
(h)  In the event that a subscriber fails to pay as properly due and owing a fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet, upon giving ten (10) days' written notice thereof. 
(i)  The grantee shall establish and conform to the following policy regarding refunds to subscribers and users: 
(1)  If the grantee collects a deposit or advance charge on any service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the grantee shall provide such service or equipment within thirty (30) days of the collection of the deposit or charge or it shall refund such deposit or charge within five (5) days thereafter. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the grantee of any responsibility to subscribers or users under any contractual agreements into which it enters with them. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the grantee's liability for fines or penalties which may be imposed under this chapter or any agreement awarded in accordance herewith for violation or breach of any of their provisions. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the grantee's liability for damages because of its failure to provide the service for which the deposit or charge was made. 
(5)  In the event that a subscriber terminates basic service during the first twelve (12) months of service because of the failure of the grantee to render the service in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter or in any agreement awarded in accordance herewith, the grantee shall refund to such subscriber an amount equal to the initial applicable installation or reconnection charge paid by the subscriber. 
(6)  In the event that such subscriber has made an advance payment, the amount so advanced shall be refunded to such subscriber by the grantee. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to relieve the grantee of any liability of this chapter or any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith. 
(7)  In the event that a subscriber terminates basic service prior to the end of a prepaid period, the pro rata portion of any prepaid subscriber fee which represents payment for services which are no longer to be rendered shall be refunded promptly, but in no case more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for termination. 
(j)  Converter security deposit: 
(1)  The grantee shall not charge a converter security deposit greater than such converter's actual cost to the grantee. 
(2)  Any converter security deposit collected by the grantee shall be returned to the subscriber twenty-four (24) months after the installation of such converter or upon termination of service by the subscriber and return of such converter undamaged, with allowance for reasonable wear and tear, and payment of any outstanding balance due and payable, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-35. - Franchise fee. 
    For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs of regulation arising out of the granting of franchises under this chapter and promoting, assisting and financing public, educational, and governmental access programming, each grantee shall pay franchise fees in the amount prescribed by section 5.5-36 below. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-36. - Amount and payment of franchise fees. 
(a)  During the term of each franchise, each grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five (5) percent per year of the grantee's annual gross revenue. 
(b)  Said fees shall be paid quarterly not later than May 1, August 1, November 1, and February 1 for the preceding three-month period ending, respectively, March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31. Not later than the date of each payment, each grantee shall file with the city council a written statement signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the grantee, which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross revenues received by a grantee during the quarter for which payment is made. 
(c)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-37. - Interest on delinquent franchise fees. 
    Any franchise fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in section 5.5-36 above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the rate as provided in the Sterling City Code for collection of charges due the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-38. - Accounting standards. 
    Not less than annually, the grantee shall provide the city council with an unqualified certification of any independent certified public accountant certifying the accuracy of the quarterly franchise fee payments paid within the preceding twelve (12) months pursuant to section 5.5-36 above. Said certification shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as established by the financial accounting standards board (FASB). 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-39. - Gross revenue calculations. 
(a)  For purposes of the gross revenue calculations required by section 5.5-36 above, the phrase "financial interest" as used in section 5.5-3 above shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any contract in which the grantee or any named owner thereof is to receive a percentage of the gross revenues and/or a percentage of the net income of the other party to the transaction by reason of the activities encompassed by said contract; 
(2)  Any debt relationship in which the grantee or any named owner thereof as debtor borrows funds at a rate more advantageous than that generally available to similarly situated entities of similar credit worthiness; 
(3)  Any debt relationship in which the grantee or any named owner thereof as creditor receives a rate of interest exceeding that which would otherwise be paid by a similarly situated debtor of similar credit worthiness; 
(4)  Any option or warrant to purchase the stock or other equity interest in an equity or equity related to an equity which generates revenues arising from or attributable to the operation of the system; 
(5)  Any debt relationship which has conversion privileges to a form of equity of the nature described in the preceding subsection. 
(b)  For purposes of the gross revenue calculation required by section 5.5-36 above, the phrase "arising from or attributable to operation of the cable television system" as used in section 5.5-3 above shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any activity, product or service which generates revenue of any type whatsoever and which is offered to the subscribers of the system by means of the system or any related service; 
(2)  Any activity, product or service which is revenue producing and is offered to the subscribers of the system by any medium other than the system, including but not limited to direct mail and home delivery if the system's subscriber list or any portion thereof is utilized for purposes of solicitation; 
(3)  Any activity, product or service in the production or provision of which any of the assets of the system including but not limited to cable, production facilities, are included, unless reasonable consideration is paid to the system for such utilization; 
(4)  Any television programming or other services offered to the citizens of Sterling within the term of the franchise by any means of delivery whatsoever where such programming or services are or could be offered by means of the system. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-40. - Auditing and financial records. 
(a)  The director of finance of the city may, from time to time during the term of a franchise prescribe standards governing the nature, extent and type of accounting system and accounting procedures utilized by a grantee and require changes in accounting standards or procedures utilized by a grantee, for the purpose of promoting the efficient administration of the franchise fee requirements of this chapter. Any such standards shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city, and shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city, and shall be mailed to the grantee to whom directed. A grantee shall promptly comply with all such standards. 
(b)  During the term of each franchise, the city may, not more frequently than once each year, conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the grantee for the purpose of determining whether the grantee has paid franchise fees in the amounts prescribed by section 5.5-36 above. The audit may be conducted by the director of finance of the city or by an independent certified public accounting firm retained by the city, and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the city. The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its findings, and the report shall be filed with the city, and mailed to the city and grantee. 
(c)  Each grantee shall make available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city, its books, accounts, and all other financial records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice for the purpose of permitting exercise of the authorities conferred by this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-41. - Flow-through of refunds. 
(a)  If during the term of this franchise the grantee receives refunds of any payments made for television or radio signals, it shall without delay notify the city council, suggest a plan for flow-through of the refunds to its subscribers, and retain such refunds pending order of the council. After considering the plan submitted by the grantee, the city council shall order the flow-through of the refunds to the grantee's subscribers in a fair and equitable manner. 
(b)  By its acceptance of this franchise the grantee specifically grants and agrees that if, during the term hereof, it received refunds of any payments made for television or radio signals, it shall without delay notify the city council, suggest a plan for flow-through of the refunds to its subscribers, retain the refunds pending order of the council, and flow-through such refunds in accordance with the order of the council. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-42. - Publication costs. 
    The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of the franchise as such publication is required by law and such is payable upon the grantee's filing of acceptance of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
Sec. 5.5-43. - Liquidated damages. 
    By acceptance of the franchise granted by the city, a grantee understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the franchise agreement will result in damage to the city, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance; the franchise agreement shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the grantee, in amounts set forth in the franchise agreement and chargeable to the security fund for the following concerns: 
(1)  Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with sections 5.5-7 through 5.5-14 unless the council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond grantee's control, a grantee shall pay five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues. 
(2)  Failure to provide, upon written request, data, documents, reports, information or to cooperate with the city during an application process or CATV system review, a grantee shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, or part thereof, each violation occurs or continues. 
(3)  Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a written request pursuant to this chapter, a grantee shall pay to the city one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues. 
(4)  For failure to provide in a continuing manner the types of services proposed in the accepted application, unless the council specifically approves grantee a delay or change, or the grantee has obtained modification of its obligation under Section 625 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; grantee shall pay to the city five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that each noncompliance continues. 
(5)  Any other action or non-action by the grantee, as agreed upon between the city and grantee, and set forth in the franchise agreement. Nothing in this section shall preclude further liquidated damages as agreed upon by parties in the franchise agreement. 
(6)  If the city manager concludes that a grantee is liable for liquidated damages pursuant to this section, he shall issue to grantee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice shall set forth the basis for the assessment, and shall inform the grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the notice unless the assessment notice is appealed for hearing before the city council and the city council rules: 
a.  That the violation has been corrected; or 
b.  That an extension of time or other relief should be granted. 
A grantee desiring a hearing before the city council shall send a written notice of appeal by certified mail to the city within ten (10) days of the date on which the city sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The hearing on the grantee's appeal shall be within thirty (30) days of the date on which the city sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. Unless the city council indicates to the contrary, said liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date on which the city sent the notice of the intention to assess liquidated damages and continuing thereafter until such time as the violation ceases, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1990, 10-9-90, eff. 10-22-90) 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.5-44. - Intent. 
    The city finds that it is in the best interests of the city's residents to establish rules and regulations whereby the city will be entitled, pursuant to relevant federal statute and consistent with the rules promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, to exercise to the maximum extent legally permissible regulatory authority and control over the rates charged by any franchised cable television operator for cable television services and related or accompanying equipment, services and facilities provided within the city. The complex procedural requirements established by relevant federal statute and by the Federal Communications Commission currently permit the city in its capacity as franchising authority to exercise regulatory authority and control only over rates charged by a franchised cable television operator for basic cable television service and related or accompanying equipment, services and facilities, as such basic cable television service is defined by federal statute, to wit: Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. subsection 521-559. The rules and regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, require, as one (1) prerequisite to the city's commencement of regulating rates charged by a cable television operator and, if necessary, ordering refunds, that the city adopt regulations consistent with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and, if such rules are not already in place, promulgate rules providing a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. It is the intent of this article to satisfy the above-stated requirements established by the Federal Communications Commission and to establish the city's intent and authority to commence regulating rates charged by any cable television operator franchised by the city and, if necessary, to allow the city to order refunds by such cable television operator. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-45. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sterling Cable Television Rate Regulation Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-46. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, all terms of art, whether capitalized or not, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. In addition, "city" shall mean the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-47. - Adoption of rules; assumption of authority. 
    The city hereby adopts and shall follow all cable television rate regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission in effect as of the date of this article, and as they may be amended or modified thereafter. The city further adopts for and assumes unto itself all authority, rights and prerogatives granted to franchising authorities pursuant to such Federal Communications Commission regulations and shall be and hereby is authorized to regulate cable television rates to the maximum extent legally permissible under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and in accordance with the Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-48. - Opportunity for consideration of views of interested parties. 
    Before the issuance of any final determination by the city concerning any initial rates submitted by a cable operator (that is, those rates in effect as of the date regulatory authority is exercised by the city) or concerning any rate increases proposed by a cable operator, the city shall convene a public meeting at which the views of any interested parties, including subscribers and representatives of the affected cable television operator, can and shall be heard by the city's representatives concerning the rates submitted or proposed by the cable operator and any matters relevant to such rates. Such public meeting shall be held only after the city has given notice to the affected cable operator in writing at least five (5) work days in advance of such meeting of the time, place and general purpose of such meeting, and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice setting forth the time, place and general purpose of the meeting, with such notice to run not less than four (4) consecutive days during the full calendar week (i.e., Sunday through Saturday) immediately preceding the week in which the meeting is scheduled to occur. Any such meeting may be continued from time to time without further notice other than the announcement, at the time of adjournment, of the time and place of the continued meeting. In addition to, and not in lieu of the foregoing state process, the city may, upon such notice and in accordance with such procedures as it deems appropriate, receive and consider written comments expressing the views of interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-49. - Proprietary information. 
    Any cable operator may be required by the city, pursuant to Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations, to submit to the city such information, including proprietary information concerning cable programming costs or other types of financial information, as may be necessary for the city to make a rate determination in those cases where a cable operator's initial rates or proposed rate increases exceed the presumptively reasonable level established by the Federal Communications Commission. In the event any cable operator submits to the city information or material that such operator deems proprietary or confidential, it may submit therewith a request that such information or material not be made routinely available for public inspection, and shall make a written showing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552. Such request and showing (or copies thereof) shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. To the maximum extent feasible, the materials to which the request and showing applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request and showing does not apply; if such separation is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request and showing applies shall be identified. If the city denies the request for confidentiality, it shall so notify the cable operator in writing of such denial, but shall not in any event release for public inspection such material to which the request relates until more than five (5) working days after notice of such denial has been received by the cable operator. If the cable operator chooses to seek review of the city's denial of the request for confidential treatment, such review shall be sought from the Federal Communications Commission within five (5) working days after the operator's receipt of the denial, and the city's release of such material for public inspection shall be stayed pending review. Notwithstanding any request for confidential treatment of any material or information submitted by a cable operator, and notwithstanding the city's grant or denial of such request, or the pendency of the review of any denial, nothing shall prevent the city from using such information or material for the purposes for which it was requested or submitted, or from disclosing and releasing such information or material, or copies thereof, to the city's officials, employees, representatives or agents under such conditions of confidentiality or limitations on disclosure as then apply to the city. If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city shall have no obligation to consider the need for nondisclosure. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-50. - Notice. 
    Any written notice required pursuant to this article shall be deemed as received three (3) working days after the deposit of same, properly addressed, in any United States mailbox, with first class postage affixed thereon. Notwithstanding the immediately foregoing provision, actual receipt of such notice by the intended recipient shall constitute proper notice for all purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-51. - Delegation of authority. 
    With the exception of the disapproval of rates, approval of rates over the objections of interested parties, ordering of prospective rate reductions, imposition of rate prescriptions, and ordering of refunds to subscribers, the city manager shall be and hereby is vested with all authority necessary to take all actions and to exercise all rights and prerogatives for and on behalf of the city as set forth herein or in the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. With respect to any authority not so delegated herein, such authority shall be exercised only by the city council sitting pursuant to a duly convened meeting. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Sec. 5.5-52. - Interpretation. 
    To the extent that there are inconsistencies between this article (sections 5.5-44 through 5.5-52) and sections 5.5-1 through 5.5-43 and/or Appendix C, Cable Television Franchise, both of the City Code, the within sections of this article, sections 5.5-44 through 5.5-51, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, 10-12-93, eff. 10-22-93) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Colorado Disaster Emergency Act, C.R.S. 24-33.5-701 et seq.; disaster relief, C.R.S. 24-33.5-1101 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Emergency management office. 
    There is hereby created and established the emergency management office, under the direction of a director of emergency management. 
(Code 1961, § 8-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Director of emergency management. 
(a)  Designated. The director of emergency management is the city manager. 
(b)  General duties. The director of emergency management shall be charged with the duty of coordinating all emergency management activities within the city and shall, in conformity with rules and regulations promulgated as authorized in subsection (d) of this section, do the following: 
(1)  Coordinate the activities of municipal and private agencies cooperating in the emergency management program. 
(2)  Sponsor and carry out recruitment, instruction and training of civilian auxiliary and volunteer service units in order to secure unity, balance and coordination in a program for emergency management. 
(3)  On behalf of the city, negotiate with other municipalities and other governmental entities in the state and work out such mutual aid agreements for reciprocal emergency management assistance as may be deemed necessary. The scope of such mutual aid agreements may encompass all facets of the plans for emergency management and mutual aid or any part of such plans, and the mutual aid agreements shall be signed by the mayor and may pledge the assistance and cooperation of the city to meet all contingencies of emergency management emergencies in return for like pledges from other governmental entities. 
(4)  Perform such other functions as may be required in connection with the federal, state and city emergency management programs. 
(c)  Staff. The director of emergency management shall appoint deputies and other staff members, both salaried and volunteer, and delegate such powers and duties within the means at his disposal as he sees proper. 
(d)  Authority to prescribe rules and regulations. The director of emergency management shall have the power to promulgate, in writing, rules and regulations which shall be reasonably necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1961, §§ 8-3-8-6) 
Cross reference- Personnel, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 6-3. - Liability of city. 
    Neither the city nor any of its agencies nor, except in cases of willful misconduct, the agents, employees, or representatives of any of them, engaged in any emergency management activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or with any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for the death of or any injury to persons or damage to property as a result of such activity. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefit to which he would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the Workmen's Compensation Law or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any Act of Congress. 
(Code 1961, § 8-7) 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-2002, adopted Feb. 26, 2002, effective March 8, 2002, repealed and reenacted Chapter 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Fire limits established, § 5-32; burglar, fire and police emergency alarm systems regulated, § 9-296 et seq.; false fire alarms prohibited, § 12-6; open fire prohibited in any park or recreation area except in the grills in Pioneer Park, § 13-48; burning of solid waste, garbage and rubbish and trash restrictions, § 16-36; incinerators restricted in trailer parks, § 20-98; open fires restricted in trailer parks, § 20-100; fire alarm box or telephone facilities required in trailer parks, § 20-101; fire extinguishers required in trailers in trailer parks, § 20-102. 
State Law reference- Fire safety assistance by state, C.R.S. 24-33.5-1203; regulations, C.R.S. 31-15-601 et seq.; codes adopted by reference, C.R.S. 31-16-201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 7-1. - Created. 
    There is officially established a single department of fire (fire department) under Article 10 of the Charter called the Sterling Fire Department consisting of all full and part-time firefighters associated with the city. The volunteer fire department described in Article 10 of the Charter is hereby abolished. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-2. - Fire department personnel. 
    The fire department shall be composed of a fire chief and such other officers, firefighters and support staff as the city manager shall approve. Career full-time firefighters shall be classified as employees subject to the city personnel policies and Article 7 of the City Charter. Part-time paid on call or volunteer firefighters will not be classified employees and shall not be under the jurisdiction of Article 7 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-3. - Article not to affect pension plans. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to abolish or affect in any way any pension plan or benefit created by state statute or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-4. - Duties and powers generally. 
    The fire department shall respond to and control fires, explosions, rescues, extrications, medical emergencies, hazardous materials accidents, natural and technological disasters and related emergencies. The fire department shall also enforce fire and life safety codes of the state, county and city, and shall have such other powers and duties as required by law or as assigned by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-5. - Duties of the fire chief. 
    The fire chief shall be in direct command of the fire department in accordance with Article 10 of the Charter. The fire chief shall, subject to approval of the city manager and city attorney, promulgate a manual of rules and regulations for the operation of the fire department. The fire chief shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the fire department. The fire chief shall also have the authority of a police officer as needed to carry out the duties and requirements of this chapter, and may delegate this authority as needed. The fire chief shall also have the authority to declare and lift any emergency fire ban due to drought or other emergency conditions to ensure the proper safeguards against a catastrophic wildfire event, and shall coordinate notification of the public through a general press release to local radio and print media, and posting on the City of Sterling internet website. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 20-2006, 9-26-06, eff. 10-6-06) 
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED 

Sec. 7-6. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, together with appendix A through appendix G of said International Fire Code, and contained therein with the following amendments, is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Fire Code, 2006 edition and appendix A through appendix G shall be available at the city clerk's office for viewing and inspection by the public. It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief to make sure this copy is in place, as specified. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 20-2008, 10-14-08, eff. 10-24-08) 
Sec. 7-7. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Where this code conflicts with other codes, laws, ordinances or standards, as required by state or federal law, then the most restrictive requirement shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-8. - Code official. 
    The code official shall be the fire chief, who may appoint deputies, including the firefighters in the classified service. The city official responsible to enforce the building code shall also be a deputy fire code official, if directed to do so by the city manager. The police chief shall have the police department assist in enforcement, as required. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-9. - Permits. 
    Operational permits shall not be required as described in the International Fire Code; however, construction permits shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-10. - Appeals board. 
    The appeals board, established in Section 108 of the International Fire Code, shall be the public works board. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-11. - Bulk storage of hazardous materials. 
    The bulk storage of flammable or combustible liquids or gases, including flammable or combustible cryogenic fluids and the bulk storage of hazardous materials shall be limited to the areas of the city zoned as light industrial or heavy industrial. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-12. - Interpretations. 
    When necessary to interpret provisions of the fire code, the International Building Code Handbook shall be used as a guide. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Sec. 7-13. - Violations. 
    Violation provisions contained in Sections 109 and 111 of the International Fire Code shall not apply. Violations shall be subject to state law and city ordinance, and when contested shall be tried in court and the court shall have the power to issue penalties for said violations, as provided for in sections 1-15 and 2-243 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
Chapter 8 - FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-2013, Arts. I-V, adopted Oct. 22, 2013, repealed former Ch. 8 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1-8-9, 8-36-8-40, 8-66, 8-67, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 11-1989, § 11A-1-11A-6, adopted Aug. 22, 1989; Ord. No. 3-1990, § 11A-3, adopted May 8, 1990. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; community development department, § 2-151 et seq.; drainage and storm sewer specification and design requirements in subdivisions, § 18-103; trailer park regulations, § 20-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Flood prevention and control, C.R.S. 31-23-301. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 8-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Colorado has, in Title 29, Article 20 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Sterling, Colorado, does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations: 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. I(A), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Sterling are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. I(B), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. I(C), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. I(D), 10-22-13) 
Secs. 8-5-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in section 8-78, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See section 8-78. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM database means database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of Federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA means Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
(3)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within floodprone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management chapter. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six (6) inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Material safety data sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. II, 10-22-13) 
Secs. 8-22-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-31. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(A), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-32. - Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Sterling, Colorado," dated September 29, 1989, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the city council. The floodplain administrator shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs, and/or FIRMs on file and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(B), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-33. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(C), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-34. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(D), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(E), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-36. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(F), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(G), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-38. - Severability. 
    This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. III(H), 10-22-13) 
Secs. 8-39-8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-51. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The public works director is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. IV(A), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-52. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by section 8-53. 
(2)  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(3)  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(6)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(7)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8-32, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(8)  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the community. 
(9)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(10)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(11)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. IV(B), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-53. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 8-72(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 8-52. Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. IV(C), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-54. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 8-53 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as stated in section 8-3. 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections(1)-(9) are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. IV(D), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-55. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
    Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City of Sterling. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sterling from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. IV(3), 10-22-13) 
Secs. 8-56-8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-71. - General standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(A), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-72. - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 8-32, (ii) subsection 8-72(7), or (iii) section 8-77, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 8-78, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one (1) foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator, as proposed in section 8-53. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 8-53, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the City of Sterling or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to the date of adoption of this chapter may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this chapter if it meets such standards. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(B), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-73. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard area established in section 8-32, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 8-78, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8-53, are satisfied. 
Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(C), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-74. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of floodway in article II). Located within special flood hazard area established in section 8-32, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article V. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(D), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-75. - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and the City of Sterling floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section 8-74 of this article. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(E), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-76. - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(F), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-77. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a floodprone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 8-33; section 8-53; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8-32 or section 8-52 of this chapter. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(G), 10-22-13) 
Sec. 8-78. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the city council to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
These facilities consist of: 
i.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
ii.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
iii.  Designated emergency shelters; 
iv.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
v.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
vi.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
These facilities may include: 
i.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
ii.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
iii.  Refineries; 
iv.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
v.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
i.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
ii.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
iii.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
These facilities consist of: 
i.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
ii.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
iii.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children); 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
i.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
ii.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the city council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city council on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the city council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. No. 19-2013, § Art. V(H), 10-22-13) 
Chapter 9 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Licenses and permits, § 3-11. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; liquor license required, § 3-42; fermented malt beverage license required, § 3-76 et seq.; parking restrictions on private property, § 10-66 et seq.; posting of handbills on property including trees prohibited, § 12-17; commercial activity in public parks and recreation areas restricted, § 13-49; permit required for installation of cable television facilities in streets, etc., § 17-1; sales tax levied, § 19-116 et seq.; use tax levied, § 19-141 et seq.; permit required for trailer parks, § 20-51 et seq.; license required for operation of a trailer park, § 20-76 et seq.; zoning regulations for certain occupations and businesses, App. A, § 703 et seq.; sign regulations, App. A, ch. X. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Licenses generally-Application; granting or denial. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, applications for licenses required under this chapter or by other city ordinance shall be submitted to the city manager or his designated representative, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license so granted. Denial shall be for cause. Due notice of the denial shall be provided the applicant, and the notice shall include the grounds for denial. The license fee paid for any license so denied shall be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Any of the following reasons may be considered cause for denial of a license: 
(1)  Conviction of the applicant of any offense involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Previous revocation or suspension of a license held by the applicant. 
(3)  Nonconformance of the premises or building to be used for the business with the requirements of pertinent city codes. 
(4)  Noncompatibility of the business with current zoning and adjacent land uses, including lack of planned unit development overlay or special permit, if required. 
(5)  Demand by the type of business for excessive city services. 
(6)  Creation of undue congestion of public throughways if the license were granted. 
(7)  Creation of a potentially hazardous or unsafe condition if the license were granted. 
(8)  The business's posing a danger to public health. 
(c)  A licensee may appeal any license denial by the city manager to the city council. The appeal shall be in writing, stating the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk within five (5) days of the decision of the city manager. The hearing procedure shall be the same as for city council suspension or revocation action, as set forth in section 9-6. 
Sec. 9-2. - Same-Issuance. 
    The director of finance shall issue all licenses required under this chapter or other ordinance of the city, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1961, § 15-1) 
Charter reference- Director of finance to issue licenses, § 6-2(8). 
Sec. 9-3. - Same-Term. 
    No license shall be granted by the city for a period longer than one (1) year. The council may, in its discretion, order any license authorized by this chapter or other ordinance of the city to be issued for a shorter period of time than is provided in this chapter or other ordinance. 
(Code 1961, § 15-2) 
Sec. 9-4. - Same-Posting and exhibition. 
    Every license granted under the provisions of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the place of business for the full term of the license. Licenses shall be removed or renewed upon expiration. It shall be the duty of each person to whom a license has been issued to show the license at any proper time when requested by any city official. 
Sec. 9-5. - Same-Suspension by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the power to suspend, for up to thirty (30) days, any license issued pursuant to this article, after notice to the licensee and hearing as provided for in this article, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee is convicted of any violation of federal, state or municipal law in the course of operation of the licensed business; 
(2)  Repeated violations of one (1) or more city ordinances occur at the licensee's place of business, by the licensee or patrons of the business; 
(3)  The conduct of the licensee's business consistently creates excessive need for city services and causes the city to expend public funds beyond normal requirements to protect the health, welfare and safety as a result of the conduct of the licensee's business; 
(4)  The business is of such a nature or is operated in such a manner that it is frequented by individuals who: 
a.  Consistently disrupt the normal and reasonable peace and tranquility of the neighborhood; or 
b.  By intimidation, threat, harassment or other hostile conduct seriously disrupt any other business in the immediate neighborhood of the licensee, thereby causing such business unreasonable economic loss; 
(5)  The licensee fails to keep and maintain permanent records which, in accordance with accepted accounting practices as determined by the finance director, are necessary for establishing the licensee's sales tax liability; or 
(6)  The licensee remains in arrears in payment of sales tax to the city longer than thirty (30) days after payment is due. 
(b)  A license may be suspended by the city manager for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days only after the city manager has called for and held a hearing, upon at least seven (7) days' written notice to the licensee, stating the grounds for such suspension and directing the licensee to appear and show cause why the license should not be suspended. The licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel at such hearing, to reasonable cross-examination of witnesses against him, and to presentation of witnesses in his own behalf. The city clerk shall record the proceedings of the hearing. 
(c)  A licensee may appeal any suspension order of the city manager to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, stating the grounds therefor, and shall be filed with the city clerk within five (5) days of the decision of the city manager. The hearing procedure shall be the same as for city council suspension or revocation action as set forth in this article. 
Sec. 9-6. - Same-Suspension or revocation by city council. 
(a)  The city council may, upon recommendation of the city manager, or on its own motion, proceed to suspend or revoke for just cause any license issued pursuant to this chapter after notice to the licensee and hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  The licensee shall be given written notice, at least two (2) weeks in advance of such hearing, stating the grounds for suspension or revocation. The notice shall direct the licensee to appear and show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Notice of such suspension or revocation hearing by the city council shall be posted by the city clerk at the licensee's place of business not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing and published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  The public hearing by the city council shall include: 
(1)  A full reading of the record of any prior city manager's hearing within the preceding year, if such record exists; 
(2)  A statement by the city manager, which may be supported by the testimony of witnesses, indicating why the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the licensee; and 
(3)  Reasonable time for the licensee to show cause why his license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(e)  Based on the record of the public hearing, the city council may cause the license to be suspended or revoked for any of the reasons set forth in section 9-5(a). 
Sec. 9-7. - Register of licenses. 
    The director of finance shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name of each and every person licensed pursuant to this chapter or other ordinance of the city, the date of the license, the purpose for which granted, the amount paid therefor, and the time the license will expire or continue in force. 
(Code 1961, § 15-6) 
Sec. 9-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 14-1994, adopted July 26, 1994 and effective August 5, 1994, repealed § 9-8 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to permits for posting advertising matter and derived from §§ 3-6, 3-7 of the 1961 Code. 
Secs. 9-9-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACTORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 9-41-9-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Public works board to hear appeals, § 8-5. 

Sec. 9-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractor means any person who undertakes with or for another to perform any operation involving the construction, alteration, remodeling, repairing, decorating and equipping of buildings or other structures; landscaping of any lot; improving of any lot; performing in the installation of underground utilities; or construction and repair of roads, streets, curbs and gutters, or water, sewer and storm drainage facilities, for compensation other than wages or salary. A person performing operations on his own property to be used as his principal and permanent residence or the principal and permanent residence of his immediate family shall not be considered a contractor. 
    Immediate family means persons related by blood and parents-in-law. 
    Permanent residence means one to be occupied for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(Code 1961, § 6-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-57. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
    The director of public works or his designated representative is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the procedure and information required for application for a license under this division and regarding the enforcement of this division. 
(Code 1961, § 6-4) 
Sec. 9-58. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of or do any work as a contractor without obtaining a license therefor and paying the annual fee. 
(Code 1961, § 6-1) 
Sec. 9-59. - Classes of contractors; fees. 
    The following classes of contractors shall be established and the fees for each such class shall be set by resolution of city council, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, as follows: 
(1)  Class I, General contractor's license. A class I license entitles the holder to contract for the construction, alteration, addition or repair of any type or size of building or structure. General contractors may perform the services as provided for by a Class IV subcontractor's license described herein. 
(2)  Class II, Residential contractor's license. A class II license entitles the holder to contract for the construction, alteration, addition or repair of single-family, duplex, triplex, and four-plex residential buildings and structures. A Class II residential contractor may perform the services as described in [subsection (4)] Class IV subcontractor's license. 
(3)  Class III, Jobber's license. A class III license entitles the holder to contract for nonstructural alterations of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in value. 
(4)  Class IV, Subcontractor's license. A class IV license entitles the holder to contract for labor or labor and materials involving one (1) trade or group of related trades. The list of trades shall include, but shall not be limited to, masonry; plastering; concrete work; elevator installation, maintenance and repair; roofing; waterproofing; excavation; heating; ventilation; air conditioning; re-siding; plumbing; electrical work; floor covering installation and repair; wall covering installation and repair; painting; paving or similar contracting; installation or repair of alternate energy sources; sign installation and repair; landscaping; demolition; and other specialties. A Class IV license for demolition work will allow the contractor to deal in used building materials at the site for a period not to exceed a total of sixty (60) days. The contractor shall be liable for all damaged public property as a result of the demolition work and the license is immediately revocable upon any such damage until the damage is repaired, replaced, or paid for. The director of public works or designated representative may require additional safety measures to be taken if, in his opinion, the public welfare is at risk. 
(5)  Class V, Utility contractor's license. A class V license entitles the holder to construct, build, install or lay all water, sewer or drainage systems, including all related appurtenances. Public utility companies will not be required to obtain licenses for the firm or corporation or for their employees when engaged in the installation, operation and maintenance of equipment which is used for the production, generation or distribution of the utility, product or service throughout the facilities owned or operated by such utility company to the point of customer service. 
(Code 1961, § 6-3; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 9-60. - Application. 
    A contractor shall make application for a license described in this division upon a form provided for by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
(Code 1961, § 6-4; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 9-61. - Term; prorating or refund of fee. 
    All contractors' licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue. The license fee shall not be refunded or prorated. 
(Code 1961, § 6-4; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 9-62. - Proof of state license required for certain applicants. 
    If a plumbing, electrical or other license is required by the state for the type of work the contractor does, no city license shall be issued unless proof that the contractor holds a current state license and is in good standing with the appropriate state licensing authority is provided to the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 6-4) 
Sec. 9-63. - Suspension or revocation; appeals board. 
(a)  Any license provided for in this division may be revoked on the grounds for suspension set forth in subsection 9-5(a). In addition to the grounds set forth in subsection 9-5(a), the director of public works may suspend a license if he has probable cause to believe that the licensed contractor has violated any of the ordinances, charter provisions or codes of the city relating to building and construction, planning and zoning, subdivisions, city services and utilities or state laws on similar subjects, including annexation. Allowing a nonlicensed subcontractor to work on a project within the city will also be sufficient cause for such a revocation. 
(b)  The public works board of the city shall serve as an appeals board, as provided in the charter and this Code, to hear any matters regarding the suspension, revocation or denial of a contractor's license. 
(c)  No contractor shall continue work on any project for which a contractor's license is required after revocation of the license pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1961, § 6-6; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 9-64. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The public works board of the city shall be the appeals board under this article and shall follow the appeal procedures as set forth in chapters on appeal and procedures for conduct of hearing appeals of the current city-adopted edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, which chapters are hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Further appeal from the public works board decision shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 4-1994, 3-22-94; eff. 4-1-94; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 9-65. - Licensing to be condition on issuance of building permits. 
    The general contractor on every construction project shall be licensed pursuant to this division as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1961, § 6-5; Ord. No. 28-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Secs. 9-66-9-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 9-91-9-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-101. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of house moving within the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1961, § 24-11) 
Sec. 9-102. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license required by this division shall make application to the director of finance on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be in writing and shall state the name and place of business of the applicant. 
(Code 1961, § 24-12) 
Sec. 9-103. - Fee. 
    Before any license required by this division is issued, the applicant therefor shall pay a license fee as set by resolution of city council, upon recommendation of the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 24-14; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94) 
Sec. 9-104. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of the application for a license under this division, required approval by the city attorney of proof of property damage and public liability insurance, and the payment of the fee prescribed by this division, the director of finance shall issue the license required by this division to the applicant. 
(Code 1961, § 24-15) 
Secs. 9-105-9-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 9-116. - Required. 
    No person shall move any building or part thereof along any of the streets of the city without having a permit approved pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1961, § 24-16) 
Sec. 9-117. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application to the director of public works on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be in writing and shall state the location of the building proposed to be moved, the place to which it is to be moved, whether the building is a dwelling house or other building, and the number of rooms in such building, and shall describe the route over which the building is to be moved. 
(Code 1961, § 24-17) 
Sec. 9-118. - Approval. 
    The application required by this division shall be approved by the director of public works. It shall be within the discretion of the director of public works to designate what motive power shall be used and such other details in connection with the moving of such building as he shall deem best under the circumstances. 
(Code 1961, § 24-18) 
Secs. 9-119-9-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE SERVICE BUSINESSES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Trees and other plantings, § 22-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the parks, library and recreation board. 
    Department means the parks, library and recreation department. 
    Division means the forestry division of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
    Tree means any woody plant having a dominant stem or trunk which is normally greater than fifteen (15) feet in height at maturity. 
    Tree service business means the planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, or other treatment of trees, shrubs or vines or any parts thereof, for hire. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 3, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-142. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
    The forestry superintendent shall prepare and present to the parks, library and recreation board reasonable rules and regulations covering all aspects of the conduct of the tree service business, which, upon approval of the board, shall be submitted to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(g), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-143. - Identification of vehicles. 
    All motor vehicles and other major equipment of any person licensed under this article that are used in conducting the licensed business shall be clearly identified with the name of the licensee in lettering not less than three (3) inches in height. The name and address of the licensee shall be on both sides of the vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(d), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Secs. 9-144-9-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-156. - Required; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the tree service business without first procuring a license therefor from the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A license shall not be required if cutting, trimming, pruning or removal of trees is incidental in connection with a business carried out and licensed under the Nursery Act, C.R.S. 35-26-101 et seq. 
(2)  A license shall not be required for the business of spraying trees, shrubs, plants, vines or other plant material wherein such business is licensed under the Pesticide Applicators Act, C.R.S. 35-10-101 et seq., and has registered with the department of parks, library and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(h), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-157. - Application. 
    Prior to any person engaging in the tree service business, application shall be made on forms provided by the city at the office of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(a), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-158. - Qualifications of applicant; issuance. 
    Upon application for license under this division, the forestry superintendent shall require a demonstration by the applicant of actual practical ability, competence and qualifications to engage in the tree service business, and shall require the applicant to pass a written test. No license shall be issued or renewed without the approval of the forestry superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(b), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-159. - Contents of license. 
    Every license issued under this division shall show on its face the types, classifications or kinds of services which the licensee is licensed and authorized to perform. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(c), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-160. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 4-1995, adopted April 11, 1995, repealed § 9-160 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to insurance and derived from Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(e), adopted May 24, 1988, effective June 6, 1988. 
Sec. 9-161. - Fee; expiration; renewal. 
    No license shall be issued under this division until the applicant has paid a license fee for the original license. Every license issued under this division shall expire on March 31. Renewal applications may be made at the office of the department of parks, library and recreation any time within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the then-current license, and upon payment of an annual license fee. All license fees under this division shall be in such amounts as set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 10(f), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-162. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Authority. Upon a verified complaint in writing by any person, the director of the department of parks, library and recreation may suspend or revoke any license issued under this division for violation of this article or violation of chapter 22, article II. The complaint shall be submitted in writing to the director and shall state the date, time and place of the violation for which the suspension or revocation of the license is requested. 
(b)  Notice. Before suspending or revoking any license pursuant to this section, the director shall serve a copy of the complaint to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, and give notice to the licensee of the date for hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than five (5) days after the date of mailing of such notice. 
(c)  Hearing. The city manager or his designee shall hold the hearing to determine whether or not such license should be suspended or revoked. The city manager or his designee shall state specifically the reasons for any suspension or revocation in writing, and shall give notice to the licensee of such specifics, setting forth the period of suspension and giving in writing the licensee's right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 11, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 9-163. - Appeals. 
    In the event of any denial, suspension or revocation of a tree service business license, the licensee shall have the right to appeal such denial, suspension or revocation. The appeal shall be heard by the public works board, pursuant to appeal provisions of that board, and pursuant further to the rules and regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 12, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Secs. 9-164-9-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 26-1997, adopted May 27, 1997, effective June 6, 1997, repealed §§ 9-186, 9-187 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to massage establishments and derived from Ord. No. 8-1989, § 16A-2, adopted April 11, 1989, effective April 14, 1989; and Ord. No. 13-1994, adopted July 26, 1994, effective Dec. 31, 1994. 

Secs. 9-186-9-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SECURITY SERVICES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Police department, § 2-136 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-211. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Security patrol means a person, or the employee or agent of such person, engaged in the business of providing protection to persons and property, or preserving the peace and conduct of any business in the city. The term "security patrol" includes any employee or agent of a security patrol. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-212. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
    The chief of police may issue and promulgate, from time to time, rules and regulations to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the city in relation to security patrol services, which shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and city manager. Such rules may pertain to the duties of licensees, manner of conduct, and reports to be furnished to the chief of police, as well as other matters. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-18) 
Sec. 9-213. - Inspections. 
    A licensee under this article shall be subject to inspection as to his activities and duties by the chief of police or any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-19) 
Sec. 9-214. - Notifications to city. 
(a)  Notice of termination of employment. Whenever a security patrol or agent or employee of a security patrol is discharged for any reason or ceases to be employed as a security patrol, immediate notification shall be given to both the chief of police and the director of finance. 
(b)  Notice of change of address. Any licensee changing his place of business or abode shall immediately notify the chief of police and the director of finance of such fact, together with the address of the new place of business or abode. If a licensee changes his place of abode, this shall not be deemed to be a transfer of the license or require the payment of any additional fees. 
(c)  Notice of vehicle acquisition. Whenever a new vehicle is acquired by a licensee for use in the conduct of his business, the type and description of the vehicle shall be immediately reported to the chief of police. 
(Code 1961, §§ 22B-11, 22B-13, 22B-14) 
Sec. 9-215. - Bond. 
    Persons licensed as security patrols shall furnish a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned on the faithful observance of this article and conditioned on the licensee's faithful performance and honest conduct as a security patrol. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-16) 
Sec. 9-216. - Vehicle insurance. 
    All vehicles used by licensees under this article shall be insured with liability insurance in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) limit for each person injured and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) limit for each accident, and property damage insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the director of finance before any vehicle is so used by a licensee. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-20) 
Sec. 9-217. - Issuance of identification card; contents. 
    In addition to the license, the director of finance shall issue an identification card to each licensee under this article. The card shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, physical description and picture of the licensee. 
(2)  The name of the employer if the licensee is an employee or agent. 
(3)  The signature of the licensee and that of the director of finance. 
(4)  The expiration date of the license and such other information as the director of finance may deem advisable. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-6) 
Sec. 9-218. - Surrender of identification card on termination of employment. 
    When any security patrol or agent or employee of a security patrol ceases to be employed as a security patrol, he shall forthwith surrender the identification card issued to him by the director of finance. If the person surrendering his identification card is reemployed or conducts business as a security patrol in the remainder of the year, the identification card may be reissued to such person for a charge in an amount set by resolution of city council, upon recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-12; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94) 
Sec. 9-219. - Badges and insignia. 
    The chief of police shall approve all badges and insignia used by all security patrols and their agents or employees. Such badges and insignia shall not be a colorable imitation of the official badge worn by officers of the city police department. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-7) 
Sec. 9-220. - Uniforms. 
    The chief of police shall approve all uniforms to be worn by security patrols and their agents or employees while engaged in their occupation as security patrol in the city. Such uniforms shall not be similar to any uniforms used by the police in the city. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-8) 
Sec. 9-221. - Color of vehicles; vehicle equipment and insignia. 
    Any vehicles used by a security patrol or the agents or employees of a security patrol within the city shall be of a color approved by the chief of police and shall be distinguishable from all vehicles used by the police department of the city. Such vehicles shall not be equipped with any lights or sirens in violation of the traffic code of the city or the motor vehicle department of the state or in violation of any other ordinances of the city or laws of the state, nor shall any insignia be painted on the sides of the vehicle which is similar to or which could be confused with that painted on the sides of the vehicles of the police department of the city or any other state or federal agency. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-9) 
Sec. 9-222. - Use of terms implying connection with police department. 
    The word "police" or "officer," or any other word that may be confused with police officer shall not be used by any security patrol to indicate any connection with the police department of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-10) 
Sec. 9-223. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article to: 
(1)  Arrest any person, except when that person commits a criminal offense in the presence of the licensee and such arrest conforms to a citizen's arrest in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(2)  Fail to turn over any such person arrested immediately to the police department of the city. 
(3)  Fire or draw firearms in the performance of his duties, except when necessary to protect himself from great bodily harm or to prevent the commission of a felony. 
(4)  Enter or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the police department of the city. 
(5)  Fail to report immediately to the police department of the city all violations of city ordinances and state or federal laws coming to his attention. 
(6)  Wear a uniform, badge or insignia, or officially operate any vehicle, other than that authorized by the chief of police. 
(7)  Represent himself to be an officer of the police department of the city or any other law enforcement agency. 
(8)  Fail to conduct himself in a lawful and orderly manner at all times. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-15) 
Secs. 9-224-9-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-246. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or the employee or agent of such person, to engage in the business of a security patrol in the city, or to represent himself to any person or the public as a security patrol, without having first procured a license therefor from the director of finance as provided in this division. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-2) 
Sec. 9-247. - Application. 
    An applicant for license as a security patrol or an employee or agent of a security patrol shall file an application with the director of finance, on a form to be provided by him for that purpose. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted or services to be offered, and the area expected to be covered in the conduct of business. 
(2)  A statement as to the number of persons to be employed as agents or employees. 
(3)  A statement as to the number and type of vehicles to be used in the conduct of the business, and a description thereof. 
(4)  A description of any other equipment, including firearms with serial numbers, to be used in conducting the business. 
(5)  If the applicant is to be employed by any other person, a statement as to who the employer is, the nature of services to be rendered to the employer, and any other pertinent facts required by the director of finance. 
(6)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude or breach of the peace, the nature of the offense, the penalty or punishment imposed, and the date and place where such offense occurred. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever had a judgment or conviction for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against him and if so, the details thereon. 
(8)  A statement as to the business or employment record of the applicant for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-3) 
Sec. 9-248. - Fee. 
(a)  All applications for annual licenses under this division shall be accompanied by the annual license fee. 
(b)  The annual calendar year license fee for a person engaged in the business of a security patrol and the annual license fee for agents or employees shall be set by resolution of city council, upon recommendation of the chief of police, taking into account additionally all actual expenses relating to the identification card to be issued under this article. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-4; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94) 
Sec. 9-249. - Persons not eligible for license. 
    No security patrol license shall be issued to the following persons: 
(1)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age or one who is not a citizen of the United States of America. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or violation of municipal ordinance pertaining to moral turpitude or breach of the peace in the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Any person against whom judgment or conviction for fraud, deceit, or mispresentation has been entered within ten (10) years immediately preceding the application or who pleads nolo contendre. 
(4)  Any person who has a record of alcohol or drug addiction or a record of violent acts against persons or property. 
(5)  Any person whose physical or mental condition is such so as not to warrant confidence that the service to be rendered will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of any person. 
(Code 1961, § 22B-5) 
Secs. 9-250-9-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INSTALLATION OF FIBER OPTIC CABLE 

Sec. 9-271. - Authority to issue permits for installation. 
    The director of public works may issue permits for installation of fiber optic cable within the city. All such installations shall be governed by the provisions of this article and, as applicable, all other provisions of this Code which require permits and inspections pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2-1988, § 10-1, 3-8-88, eff. 3-21-88) 
Sec. 9-272. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Each permittee under this article shall pay a permit fee of ten cents ($0.10) per lineal foot of cable or other installation on private property within the city. If such cable or other installation is on or beneath the public right-of-way, the permit fee shall be ten cents ($0.10) per lineal foot. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be in addition to any and all other fees and taxes provided for under this Code. All fees under this section are to be paid to the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 2-1988, § 10-3, 3-8-88, eff. 3-21-88; Ord. No. 18-2003, 9-9-03, eff. 9-19-03) 
Sec. 9-273. - Conditions accepted by permittee. 
    The director of public works may issue permits as authorized by this article to any person, private or public, upon such terms and conditions as set forth in this section, which the permittee, upon acceptance of the permit, shall be deemed to have accepted, including the following: 
(1)  All construction shall comply with and conform to standards formulated by the director of public works, as approved by the public works board. Variances and variations from such standards shall be approved by the board before such variances or variations become new or additional or amended standards for new or additional construction. The director shall, prior to the issuance of the permit and the commencement of construction, review installation plans and submit requested variances from standards to the board for approval. During construction, the director shall also inspect the construction. 
(2)  The city shall have the right at all times to direct and oversee the maintenance, installation, repair, removal or relocation of the facilities or installations within the city's right-of-way. The city reserves the exclusive right to control all easements and installations. 
(3)  If any use by the permittee should interfere with any future use of the right-of-way by the city for the common good, the permittee shall, upon request and reasonable notice by the city to the permittee, at the permittee's sole expense, relocate, rearrange or remove its installation so as not to interfere with such use. 
(4)  Permittees shall pay for actual damages done to city streets or other city property when such damage is due to or is a result of the permittee's installation, maintenance, operation or replacement. 
(5)  All rights and privileges granted in any permit issued under this article shall be subject to prior agreements, permits, licenses and grants, recorded and unrecorded, and it shall be the permittee's sole responsibility to determine the existence of such documents or conflicting uses or installations. 
(6)  The permittee shall contact and fully cooperate with the director of public works to eliminate or minimize interference with any lawful, usual or ordinary use of the public right-of-way. The permittee shall comply with all provisions of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, including all amendments thereto. 
(7)  The permittee shall not place any equipment or allow any equipment to be placed without the approval of the director of public works as to location and means of installation, including means of construction. 
(8)  All permittees, by acceptance of their permit, expressly assume full and strict liability for any and all damage due to exposure to light emitted from the optic cable. 
(9)  The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its officers and employees against any and all claims, damages, actions or causes of actions and expenses to which it or they may be subject by reason of the installation being within and across the premises of the city, or by reason of any work done or omission made by the permittee or its agents or employees in connection with the construction, replacement, maintenance or repair of the installation, except for sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its officers and employees. 
(10)  The permittee expressly agrees that, in the case of the permittee's breach of any of the provisions set out in this article, the city may, at its option, have specific performance therefor or sue for damages resulting from the breach. 
(Ord. No. 2-1988, § 10-2, 3-8-88, eff. 3-21-88) 
Secs. 9-274-9-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-296. - Intent of article. 
    It is the intent of the city to provide for a mechanically responsible and properly maintained monitoring program for business burglar, holdup, fire and police emergency alarm systems; to reduce the incidence of false alarms, which are wasteful and expensive to the city in waste of personnel time and reduced efficiency; to avoid a multiplicity of monitoring systems, which fosters inefficiency and inaccuracy; and, through the use of a single monitoring system, to increase the quality of service to businesses of the city who wish to install alarm systems. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-1) 
Sec. 9-297. - Official police monitoring system. 
    The chief of police is authorized to install and maintain an alarm monitoring system and to make such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary for its proper operation. The police will monitor this official system and be responsible for its upkeep. No other alarm monitoring system or equipment will be monitored in the police department or be allowed to be installed in the police department. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-2) 
Sec. 9-298. - Hookup fee; equipment standards. 
    Any business wishing to have alarm detection equipment monitored by the official police monitoring system will be required to pay a hookup fee in the amount set by the city council by resolution and on file in the city clerk's office. This fee will become the property of the city and will not be refunded upon termination of the hookup. Any such detection equipment must be compatible with the official police monitoring system, and equipment may not be hooked up if it causes disruption to the official monitoring system or causes excessive and repeated false alarms. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-3) 
Sec. 9-299. - Connection to primary telephone trunk line prohibited. 
(a)  No alarm system or device which transmits a signal or prerecorded message directly to the police or fire department shall be connected to or be permitted to use the primary telephone trunk line serving any city governmental facility. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided in this article any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1961, §§ 3A-5, 3A-8) 
Sec. 9-300. - Equipment testing. 
    The owner of any alarm detection equipment shall be responsible for providing the personnel necessary for any testing of the system which involves the official police monitoring system equipment. The chief of police or his designated representatives shall at all times maintain ultimate control over the police monitoring system equipment. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-6) 
Sec. 9-301. - City not liable for equipment operation. 
    The city does not by this article, in any way, warrant or guarantee the operation of any mechanical equipment. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-7) 
Sec. 9-302. - False alarms. 
    Except for alarms caused by an act of nature or through faulty telephone communications, a charge of an amount to be set by resolution of city council, upon the recommendation of the chief of police, shall be paid by the subscriber to the city for each false alarm to which the police respond in excess of nine (9) in any one-year period. Repeated false alarms in excess of nine (9) alarms in any one-year period, for whatever reason, shall be grounds for disconnection of the alarm system from the official police monitoring system by the chief of police. The chief of police shall at all times have the authority to suspend the monitoring of any such system until such time as suitable personnel practices are instituted or satisfactory repairs or replacement is made correcting the faulty system. The chief of police shall have the authority at any and all times to terminate monitoring service for any violation of this article or for any faulty system which cannot be made reliable against false alarms in keeping with the provisions of this section. The chief of police may provide for a grace period of up to ninety (90) days after the hookup of alarm detection equipment to the official police monitoring system before the provisions of this section apply in order to allow for needed adjustments in the systems. 
(Code 1961, § 3A-4; Ord. No. 13-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 12-31-94) 
ARTICLE IX. - SALE OF FIREWORKS 

Sec. 9-303. - Sale of permissible fire works from temporary structures. 
(a)  The sale of those fireworks allowed by state statute shall be allowed from temporary structures, provided the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  A sales tax license has been procured by the person or entity wishing to sell fireworks from a temporary structure. 
(2)  A permit has been acquired from the city's department of public works granting to the applicant, twenty (20) days from June 15, the right to sell fireworks from such temporary structure. The cost of such permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  Application for the aforementioned permit shall be made at least one (1) week prior to June 15. Failure to make such application by that date shall prohibit the applicant from having a permit for sale from a temporary structure for that year. 
(4)  The temporary structure and the contents therein must meet all applicable fire code regulations. 
(5)  The sale of fireworks from a temporary structure shall be allowed only in those areas within the city limits zoned light industrial or heavy industrial. 
(6)  The sale of fireworks from a temporary structure shall meet all applicable state statutes. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the sale of permissible fireworks from a permanent building if the building is equipped with fire prevention equipment approved by the fire chief, such as fire extinguishers, sprinkler systems, fire alarm and smoke alarm systems. 
(Ord. No. 5-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02) 
ARTICLE X. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-304. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to impose reasonable time, place and manner regulations on sexually oriented business in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious effects caused by the location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects which have been shown to exist from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials and activities. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials and activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or the State Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-305. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore means: 
(1)  A commercial establishment which: 
a.  Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space to; or 
b.  Receives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from; or 
c.  Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of: the sale or viewing, for any form of consideration, of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as an adult bookstore. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore so long as the provisions of subsection (1) of this definition are otherwise met. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which features: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminude; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which can be described as depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent a sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration and to six (6) or more persons. 
    Adult novelty business means a commercial establishment which (i) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space to; or (ii) receives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from; or (iii) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to: the promotion of the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. Other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult novelty business. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form or consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Applicant means the person listed as an applicant on the application for a license and a person applying for renewal of an existing license and who shall be an owner or principal owner of the business. 
    Building inspection division means the building inspection division for the City of Sterling. 
    Business means a sexually oriented business as defined in this section. 
    Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, including the manager, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the manager of the business. 
    Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as part of its business purposes for a fee, tip, or any form of consideration. 
    Establishment of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business into a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of a sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of a sexually oriented business. 
    License means a sexually oriented business license applied for or issued pursuant to division 2 of this article. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued and who shall be an owner or principal owner of the business. 
    Manager means an employee, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of or in charge of a permitted or licensed sexually oriented business. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person, who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas, is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus, genitals, or areola or nipple of the female breast. 
    Owner means a person owning, directly or beneficially, any interest or part interest, however identified, in a sexually oriented business. However, the term owner shall not include corporate stockholders unless such stockholders are also officers, directors or employees who have direct management responsibilities. 
    Peep booth means a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
    Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, organization, or other recognized entity, including an applicant, licensee, manager, owner, or principal owner. 
    Premises or licensed premises means any premises that requires a license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business. 
    Principal owner means any person owning, directly or beneficially: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent or more of a corporation's corporate stock; 
(2)  Ten (10) percent or more of a membership interest in a limited liability company; 
(3)  In the case of any other recognized entities, ten (10) percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity; or 
(4)  The general partner of a limited partnership, regardless of the percentage of ownership. 
However, the term principal owner shall not include corporate stockholders unless such stockholders are also officers, directors or employees who have direct management responsibilities. 
    Private room means a room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, that has a bed and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and that is capable of being used for lodging. 
    Public park means public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, open space, wilderness area, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities. 
    Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    School means any public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. The term "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. An adult motel will not be classified as a sexual encounter establishment by virtue of the fact that it offers private rooms for rent. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult novelty business, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or nude model studio or any business that holds a license issued under division 2 of this article. The definition of a sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person engages in medically approved and commonly recognized sexual therapy. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals less than completely or opaquely covered, including the pubic region, buttocks, or anus; female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal acts means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity, prostitution, or pandering. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business. 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means. 
(3)  The establishment of trust, management arrangement, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-306. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, principal owner, or a manager to knowingly operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business if the business: 
(1)  Does not have a sexually oriented business license. 
(2)  Has a license which is under suspension. 
(3)  Has a license which has been revoked. 
(4)  Has a license which has expired. 
(5)  Has an employee acting as a manager without a sexually oriented business manager's license. 
(6)  Has not paid an application fee, a license fee, or a manager's license fee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee, owner, principal owner, or a manager to knowingly allow or permit the following: 
(1)  Operation of licensed premises in violation of any municipal ordinance, state or federal law or any applicable state or county health department's regulation. 
(2)  Operation of licensed premises in violation of any of the regulations contained in section 9-307. 
(3)  Noncompliance with the requirements of subsection 9-308(d). 
(4)  Transfer or attempt to transfer a license without complying with section 9-313. 
(5)  Change, alter, or modify the licensed premises of a sexually oriented business, or attempt to do so without complying with section 9-314. 
(6)  In the case of a corporation licensee, operation of a sexually oriented business when the corporation is suspended or not in good standing with the Secretary of State's office where the corporation is incorporated, or authorized to do business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, principal owner, or a manager to knowingly: 
(1)  Make a false statement on an application for a license or fail to disclose facts as required by subsection 9-308(d). 
(2)  Permit any person, employee or patron on the licensed premises who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years, except for establishments which offer on-premises viewing of films or videos or have live entertainment, in which case, the age restriction shall be twenty-one (21) years. 
(3)  Engage in or allow patrons or employees to be engaged in any specified sexual activity on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Fail to comply with or allow any patron or employee to violate any of the regulations contained in section 9-307. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Enter or remain on the licensed premises when such a person has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years, except for establishments which offer on-premises viewing of films or videos or have live entertainment, in which case, the age restriction shall be twenty-one (21) years. 
(2)  Commit or engage in any specified sexual activity on the licensed premises. 
(3)  Touch, fondle, caress or come in physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any performer, entertainer, waitress, waiter, or employee of the sexually oriented business. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be punishable by a fine in a minimum amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and a maximum amount of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00), plus all applicable court costs. 
(2)  Any violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section shall be punishable by a maximum penalty prescribed in section 2-243. 
(3)  Each day a licensed premises is in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(f)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of this article that an owner, principal owner, patron or employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area during such person's bona fide use of a restroom, or in the case of an employee during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-307. - Regulations for operation. 
(a)  Inspection of the premises. An applicant, licensee, owner, principal owner, or manager shall permit representatives of the building inspection division, the health department, the fire department, or the police department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied by anyone or open for business. 
(b)  Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos in peep booths. A licensee, owner, principal owner, or manager who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits, on such sexually oriented business premises, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction in a peep booth, which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The business shall have one (1) or more manager's stations. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station as provided for in this subsection and subsection 9-314(b)(4) may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
(2)  At least one employee must be on duty and situated at a manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the sexually oriented business premises. 
(3)  The interior of the sexually oriented business premises shall be configured in such a way that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the sexually oriented business premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the sexually oriented business premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to section 9-308. 
(4)  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. 
(5)  No door shall be placed on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. 
(c)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  A sexually oriented business shall not be open for business nor shall the licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or any employee allow patrons upon the licensed premises: 
a.  On any Monday through Friday from 12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and on any Saturday from 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
b.  On any Sunday, except that sexually oriented businesses which do not provide on-premises live entertainment, films, or video are allowed to operate on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  This subsection shall not apply to those areas of an adult motel which have private rooms. 
(d)  Minimum age. The licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or any employee of the licensee shall not allow or permit anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in or upon licensed premises, except for establishments which offer on-premises viewing of films or videos or have live entertainment, in which case the age restriction shall be twenty-one (21) years. 
(e)  Lighting regulations. Excluding a private room of an adult motel, each licensee, owner, principal owner or manager must ensure that the interior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business, to which patrons are permitted access, is equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place, including peep booths, at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
(f)  Adult theaters and adult cabarets. Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one (1) or more separate areas designated as a stage in the diagram submitted as part of the application for the license. Entertainers shall perform only upon the stage. The stage shall be fixed and immovable. No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. No members of the audience shall be permitted upon the stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. 
(g)  Conduct for sexually oriented businesses. 
(1)  No licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or employee mingling with the patrons or serving food or drinks shall be in a state of nudity. 
(2)  No licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or employee shall knowingly encourage or permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts or specified anatomical areas of any person. 
(3)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, or manager shall comply, in addition to the regulations contained in this subsection, with those specific regulations concerning the conduct of liquor licensed premises contained in chapter 3 of the City Code, which chapter is incorporated in this article by this reference. 
(h)  Sexually oriented businesses dealing with employee tips. 
(1)  No employee of a sexually oriented business shall receive tips from patrons except as set forth in subsection (h)(2) of this section. 
(2)  A licensee, owner, principal owner or manager wanting to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by patrons into the tip box. Any sexually oriented business which offers tip boxes as provided for in this subsection shall post one (1) or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises in capital letters at least one (1) inch in height, and the coloring of the letters is to be in clear contrast to the background and is to read as follows: 
"All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to the employees. Any physical contact between the patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 9-308. - Required; application. 
(a)  All sexually oriented businesses operating in the city must have a valid annually renewable license issued by the city. 
(b)  A license can be obtained through the application and licensing process described in this division. 
(c)  Any sexually oriented business operating in the city upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and subject to subsection 9-319(6) shall have sixty (60) days to file an application with the city clerk for a license. During the sixty (60) days and throughout the application process, the business will be allowed to operate. Once an application has been accepted by the city clerk, the business will be allowed to remain open until notification that a request for a license has been denied. 
(d)  Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the city clerk an original and two (2) copies of a fully completed and sworn license application on the standard application form supplied by the city clerk. Completeness of the application shall be determined by the city clerk. Each such person and each owner and principal owner, member of a limited liability company, officer, director, or any person holding ten (10) percent or more of the corporate stock of a corporation, and all managers, shall be named in the application form, and each of the persons so named shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the police department. 
(1)  A completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
a.  If the applicant is: 
1.  An individual, the individual shall state such individual's legal name and any aliases, date of birth, and submit satisfactory proof that such individual is twenty-one (21) years of age; or 
2.  A legal entity, or other recognized entity, the applicant shall state its complete name; the date and place of its organization; evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized, and if it is organized under the laws of a state other than this state, that it is registered to do business in this state; the names and any aliases, dates of birth, and capacity of all officers, directors, managers, and principal owners; and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service of process, if any. 
b.  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the sexually oriented business' fictitious name. 
c.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in subsection (d)(1)a. of this section has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in subsection 9-310(d)(1)i. and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. 
d.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in subsection (d)(1)a. of this section has had a previous license under this or any other type of sexually oriented business licensing process, law or ordinance from any type of governmental entity anywhere in the United States denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation. 
e.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in subsection (d)(1)a. of this section has been a partner in a partnership or a principal owner of a corporation or legal entity or other recognized entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
f.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in subsection (d)(1)a. of this section holds any other licenses under this division or any other type of sexually oriented business licensing process, law or ordinance from any type of governmental entity anywhere in the United States, and if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
g.  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if any. 
h.  Proof of ownership or the applicant's right to possession of the property. 
i.  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
j.  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, and showing all interior walls and rooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
k.  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to an initial application by a state-registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this article or appendix A, zoning, as applied to sexually oriented businesses which are located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any religious institution, school, public park, public building, residentially zoned property with a density of three (3) or more dwelling units per acre or any other sexually oriented business (the survey). For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
l.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, such person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each owner and principal owner of the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. 
(2)  The city clerk, upon receipt of an application, shall determine whether a proposed sexually oriented business, for which a license application has been submitted, complies with the requirements of this section and is a complete application. If the application complies with this section, it will be accepted. 
(e)  An applicant for a license under this division shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that the information changes in any material way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with such continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a license. 
(f)  In the event that the city clerk determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, the city clerk shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant to properly complete the application. 
(g)  The application process described in this section must be repeated for each year that a licensee wishes to renew a license. 
(h)  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by resolution of the city council, at the time of filing an application under this section and at the time of filing of each annual renewal. 
(i)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city licenses does not exempt such person from the requirement for obtaining a license issued pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-309. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of a completed application and upon payment of the nonfundable application fee as required in section 9-308, the city clerk shall immediately stamp the application as filed which shall constitute acceptance of the application. The city clerk will then send photocopies of the application to the police department and the building inspection division and any other affected department or agency. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities. The investigation shall be completed within forty (40) days of the date the application was filed with the city clerk. At the conclusion of an investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date and sign the photocopy of the application and, in the event of disapproval, state the reasons therefor. Each department or agency shall then return the photocopy of the application to the city clerk. The police department shall only be required to provide the information specified in subsection 9-310(d)(1)i. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-310. - Issuance. 
(a)  Acceptance of application. Once an application has been accepted by the city clerk, it shall be considered a request for a license to operate a sexually oriented business. An application may be accepted under the requirements of subsection 9-308(c) and section 9-309, but the request for a license may be denied pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Time limit for determination, decision. The city shall either issue a license or deny a request for issuance of a license within sixty (60) days from the date the application is accepted by the city clerk. Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the license is sought, unless and until the city clerk notifies the applicant of a denial of the application or license and states the reason for that denial. 
(c)  Issuance. 
(1)  The city shall issue a license unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section is present. 
(2)  The license, if issued, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business. A license issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable only pursuant to section 9-313. 
(d)  Denial. 
(1)  The city shall deny a request for issuance of a license for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
b.  In the case of renewal, if the applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed or imposed upon the sexually oriented business; 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide any information required by this division for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question on the application form or request for information; 
d.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency on the grounds that the proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of any standard, regulation, law or ordinance adopted or administered by such agency; 
e.  The application or license fees have not been paid; 
f.  An applicant is found to be in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any relevant statutes, codes, ordinances, regulations or other laws in effect in the city; 
g.  The granting of the application would violate a court order issued out of any court of competent jurisdiction; 
h.  The applicant has had a license issued under this division which had been suspended or revoked within the previous twelve (12) months; 
i.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts for which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for a license only when the time period required in this subsection has elapsed; 
j.  The corporation for which a license has been issued or requested is not in good standing as required by the secretary of state of the state in which the corporation is incorporated; or 
k.  If an applicant has had a license issued under this division or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked for cause within five (5) years of the date of the application. 
(2)  In the event that the city denies a request for issuance of a license, after having received and compiled information concerning the proposed business from all relevant sources, the city clerk shall make written findings of fact stating the reasons for the denial and will so notify the applicant within five (5) days of such decision. An applicant shall be entitled to a hearing on a decision to deny before the city council. A written request for such a hearing shall be made to the city council within thirty (30) days of the date of the city's decision to deny a request for issuance of a license. This hearing shall follow all the relevant procedures set forth for a suspension or revocation of a license contained in subsection 9-318(d). 
(3)  If, at the hearing referred to in subsection (d)(2) of this section, the city council determines that the applicant is ineligible for a license pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section, the city council shall issue an order affirming the city's denial, within thirty (30) days after the date of the hearing is concluded, based on the findings of fact advanced at the hearing. A copy of the order shall be mailed to, postage prepaid, or be served on, the applicant at the address shown in the application. 
(4)  The order of the city council made pursuant to subsection (d)(3) of this section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4). Failure of an applicant to timely appeal the city council's decision constitutes a waiver by the applicant of any right to contest the decision. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other time periods set forth in this division, no license shall be issued by the city until the building in which the business is to be housed is ready for occupancy with such furniture, fixtures, and equipment in place as necessary to comply with the provisions of this article as well as any other requirements determined by the building inspection division, and then only after inspection of the premises has been made by the building inspection division to determine that the applicant has complied with the plans and specifications submitted upon application. If the licensed location has been inactive, or if the construction of the building has not commenced within one (1) year after approval of the request for issuance of a license, the city, at the city council's discretion, may revoke, suspend or elect not to issue or renew the license. Such discretion also exists if the building fails to be in operation within two (2) years of granting approval for the issuance of a license. 
(e)  Notification. Notification under this division shall mean a mailing to the licensee by regular mail, postage prepaid, at the address listed on the license application, and the effective date for the notice shall be counted from the date of such mailing. Any notification made or required of the applicant, licensee, or other private party under this division shall be considered received by the city within the time periods specified. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-311. - Annual license fees. 
(a)  The annual license fee, including renewal fees, for a license required under this division shall be as established by resolution of the city council. This fee does not include the application fee required by subsection 9-308(h). 
(b)  The annual license fee, including renewal fees, for a manager's license of a sexually oriented business is as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-312. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Each license required under this division shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 9-308 and payment of the application fee; for renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the license. If a renewal application is submitted less than sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the license, the expiration date of the license will not be continued and the applicant/licensee will be accepting the risk that the request for a renewal of the license may not be completed in time to ensure continuous operation of the business. An expired license is invalid. 
(b)  The city may deny a request for renewal on the same grounds as stated in subsection 9-310(d)(1). If the city denies a request for renewal of license and then finds that the basis for the denial has been corrected, the applicant shall be so notified and a renewal of the license will be processed if at least thirty (30) days have elapsed since the date the application for renewal was denied and the correction has occurred within six (6) months of submitting the application for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-313. - Transfer. 
(a)  A licensee, owner, principal owner or manager shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license issued pursuant to this division at any address other than the address designated in the application for license. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer a license issued under this division either directly or indirectly to any person unless and until such person: 
(1)  Files the equivalent of a new application with the city clerk and a new license is issued pursuant to this division; and 
(2)  Pays a transfer fee of twenty (20) percent of the annual license fee. 
(c)  No license may be transferred when the city clerk has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(d)  A license cannot be transferred to a different location. 
(e)  A license issued pursuant to this division is invalid if there is any attempt to transfer the license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-314. - Changing, altering, or modifying licensed premises. 
(a)  After the issuance of a license under this division, the licensee shall make no physical change, alteration or modification of the licensed premises which materially or substantially alters the licensed premises or the usage of the licensed premises from the plans and specifications submitted at the time of obtaining the original license. If the licensee wishes to make a physical change, alteration, or modification, the licensee must apply for a new license under the application provisions in section 9-308. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, physical changes, alterations or modifications of the licensed premises or in the usage of the licensed premises requiring prior written consent shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Any increase or decrease in the total size or capacity of the licensed premises. 
(2)  The sealing off, creation of or relocation of a common entryway, doorway, passage or other such means of public ingress and/or egress, when such common entryway, doorway or passage permits access to the licensed premises from or between public streets or thoroughfares, adjacent or abutting buildings, rooms or premises. 
(3)  Any change, alteration or modification to a peep booth which would result in increasing the size of the peep booth to more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
(4)  Any change, alteration or modification of the manager's station for sexually oriented businesses which exhibit sexually explicit films or videos in peep booths. 
(5)  Any material change in the interior of the licensed premises that would alter or affect the physical structure that existed in the floor plan on file with the latest application. This shall not apply to painting and redecorating of premises; the installation or replacement of electric fixtures or equipment, plumbing, refrigeration, air conditioning or heating fixtures and equipment; the lowering of ceilings; the installation and replacement of floor coverings; the replacement of furniture and equipment, and other similar changes. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-315. - Manager's license. 
(a)  If a sexually oriented business desires to employ a manager, such business must have a manager licensed pursuant to this section, except an owner or principal owner may act as a manager, in which case such owner or principal owner need not have a manager's license. 
(b)  Any manager of a sexually oriented business shall submit an application for a manager's license on a form to be provided by the city clerk. The application shall contain the applicant's name and any aliases, residential address, date of birth, phone number, and the information required in subsection 9-308(d)(1)a. The city shall grant the application within twenty (20) days of its filing unless: 
(1)  The applicant is under age twenty-one (21). 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section or has failed to completely fill out the application. 
(3)  The license fee for a manager's license, as required by section 9-311, has not been paid. 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in subsection 9-310(d)(1)i. 
(5)  The applicant is a manager of a sexually oriented business that is not operating in compliance with any provisions of relevant statutes, codes, ordinances, regulations or other laws in effect in the city. 
(c)  There is no requirement that a sexually oriented business must have a manager separate and distinct from an owner or principal owner. 
(d)  A manager's license will be valid as long as the manager is employed in that capacity. Each new manager for a business must have a manager's license issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-316. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city shall suspend a license issued under this division if the city finds that: 
(1)  A licensee, owner, principal owner or manager has: 
a.  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article including the regulations provided for in section 9-307 or has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to the prohibitions contained in section 9-306 or any specified criminal acts; 
b.  Been found to have operated or been found guilty of operating the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, such determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing such rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation and if the violation is of a type that can be corrected, the city shall notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the city shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; 
c.  Engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 9-313. In the event that the city suspends a license on the ground that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 9-313, the city shall forthwith notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the procedure for transfer as set forth in section 9-313 has been followed; 
d.  Failed to comply with the continuing duty of the applicant or licensee to supplement an application requesting issuance of a license pursuant to subsection 9-308(e); or 
e.  Operated the sexually oriented business when the corporation in whose name the license is held is no longer in good standing according to the secretary of state of the state under which the corporation is incorporated. 
(2)  An employee of the licensee has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to: 
a.  Any specified criminal acts; or 
b.  The prohibitions contained in subsection 9-306(d). 
(b)  In the event the city determines a license should be suspended, after having received information demonstrating or evidencing violation of this section, the city shall make written findings of fact stating the reasons for the suspension and will notify the licensee within five (5) days of such decision. All license suspensions under this section shall be for a period of thirty (30) days. The thirty (30) days shall commence eleven (11) calendar days from the date the city notifies the licensee of the grounds for suspension. In the event that the violation of the statute, law, ordinance or regulation in question has not been corrected within the thirty-day suspension period, the suspension will continue until the violation has been corrected, as verified by the city. If the violation has not been corrected within six (6) months, the city will have the authority to revoke the license according to the procedures set forth in section 9-318. 
(c)  A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if the city seeks to suspend a license under this section. The licensee shall have ten (10) days to request such hearing after the licensee has received notification of the city's decision to suspend the license. If the city clerk receives a request for a hearing by a licensee, the city council will schedule such hearing within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request and will so notify the licensee of the date and time of the hearing. The hearing shall follow all the relevant procedures set forth in subsection 9-318(d). 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-317. - Summary suspension. 
(a)  Where the city has reasonable grounds to believe and finds that a licensee under this division has been guilty of a willful violation of any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation and, as a result, there exists an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare which requires emergency action, the city may temporarily and summarily suspend the license pending a request for proceedings by the licensee. 
(b)  The temporary suspension of a license without notice pending any prosecution, investigation, or public hearing shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. The licensee, during this time period, may request a hearing provided for in subsection 9-318(d). If the licensee does not request a hearing within the fifteen (15) days, the license shall remain suspended for an additional fifteen (15) days or until the reason for the summary suspension and imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare has been eliminated. If the reason for the summary suspension has not been corrected within six (6) months, the city will have the authority to revoke the license according to the procedures set forth in section 9-318. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 9-318. - Revocation. 
(a)  Subject to the appeal provisions provided in this section, the city shall revoke a license issued under this division upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause for suspension as set forth in section 9-316 occurs and the license had previously been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(2)  A license has been suspended under section 9-316 and the licensee has failed to correct the violation for which the license was suspended within six (6) months; 
(3)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, or manager gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(4)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances, as defined in C.R.S. 12-22-301 et seq., to occur on the licensed premises of a sexually oriented business; 
(5)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution to occur on the licensed premises of a sexually oriented business; 
(6)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(7)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, or manager has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in subsection 9-310(d)(1)i. has not elapsed; 
(8)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person committed an act or action which occurred in or on the premises, which act or actions constituted a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere had been entered and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the act was committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(9)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes, fees or other financial obligations; 
(10)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(11)  A licensee, owner, principal owner, manager, or an employee has knowingly allowed any activity, conduct, or sale of material that has been found by a court of law to be obscene, as "obscene" is defined in C.R.S. 18-7-101, as amended; or 
(12)  The licensee, owner, principal owner, manager or an employee has operated more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  In the event the city determines that a license should be revoked, after having received information demonstrating or evidencing a violation of this section, the city shall make written findings of fact stating the reasons for the revocation and will so notify the licensee within five (5) days of such decision. A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if the city seeks to revoke a license under this section. A request for such hearing must be received by the city clerk within ten (10) days of such request for a hearing. If the city clerk receives no request for a hearing within ten (10) days of notification, the decision to revoke a license will be final. If the city clerk receives a request for a hearing by a licensee, the city council will schedule such hearing within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request and will so notify the licensee of the date and time of the hearing. The hearing shall follow all the relevant procedures set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  When the city has determined that a license should be revoked, the revocation shall continue for a period of two (2) years. A licensee, owner or principal owner of a sexually oriented business who has had a license revoked shall be ineligible to apply for a license for two (2) years from the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if the city seeks to deny, suspend, or revoke a license issued pursuant to this division for reasons stated in this division, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  The city council shall hear statements and consider all evidence, including the city's findings, from the police department or other enforcement officers, the licensee, the owner, or principal owner, or other affected department or that any other witness shall offer which is relevant to the violation of any statute, law, ordinance, or regulation alleged to have occurred. The hearing shall be an informal quasi-judicial hearing with the rules of evidence used as a guide for the presentation of evidence. All testimony by witnesses must be sworn testimony; the city council shall swear in all witnesses. The city council shall make findings of fact and issue an order from the statements, evidence and arguments offered. The burden of proof is on the city to show that a violation of any statute, law, ordinance or regulation occurred or that action constituting grounds for denial, suspension or revocation occurred by a preponderance of the evidence. If the city council determines that such a violation occurred or that any grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation, the city council shall issue an order either reaffirming the city's findings or an order denying, suspending or revoking the license. The order shall be prepared within thirty (30) calendar days after the hearing is concluded. A copy of the order shall be mailed, postage prepaid, or served on the licensee or owner at the address shown on the license. 
(2)  The order of the city council made pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4). Failure of a licensee, owner or principal owner to timely appeal the order constitutes a waiver by the licensee, owner or principal owner of any right that may otherwise be available to contest the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. 
(3)  The city council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary, grant continuances. Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and/or the production of papers, books, records or other documents necessary for a fair determination of any issue presented at the hearing. A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the state. Upon failure of any witness to comply with such subpoena, the city attorney shall: 
a.  Petition any judge of the municipal court, setting forth that due notice has been given of the time and place of attendance of the witness and the service of the subpoena, that the court, after hearing evidence in support of or contrary to the petition, enter its order compelling the witness to attend and testify or produce books, records or other evidence, under penalty of punishment for contempt in case of willful failure to comply with such order of court; or 
b.  Petition the district court in and for the county, setting forth that due notice has been given of the time and place of attendance of the witness and the service of the subpoena, that the court, after hearing evidence in support of or contrary to the petition, enter its order as in other civil actions, compelling the witness to attend and testify or produce books, records or other evidence, under penalty of punishment for contempt in case of willful failure to comply with such order of the court. 
(e)  In any such proceedings the city attorney may act on behalf of the city during the hearing. The licensee, owner or principal owner may be represented by counsel. 
(f)  All hearings held before the city council regarding suspension or revocation of a license issued under this division shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording device. Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the city clerk and shall pay all costs of preparing such record. 
(g)  In the event of a denial, suspension or revocation of a license, or a cessation of business for any reason, no portion of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(h)  When the city council affirms a decision by the city to deny, suspend or revoke, pursuant to the applicable subsections of this section, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be for the same time period and upon the same conditions as specified by that subsection. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Secs. 19-319-19-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 

Sec. 9-331. - [Prohibited.] 
    The operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses, as defined in C.R.S. title 12, article 43.3, (the "Colorado Medical Marijuana Code"), are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 7-2010, 7-13-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7-2010, adopted July 13, 2010, set out a provision designated as art. XI. In order to preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, said provision has been redesignated as § 9-331. 
Chapter 10 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited on streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways or public places and in any vehicle, § 3-12; fire lanes established, § 7-41; motor vehicles restricted in public parks and recreation areas, § 13-50; driving motorized vehicles on or in a water body restricted, § 13-51; snowmobiles restricted in public parks, parkways or other recreation areas, § 13-52; entrance and exit signs required in trailer parks, § 20-96; parking in driveways and walkways in trailer parks restricted, § 20-103; parking regulations and requirements in the zoning code, App. A, Ch. VII. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, C.R.S. 42-4-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Unlawful registration of motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall register a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. 42-6-137(2). 
(b)  A person who registers a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. 42-6-137(2) shall be subject to a five-hundred-dollar civil penalty (penalty assessment amount) pursuant to the authority granted in C.R.S. 42-6-137(4). The procedure for the assessment of such civil penalty shall be as follows: 
(1)  When the city finance director determines on such information as is available that a person has registered a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. 42-6-137(2), the finance director shall provide to such person a notice of deficiency for the penalty assessment amount, pursuant to section 19-161(2). 
(2)  Such person shall pay such civil penalty within the same period provided for in the notice of deficiency, unless such person files a written protest pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3)  If such person desires to protest the notice of deficiency, such person shall file a written protest with the finance director within the time period provided pursuant to section 19-161 for protesting a notice of deficiency. The protest shall set forth the facts which show that a violation of C.R.S. 42-6-137(2) did not occur. The finance director shall issue a written decision affirming or withdrawing such penalty notice within the time period and in the same manner as provided for pursuant to section 19-161 on a protest on a notice of deficiency. If the decision affirms the penalty assessment notice, such person shall pay such civil penalty. 
(4)  Such person may seek judicial review of the finance director's decision pursuant to Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 106(a)(4). No such judicial review shall be available if a written protest was not timely filed in the manner provided for in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The finance director may enforce collection of the civil penalty provided for in this subsection (b) in any manner provided in chapter 19, articles III and IV for the collection of unpaid sales or use taxes, penalties, or interest. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the collection of any tax or fee or penalties or interest thereon provided by law, or the imposition of any other civil or criminal penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-1986, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Secs. 10-2-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MODEL TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 10-26. - Adopted; exceptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31 and part 4 of article 15 of title 30, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2003 edition of the "Model Traffic Code" promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 E. Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the model traffic code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purpose of this article and of the code adopted in this section is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three (3) copies of the model traffic code adopted in this section are filed in the office of the city clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(b)  The 2003 edition of the model traffic code is adopted as if set out at length in this section, except for the following articles and/or sections, which are declared to be inapplicable to the city and are therefore expressly deleted: section 711, driving on mountain highways; section 1011, use of runaway vehicle ramps; section 1012, high occupancy vehicle lanes; section 1408, operation of motor vehicles on property under the control of or owned by parks and recreation districts; section 1901, school buses-equipped with supplementary brake retarders; section 1902, school bus drivers-special training required; section 1904, regulations for school buses-regulations on discharge of passengers-penalty-exception. 
(Code 1961, § 17-1; Ord. No. 36-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 1-1-96; Ord. No. 19-2006, 9-26-06, eff. 10-6-06) 
Sec. 10-27. - Amendments. 
    The model traffic code adopted in section 10-26 is subject to the following additions and modifications: 
(1)  Article 1, Part I, Traffic Regulations generally, shall have the following provisions amended or added: 
a.  Section 108, Public officers to obey provisions-exceptions for emergency vehicles, subparagraph (3) shall be amended to read as follows: 
(3)  The exemptions granted in paragraphs (b) to (d) of subsection (2) of this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of section 213, and the exemption granted in paragraph (a) of subsection (2) of this section shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of visual signals meeting the requirements of section 213 unless using such visual signals would cause an obstruction to the normal flow of traffic; except that an authorized emergency vehicle being operated as a police vehicle while in actual pursuit of a suspected violator of any provision of this title need not display or make use of audible or visual signals so long as such pursuit is being made to obtain verification of or evidence of the guilt of the suspected violator; excepting also that an authorized emergency vehicle being operated as a police vehicle while approaching the suspected scene of a crime may dispense with use of audible or visual signals if, at the officer's discretion, such use of audible or visual signals would alert the alleged perpetrator of the officer's approach. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require an emergency vehicle to make use of audible signals when such vehicle is not moving, whether or not the vehicle is occupied. 
b.  Section 1412, Operation of bicycles and other human-powered vehicles, shall have paragraph (10)(e), riding on sidewalks, added and shall read as follows: 
(10)(e) Riding on sidewalks. 
(1)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk. 
(2)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(3)  No motorized bicycle shall be operated on any sidewalk unless such operation is specifically designated. 
c.  Section 109, Motorized bicycles, [motorized scooters,] animals, skis, skates, toy vehicles, and all terrain recreational vehicles on highways shall be amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Every person riding a motorized bicycle [or motorized scooter] upon a roadway where motorized bicycle [or motorized scooter] travel is permitted shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties and penalties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as set forth in this Code, except those provisions of this Code which, by their very nature, can have no application. Said riders shall also comply with special rules set forth in this section and in section 220 (1)(b) and (1)(c) and, when using streets and highways within incorporated cities and towns, shall be subject to local ordinances regulating the operation of motorized bicycles [and motorized scooters] as provided in section 42-4-111, C.R.S. Whenever the word "vehicle" is used in any of the driving rules set forth in this article that are applicable to motorized bicycle riders, such term shall include motorized bicycles [and motorized scooters.] 
(2)  A person riding a motorized bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(3)  No motorized bicycle [or motorized scooter] shall be used to carry more persons at one (1) time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(4)  No person riding upon any motorized bicycle, [motorized scooter,] coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(5)  Every person operating a motorized bicycle [or motorized scooter] upon a roadway shall ride as close to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(6)  Persons riding motorized bicycles [or motorized scooters] upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on lanes or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Persons riding or leading animals on or along any highway shall ride or lead such animals on the left side of said highway, facing approaching traffic. This shall not apply to persons driving herds of animals along highways. 
(9)  No person shall use the highways for traveling on skis, toboggans, coasting sleds, skates, or similar devices. It is unlawful for any person to use any roadway of this state as a sled or ski course for the purpose of coasting on sleds, skis, or similar devices. It is also unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a highway in a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This subsection (9) does not apply to any public way which is set aside by proper authority as a play street and which is adequately roped off or otherwise marked for such purpose. 
(10)  Every person riding or leading an animal or driving any animal-drawn conveyance upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Code, except those provisions of this Code which by their very nature can have no application. 
(11)  Where suitable bike paths, horseback trails, or other trails have been established on the right-of-way or parallel to and within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the right-of-way of heavily traveled streets and highways, the department of transportation may, subject to the provisions of section 43-2-135, C.R.S., by resolution or order entered in its minutes, and local authorities may, where suitable bike paths, horseback trails, or other trails have been established on the right-of-way or parallel to it within four hundred fifty (450) feet of the right-of-way of heavily traveled streets, by ordinance, determine and designate, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, those heavily traveled streets and highways upon which shall be prohibited any bicycle, animal rider, animal-drawn conveyance, or other class or kind of non-motorized traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic, and, upon such a determination, the department of transportation or local authority shall erect appropriate official signs giving notice thereof; except that with respect to controlled access highways the provisions of section 42-4-1010(3), C.R.S., shall apply. When such official signs are so erected, no person shall violate any of the instructions contained thereon. 
(12)  The parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any provision of this section. 
(2)  Part 12, Parking shall be amended as follows: 
a.  1204(1)(k) shall be amended as follows: 
1204(1)(k) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, or at any place where official signs prohibit parking, or at any place on public or private property clearly marked with a yellow painted curb or as a yellow zone curb mark pursuant to 1222. 
b.  Section 1204. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places, subsection (1)(l) shall read as follows: 
Public alleys except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or freight, and not in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
c.  Section 1211 shall be amended to read as follows: 
1211. Limitations on backing. 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle, whether on public property or private property which is used by the general public for parking purposes, shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic or endangering human or animal life or any public or private property. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
d.  There shall be added a Section 1220 entitled "Two-hour parking zones" which shall read as follows: 
1220. Two-hour parking zones. 
(1)  The traffic engineer under and pursuant to the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities shall cause appropriate signs to be installed at appropriate places giving notice of the parking limitation of two (2) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays as defined in the model traffic code. 
(2)  Designation. The traffic engineer, with prior official approval of the city council, may, from time to time, designate additional parking spaces or parking areas as being subject to this section. 
(3)  Unlawful parking; enforcement. It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space within any designated two-hour parking area for a continuous period of more than two (2) hours. Enforcement of this section shall be as set forth in the model traffic code. The maximum fine to be levied for each violation shall be five dollars ($5.00) and the municipal judge shall have the authority to designate such violation as a penalty assessment violation and shall specify by a suitable schedule the amount of such penalty assessment fine and the maximum allowable time with which such fine shall be paid. Nonpayment of such fine shall be enforced the same as any other violation under the model traffic code. 
e.  There shall be added a Section 1221 entitled "Abandoned vehicles" which shall read as follows: 
1221. Abandoned vehicles. 
    Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle attended or unattended standing in violation of Section 1204 of this Code, as amended, Section 1205, as amended, or Section 1202, as amended, of this code, or left unattended for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more and presumed to be abandoned under conditions prescribed by Section 18-4-512, C.R.S. 1990, such officer shall cause the vehicle to be removed and placed in storage in a garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the municipality, said removal and storage to be at the sole cost, risk and expense of the owner or person in charge of said vehicle and said cost of removal and storage shall be paid by the owner or person in charge thereof prior to release of said vehicle. 
f.  There shall be added a Section 1222 entitled "Disposal of abandoned vehicles." 
1222. Disposal of abandoned vehicles. 
    Vehicles removed from streets or highways and other property within this municipality and placed into storage as provided by Section 1221 of this Code shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. 42-4-1801, et seq., as amended. 
g.  There shall be added a Section 1223 entitled "Authority to paint yellow zones." 
1223. Authority to paint yellow zones. 
    Yellow zones within the City of Sterling shall be governed as follows: 
(1)  On public property and rights-of-way, no person or corporation shall paint or designate any yellow curb, yellow zone, or other yellow area other than the agents, contractors, and employees of the city, and the responsibility for establishing yellow curbs and zones shall hereby be delegated to the department of public works, in cooperation with the department of fire and the traffic engineer. 
(2)  On private property, the city may require the owner, lessee, or other authorized person to designate certain areas as yellow curbs, zones or areas and paint the areas at the direction of the department of public works for the purposes of fire protection, in accordance with city code section 741. 
(3)  On private property, an owner, lessee, or other authorized person may mark "No parking" zones by the use of yellow curbs and zones, in accordance with Section 1224 of the model traffic code, as amended, and such yellow markings shall be sufficient to properly post and give notice that parking is prohibited. Yellow zones and curbs shall only be used to designate places where parking is prohibited. 
(4)  Except areas painted yellow, in conjunction with Section 1204(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (g), (h), (i) or (j); Section 1204(2)(a) through (e); Section 1204(3)(a) of the model traffic code, all yellow curbs and zones which are designated on state highways within the city shall also be posted with official signs, designating the parking restriction. 
(3)  Part 14, Other Offenses shall have the following additions or amendments: 
a.  Section 1419, Approach of authorized emergency vehicles, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1419. Approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of signals as described in Sections 213 and 222 of this Code, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way and shall leave the roadway and remain off the same until said vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
b.  Section 1420, Authority of police and fire department officials, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1420. Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic regulations of this municipality on all of the state laws applicable to street and highway traffic in this municipality. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such special officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with state traffic laws and the traffic ordinance of this municipality, provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department and other special officers as are assigned by the chief of police, may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the state traffic laws and provisions of this code. 
(c)  Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there at, or in the immediate vicinity. 
c.  Section 1421, Obedience to police and fire department officials, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1421. Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or member of the fire department at the scene of a fire who is invested by law or ordinance with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
d.  Section 1422, When permits required for parades or processions, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1422. When permits required for parades or processions. 
    No parade shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street in this municipality, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and in compliance with such other regulations as are set forth in this Code or by Colorado statutes, when said parade or procession is to occur upon a state highway. 
e.  Section 1423, Funeral processions, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1423. Funeral processions. 
(a)  Each driver of a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(b)  No driver of vehicles shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while said vehicles are in motion. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by signals or police officers. 
f.  Section 1424, Driving on sidewalks, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
1424. Driving on sidewalks. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon sidewalks or upon a sidewalk area within this municipality, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(4)  Article II, Definitions, shall have the following provisions amended or added: 
a.  Article II, Section 102, Definitions, subparagraph (68), shall be amended to read as follows: 
"Sidewalk" or "Sidewalk area" means that portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
b.  Article II, Section 102, Definitions, subparagraph (90), Holidays, shall be added and shall read as follows: 
"Holidays" where used in this ordinance or on official signs shall, in addition to Sundays, mean New Year's Day, President's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and such additional statutory holidays as may [made] by ordinance be declared applicable. 
c.  Article II, Section 102, Definitions, subparagraph (42)(c), motorized scooter; shall be added and shall read as follows: 
(42)(c) "Motorized scooter" is any two-wheeled device that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an electric motor or internal combustion engine that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. 
(5)  a.  Article II, Section 102, Definitions, shall be amended by the addition of subparagraph (20.1) as follows: 
(20.1) "Dynamic braking device" means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, and is also known as a jake brake. 
b.  Section 223 is amended with the addition of subsection (3), to read as follows: 
(3) The operation or engaging of a dynamic braking device within the city is prohibited except for the aversion of immediate danger. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Additional additions or amendments to the Sterling Traffic Code [shall be as follows:] 
a.  Amending Section 1205 by the addition of a new subsection (4) to read as follows: 
(4)  On those streets which have been approved and signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than at the angle at the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such markings and with the a front wheel more than twelve (12) inches from the curb. 
b.  Amending Section 1202 to read as follows: 
Sec. 1202. Parking or abandonment of vehicles. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved and main-traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position, subject, when applicable, to the emergency lighting requirements set forth in section 230. 
c.  Adding a new Section 1410 to read as follows: 
Sec. 1410. Restricted use of streets. 
(1)  The use of certain streets and roadways by motor-driven cycles, trucks, or other commercial vehicles, bicycles, motorized bicycles, and horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic shall be restricted or prohibited when declared as provided in Article I, Part 1, Traffic Regulations Generally, and when official signs giving notice thereof are erected as authorized by this Code. 
(2)  For the purpose of road construction and maintenance, any street or portion thereof may, by action of this municipality or by agreement with other concerned road agencies, be temporarily closed to through traffic or to all vehicular traffic during the work project, and the traffic affected shall be guided along appropriate detours or alternate routes by official traffic control devices. 
(3)  When signs are so erected giving notice of restrictions or prohibitions upon the use of streets, no person shall disobey the directions or instructions stated on such signs. 
(4)  The provisions of subparagraph (1) shall not be construed to prohibit the drivers of any excluded vehicles from traveling over such restricted or prohibited streets, other than controlled access roadways, for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise or reaching their destinations which occur on these particular streets, provided such excluded vehicles enter such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceed no further than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
d.  Adding a new Section 1203 to read as follows: 
Sec. 1203. Obedience to stopping, standing, or parking regulations. 
    On any street or at any place within this municipality where official signs are posted giving notice of stopping, standing, or parking restrictions or prohibitions as authorized by this Code and described in traffic control schedules as provided for by the Sterling Traffic Code, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any manner in violation of the provisions contained on such sign or signs, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, or except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers when such standing does not obstruct, impede or endanger any traffic. 
e.  Amending Section 237(2) to read as follows: 
237. Safety belt systems-mandatory use-exemptions-penalty. 
(2)  Unless exempted pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, every driver of and every front seat passenger in a motor vehicle equipped with a safety belt system shall each wear a separate fastened safety belt while the motor vehicle is being operated on a street or highway in this state. 
f.  Adding a new Section 1210 to read as follows: 
1210. Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principle purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing, painting, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; and 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
g.  Amending Section 1707(3)(a) to read as follows: 
Sec. 1707. Summons and complaint or penalty assessment notice for traffic offenses-release-registration. 
    (3)(a) Whenever a penalty assessment notice for a traffic offense is issued pursuant to section 1701, the penalty assessment notice which shall be served upon the defendant by the peace officer shall contain the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, a citation of the Code alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the offense, the date and approximate location thereof, the amount of the penalty prescribed for such offense, the amount of surcharge thereon pursuant to section 24-4.2-109, C.R.S., the number of points, if any, prescribed for such offense pursuant to section 42-2-127, C.R.S., including point reduction provisions, and the date the penalty assessment notice is served on the defendant; shall direct the defendant to appear in a specified municipal court at a specified time and place in the event such penalty thereon are [sic] not paid; shall be signed by the peace officer; and shall contain a place for such defendant to elect to execute a signed acknowledgement of guilt and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed thereon within twenty days, as well as such other information as may be required by ordinance and C.M.C.R. to constitute such penalty assessment notice to be a summons and complaint, should the prescribed penalty thereon not be paid within the time allowed by ordinance or court order. 
h.  Adding a new Section 613 to read as follows: 
Sec. 613. Designation of highway maintenance, repair, or construction zones-signs-increase in penalties for speeding violations. 
(1)  If maintenance, repair, or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a state highway or municipal street, the department of transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdictions, may designate such portion of the highway as a highway maintenance, repair, or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair, or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to increased penalties and surcharges. 
(2)  The department of transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdictions, shall designate by appropriate signs a maintenance, repair, or construction activity is taking place or will be taking place within four hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair, or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, construction, or repair zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or local authority may display such signs on any fixed, variable, or moveable stand. The department of transportation or local authority may place such a sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway painting work. 
i.  Amending Section 1208(1) to read as follows: 
Sec. 1208. Parking privileges for persons with disabilities. 
(1)  As used in this section, "person with a disability" has the meaning provided for such term in section 42-3-121(1), C.R.S. and any person who has qualified for and obtained disabled veterans special license plates with the identifying feature for a person with a physical impairment affecting mobility under 42-3-115.5(5)(a)(ll), C.R.S.. 
j.  Amending Article II. Definitions. Sec. 102(85) as follows: 
Sec. 102. Definitions. As used in this Code, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(85)  "Truck" means any motor vehicle equipped with a body designed to carry property and which is generally and commonly used to carry and transport property over the public highways, but shall not include, however, pickup trucks. 
k.  Adding a new Section 111 to read as follows: 
Sec. 111. Use of motorized golf carts. 
(1)  Operation authorized. The operation of motorized golf carts by permit is hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets within the City of Sterling, except on state highways. Notwithstanding the restriction against operating a motorized golf cart on state highways, the operation of a motorized golf cart under permit may cross any street or road that intersects a street on which the operator is specifically authorized in the permit to operate a motorized golf cart. Any person operating a motorized golf cart under permit has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts. 
(2)  Permits. Authorization to operate a motorized golf cart on city streets is by permit only. Permits shall be issued by the city manager. All permits shall expire annually on December 31, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), unless adjusted by resolution by the Sterling City Council. 
(3)  Permit applications. Each application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of streets shall include: 
i.  The name and address of the applicant; 
ii.  A description of the specific area, including the names of all affected streets within which the applicant seeks authorization to operate a motorized golf cart; 
iii.  The proposed times of operation; and 
iv.  Such other information as the council may from time to time require. 
In addition, each permit application, whether for an initial permit or a renewal, shall be accompanied by (a) a photocopy of operator's valid Colorado drivers license, and (b) evidence of general liability policy with limits of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per individual and six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00) per incident. 
(4)  Required equipment. The following equipment is required on any motorized golf cart during operation upon the roadway of any street: 
i.  The slow moving vehicle emblem provided for by state statute, properly mounted on the rear of the golf cart pursuant to state regulations; 
ii.  A rear view mirror, properly mounted on the golf cart so as to reflect to the operator a view of the street for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of the golf cart; 
iii.  One four-foot red safety flag properly mounted on the rear of the golf cart; 
iv.  Properly operating brake lights; and 
v.  Seatbelts for the driver and passengers. 
(5)  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of any street within the city unless: 
i.  The operator has in his possession a valid, current and unrevoked permit issued to the operator by the city manager; 
ii.  The motorized golf cart is being operated on a roadway that is specifically designated in the operator's permit, except when crossing at an intersection as provided in subsection (1); 
iii.  The motorized golf cart is being operated during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset; 
iv.  The motorized golf cart is being operated at times other than during inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet; 
v.  The motorized golf cart is equipped with the required equipment described under subsection (4); 
vi.  The operator has current insurance coverage as provided in subsection (3), pursuant to state statute; and 
vii.  The operator observes all traffic laws and regulations, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts. 
(6)  Revocation or modification of permits. A permit issued under subsection (2) may be revoked or modified at any time by the city manager if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of streets within the city. For purposes of this section, the commission of any of the violations described in subsection (5) constitutes evidence that the violator cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of streets within the city. 
(7)  Appeal. Any person whose permit to operate a motorized golf cart has been revoked may appeal the revocation to the city council. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the city attorney within thirty (30) days of the date of revocation. 
(8)  Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1961, § 17-2; Ord. No. 12-1987, § 17-2, 6-23-87, eff. 7-6-87; Ord. No. 23-1991, 12-10-91, eff. 12-23-91; Ord. No. 2-1994, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 36-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 1-1-96; Ord. No. 14-1996, 4-9-96, eff. 4-19-96; Ord. No. 35-1997, 8-12-97, eff. 8-22-97; Ord. No. 49-1997, 9-23-97, eff. 10-3-97; Ord. No. 25-1998, 8-11-98, eff. 8-21-98; Ord. No. 16-1999, 8-10-99, eff. 8-20-99; Ord. No. 32-1999, 12-14-99, eff. 12-24-99; Ord. No. 26-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00; Ord. No. 28-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00; Ord. No. 19-2003, 9-23-03, eff. 10-3-03; Ord. No. 12-2004, 8-10-04, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 3-2012, 6-12-12, eff. 6-22-12) 
Sec. 10-28. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402, and 1413 of the adopted model traffic code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, and eluding officer shall apply not only to public places and ways, but also throughout the city. 
(Code 1961, § 17-3; Ord. No. 2-1994, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 36-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 1-1-96) 
Sec. 10-29. - Violation of article. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 17-4; Ord. No. 36-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 1-1-96; Ord. No. 50-1995, 1-2-96) 
Secs. 10-30-10-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-46. - Parking of trailers or equipment on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful at any time to park any trailer, semitrailer, trailer house, farm machinery or any vehicle of any kind whatsoever without motive power upon any of the streets, highways or alleys within the city for any purpose, separate and apart from the truck, tractor, car or other motor vehicle which draws or provides the motive power of, to and for such trailer or equipment. Temporary trailers and similar equipment for which a permit has been obtained from the traffic engineer shall be an exception to this section. 
(Code 1961, § 17-4.1) 
Cross reference- Trailers and trailer parks, Ch. 20. 
Sec. 10-47. - Two-hour parking zones. 
(a)  Posting. The traffic engineer under and pursuant to the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities shall cause appropriate signs to be installed at appropriate places giving notice of the parking limitation of two (2) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays as defined in the model traffic code. 
(b)  Designation. The traffic engineer, with prior official approval of the city council, may from time to time designate additional parking spaces or parking areas as being subject to this section. 
(c)  Unlawful parking; enforcement. It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space within any designated two-hour parking area for a continuous period of more than two (2) hours. Enforcement of this section shall be as set forth in the model traffic code. The maximum fine to be levied for each violation shall be five dollars ($5.00) and the municipal judge shall have the authority to designate such violation as a penalty assessment violation and shall specify by a suitable schedule the amount of such penalty assessment fine and the maximum allowable time within which such fine shall be paid. Nonpayment of such fine shall be enforced the same as any other violation under the model traffic code. 
(Code 1961, § 17-4.2; Ord. No. 15-1994, 7-26-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Secs. 10-48-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 10-66. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this division, the term "motor vehicle" shall be defined and interpreted in compliance with the definition of that term as adopted and used in the model traffic code of the city, and any amendments pertaining thereto, at the time of the alleged violation under this division. 
(Code 1961, § 17-5) 
Sec. 10-67. - Parking without consent of owner prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, in a private driveway or on private property, without the express or implied consent of the owner, lessee or other person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Code 1961, § 17-6) 
Sec. 10-68. - Parking in private parking lot in violation of posted restrictions. 
    Where private property or a portion thereof is devoted to the purpose of the parking of motor vehicles, and where the owner, lessee or other authorized person has established parking restrictions on such property and the restrictions are prominently posted so as to give notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, in violation of the parking restrictions so posted. 
(Code 1961, § 17-7) 
Sec. 10-69. - Presumption as to violator. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this division governing the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this division, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle where such violation occurred. 
(Code 1961, § 17-8) 
Sec. 10-70. - Filing of complaint. 
    All cases involving a violation of any provision of this division shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint in the municipal court, such complaint to be signed and executed by the owner, lessee, person in lawful possession or other authorized person having control over the premises. 
(Code 1961, § 17-9) 
Sec. 10-71. - Authority to remove vehicles. 
    Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle, attended or unattended, standing within the city in such a manner as to constitute a violation of section 10-67 or section 10-68, such officer shall require such vehicle to be removed. 
(Code 1961, § 17-11) 
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF ATV/OHVs 

Sec. 10-72. - Registration. 
(a)  It shall be legal for licensed drivers at least eighteen (18) years of age to operate an all-terrain vehicle, hereafter known as ATV (all-terrain vehicle) or OHV (off-highway vehicle) on the public streets within the city, providing that said vehicle is registered with the city and meets all requirements of this chapter. Owners wishing to register their vehicle with the city may do so at the police department. 
(b)  Registration with the city will be completed only when the vehicle being registered meets the criteria set forth by the city in accordance with local traffic ordinances already in place. 
(c)  Owners must provide the following: 
(1)  Bill of sale, title of vehicle or proof of ownership; 
(2)  Proof of current insurance; and 
(3)  Valid driver's license (a valid driver's license will be required to operate an ATV/OHV on the streets and alleys of the city.) 
(Ord. No. 11-2013, 7-9-13, eff. 7-19-13; Ord. No. 17-2013, 9-24-13, eff. 10-5-13) 
Sec. 10-73. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    All-terrain vehicle type I (ATV) means any motor vehicle forty-eight (48) inches, or over, in width, having an unladen dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less, a minimum of 350 cc engine, traveling on four (4) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, having a seat height of a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches when measured at the forward edge of the seat bottom, with handlebars for control and designed for or capable of traveling over unimproved terrain. 
    Insured means the same insurance requirements needed to operate a street legal motorcycle in the State of Colorado. 
    Operator means the person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Off highway vehicle (OHV) , as used in this section, shall mean an all-terrain vehicle type I (ATV) and/or utility type vehicle (UTV) as defined in this section. 
    State and city traffic laws means any traffic codes adopted by the city. 
    Utility type vehicle (UTV) means any recreational vehicle designed for and capable of traveling over unimproved terrain: traveling on four (4) or more low pressure tires, having a width of thirty (30) to seventy (70) inches, having an unladen dry weight of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds or less, having a seat height of twenty-five (25) to forty (40) inches when measured at the forward edge of the seat bottom, a minimum of 350 cc engine, and having side by side seating with a steering wheel for control. 
    Valid driver's license means any current, legal license not subject to revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 11-2013, 7-9-13, eff. 7-19-13; Ord. No. 17-2013, 9-24-13, eff. 10-5-13) 
Sec. 10-74. - Terms and conditions; fees. 
(a)  Terms and conditions of ATV/OHV use: city streets (hereinafter called "legal route"), except for any state highway, are open for ATV/OHV use under the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  ATV/OHV vehicle must be brought to the police department for VIN inspection, issuance of a permit and payment of registration fees, and must be re-registered upon transfer of ownership, before use on city streets; 
All ATV/OHV vehicle registrations must be renewed annually on the anniversary date of the initial registration by an owner; 
The initial registration fee for an ATV/OHV vehicle, including upon transfer of ownership, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the annual renewal fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00); these fees may be amended by resolution; 
(2)  Two (2) stickers must be placed on the ATV/OHV, one (1) on the front and one (1) on the rear, such that both stickers are clearly visible; 
(3)  ATV/OHV is insured. Proof of insurance required with vehicle at all times. Must maintain liability insurance coverage. Minimum required by state law; 
(4)  ATV/OHV operator is licensed driver eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(5)  Limited to one (1) person on OHV unless the OHV is designed for two (2) riders and there is [a] foot rest and hand holds for each rider. Side-by-sides (UTVs) must have and wear seatbelts for each occupant. All safety equipment on the OHV must be used. If UTV has a windshield, it must have operational wipers; 
(6)  ATV/OHV operator must obey all state and city traffic laws; 
(7)  No three-wheel ATV/OHV type vehicles are allowed on city streets; 
(8)  The operator of an ATV/OHV may not exceed the posted speed limit or a maximum speed of thirty-five (35) mph; 
(9)  The operator of an ATV/OHV on legal routes shall have all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of Colorado statutes and laws, except when those provisions cannot be reasonably applied to ATV/OHVs and except as otherwise specifically provided for in Colorado statutes; and 
(10)  Motor vehicles that have been modified to be used as ATV/OHVs are not permitted. 
(b)  Must meet the following safety equipment requirements: 
(1)  Headlamp; 
(2)  Tail lamp and reflector; 
(3)  Stop lamps on the rear; 
(4)  A horn or other audible warning device; 
(5)  A muffler and emissions system. 
(6)  Rear view mirror; 
(7)  A windshield or eye protection for the operator; 
(8)  For side-by-side vehicles, a seat belt is required for each occupant; 
(9)  Anyone under the age of eighteen (18) who is riding as a passenger on a UTV (side-by-side) or two-person ATV must wear a helmet; 
(10)  A footrest and hand hold for each passenger; and 
(11)  Turn signals. 
(Ord. No. 11-2013, 7-9-13, eff. 7-19-13; Ord. No. 17-2013, 9-24-13, eff. 10-5-13) 
Sec. 10-75. - Limitation of liability. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of any duty of care by the city with respect to, or the assumption of any liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of an ATV/OHV on the streets within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 11-2013, 7-9-13, eff. 7-19-13) 
Sec. 10-76. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  Any persons in violation of any city or state traffic laws will be ticketed and assessed fines that are application to said violations. The police department or any other legal policing authority is given all rights to write citations to those individuals breaking laws as outlined in this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall revoke the registration of any owner who is convicted of three (3) or more violations of any city or state traffic laws within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 11-2013, 7-9-13, eff. 7-19-13) 
Chapter 11 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 27-2000, adopted Aug. 22, 2000, effective Sept. 1, 2000, repealed chapter 11 in its entirety. Further, said ordinance set out similar provisions included as §§ 11-1-11-20, 11-26-11-34 and 11-40-11-45 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference- Power to abate nuisances, § 3-4(b). 
Cross reference- Authority to dispose of cats becoming public nuisances, § 4-111; burglar, fire and police emergency alarm systems regulated, § 9-296 et seq.; posting of handbills on property including trees prohibited, § 12-17; littering prohibited in parks and recreation areas, § 13-66; use of trash receptacles required in public recreation and park areas, § 13-67. 
State Law reference- Health, C.R.S. 25-1-101 et seq.; nuisances, C.R.S. 16-13-301 et seq.; noise, C.R.S. 25-12-101 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction, C.R.S. 1-15-401. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Prohibited; responsibilities of owners, agents, occupants. 
(a)  No person being the owner, agent or occupant or having under his control or responsibility any building, lot or premises shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain thereon or therein. The requirements and responsibilities placed by this section shall include a prohibition against any owner, agent or occupant of any building, lot or premises maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any nuisance on that property which is not used for a public traveled way but which is owned by the city and which is located between the sidewalk and the property line of any abutting or adjacent property of the owner, lessee or occupant. 
(b)  The term "owner" as used in this section shall mean the record owner as shown on the records of the tax assessor of the county and any agent, manager or representative of the record owner and shall also include any occupant or person entitled to possession of any premises. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-2. - Cases where nuisance not defined. 
    In all cases where no provision is made in this chapter defining certain nuisance and how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, those offenses which are known to the common law of the land and the statutes of the state as nuisances may, in case the same exists within the city limits, be treated as nuisances and the person who permits or creates such nuisances shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-3. - City manager to ascertain and abate. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager or the person he may direct or the person the city manager may designate in the absence of the city manager to ascertain and cause all nuisances to be abated. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-4. - Inspections, right of entry. 
    Any person charged or appointed to enforce this chapter may make such inspections as may be necessary so as to enforce this chapter and shall have the authority to enter any premises outside of a building at all reasonable times, in order to make a thorough examination of the premises and to cause all nuisances to be abated or removed as provided for in this chapter, and shall be free from any action or liability on account thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-5. - Violation-Notice to owner. 
(a)  If any of the provisions of this chapter are violated by permitting the existence of a nuisance as defined in this chapter on any lot, parcel of land, structure or premises, the city manager may serve, either personally or by mail, a written notice upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in control of such lot, parcel of land, structure or premises to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Service thereof shall be deemed complete upon personal delivery or after five (5) days from the date of mailing if the mailed notice is not returned to the sender undelivered. 
(b)  If the address of a person to be notified is unknown or a mailed notice is returned undelivered, the notice may be served by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation exists, in which event service of the notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of posting. 
(c)  Notification of an offense shall be deemed given to owner on all subsequent violations of the same offense occurring on the same property and within one hundred eighty (180) days of notification of the first offense. 
(d)  No such written notice of violation as provided for in this section for assessment shall be required prior to a criminal prosecution for violation of this Code or prior to any other remedy available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-6. - Emergency abatement. 
    When, in the opinion of the city manager, police chief or fire chief, a nuisance constitutes an immediate and serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or in the case of any nuisance in or upon any street or other public way or public ground in the city, the city manager, police chief, fire chief or any other designated city official shall have authority to abate the nuisance summarily without notice of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-7. - Same-Failure to correct; abatement by city; lien. 
    If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to correct the violation within ten (10) days of service of the notice, the finance director may cause the necessary work to be performed to eliminate the violation and reasonable efforts made to notify the owner, lessee or occupant of the cost thereof plus the charges authorized in this chapter; provided that in no event shall failure of the owner, lessee or occupant to receive notice of the cost and charges void the lien provided for in this chapter. The actual cost of the work plus fifteen (15) percent for inspection and other costs in connection therewith shall, if payment thereof is not made to the city within thirty (30) days after completion of the work, become a lien against the property as of the date the finance director certifies the cost and charges to the office of the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. The county treasurer shall also collect a ten (10) percent penalty for cost of collection. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-8. - Same-Assessment of costs, charges. 
(a)  Duty of owner, lessee, occupant. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises to pay the costs and charges provided for in section 11-7 or object thereto as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Objections. If any owner, lessee or occupant desires to object to the assessment made, he shall, within thirty (30) days after completion of the work on the subject property file a written objection thereto with the city clerk who shall thereupon set a meeting with the city manager as the date when the objector may appear before the city manager and have his objections heard. 
(c)  Payment. The costs and charges assessed in this chapter may be paid to the city clerk at any time prior to certification of the same by the finance director to the office of the county treasurer; thereafter, payment shall be made only to the office of the county treasurer. 
(d)  Collection. Upon receipt of the assessment roll, the county treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts so assessed and certified against the property affected thereby in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes and the redemption thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-9. - Prohibited conditions. 
    No building, vehicle, structure or receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operation shall be dangerous, harmful or detrimental to the life, health, property or welfare of the inhabitants of the city and every act or thing, done or made, permitted or allowed, or continued on any property, public or private, by any person or his agents, servants or employees, which is harmful, dangerous or detrimental to the life, health, property or welfare of any of the inhabitants of the city shall be deemed a nuisance and in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-10. - Abandoned appliances. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon or store or allow the abandonment or storage of an icebox, refrigerator or other compartment or appliance capable of being airtight when the doors thereof are closed and which is accessible to children or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-11. - Deposit of offensive substances. 
    The filling, placing, depositing or location of any dung, carrion, dead animal, offal, garbage or any putrid or offensive substance or the contents of any privy, vault or cesspool on any street or alley or on or under any public or private ground or in any body of water shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-12. - Rubbish, debris, junk, stale or uncovered garbage and junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Completely enclosed building or garage shall not include a carport. 
    Junked or inoperable motor vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle not capable of travel under its own power in its existing condition or is dismantled, partially dismantled or damaged to the extent that it would be unlawful to use or operate on public streets or highways in the State of Colorado. 
    Rubbish, debris and junk shall include, but not be limited to, scrap lumber, scrap metals and materials, discarded furniture, discarded fixtures, discarded appliances, worn motor vehicle parts and tires not in current use, and all wrecked, abandoned, demolished, dismantled, partially dismantled, and junked or inoperable motor vehicles, machinery, trailers and other goods that are so worn or deteriorated as to make them unusable in their existing condition. Rubbish shall also consist of nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Stale or uncovered garbage shall mean any garbage which is stored otherwise than in covered cans or sealed containers or which creates odor or stench or is accessible to animals or otherwise creates a health hazard. 
    Travel under its own power shall mean the motor vehicle must be able to be started, stopped, driven forward and backward and all tires inflated. 
    Unlicensed motor vehicle shall mean the motor vehicle which is not currently and validly registered pursuant to the laws of the State of Colorado or any other governmental authority having lawful authority to license motor vehicles. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be deemed a nuisance and unlawful to deposit, accumulate, store, keep, abandon or to allow the deposit, accumulation, storage, keeping or abandonment of rubbish, debris, junk and junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles on private or public property within the city other than in areas zoned for the deposit, accumulation, storage, keeping or abandonment of rubbish, debris, junk and junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles other than as authorized in this section. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle collector's item as defined and regulated by C.R.S. 42-3-138, so long as the keeping and storing of such motor vehicle is in compliance with said statute. 
(2)  With the prior approval of the city manager, or his designee, the department of finance may issue a 180-day permit for junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles, which are being kept for the purpose of repair or restoration, but there shall be no extensions of the permit granted, and only one (1) permit may be granted per property per year. If, at the end of the 180-day permit period, the vehicle is still junked, unlicensed or inoperable, such motor vehicle shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(3)  The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles defined in subsection (a) of this section if said motor vehicles are stored or kept within a completely enclosed building. 
(d)  Restrictions on areas authorized for keeping junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles. Any area zoned and used for storage, keeping or abandoning of any junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles shall be kept free of weeds and any junk, rubbish and debris other than the authorized junked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle(s). 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-13. - Privies. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance to erect or maintain or allow the erection or maintenance of an outdoor privy; provided, however, that privies which have chemical elimination systems and which are not permanent are not prohibited under the provisions of this section. For purposes of this section, "not permanent" shall be defined as those chemical elimination systems utilized at construction sites and special events open to the public and the duration of which do not exceed two (2) weeks. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-14. - Wells that overflow. 
    Any well maintained or operated so that it overflows or waste is discharged therefrom into or over any street or other public way or place or upon or over private property so as to form ice, create a health or safety hazard, or in any other manner inconvenience or endanger persons or property shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-15. - Wells, gravel pits, other excavations not in use. 
(a)  Declared nuisance. All wells, gravel pits and other excavations that are not in operation or use or have been abandoned are thereby declared to be a nuisance and any person or persons who permit or create such nuisance shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  To be filled, covered, enclosed. At the time of the cessation of use and operation thereof or abandonment thereof, all wells, gravel pits and other excavations shall be filled with earth to the level of the surrounding and adjacent area or shall be covered with a concrete cap or lid, not less than four (4) inches in thickness or shall be surrounded and enclosed by a walled structure or fence which shall be of woven wire construction and not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-16. - Unclean or defective drain, ditch, garbage box, etc. 
    Any unclean, foul, unsafe, unhealthy, dangerous, defective or filthy drain, ditch, tank or gutter, or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box or receptacle of like character shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-17. - Unclean stable or stall. 
    Any stable, stall, shed, yard or appurtenance thereto in which refuse collects and accumulates to an extent offensive or unhealthy to others, or which is not kept protected from flies and other insects and rodents and in a clean or wholesome condition, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-18. - Unsafe pond or pool. 
    Any pond, pool, stream, ditch or deposit of water or other liquid or viscous body which is unsafe, dangerous or detrimental to the public health or safety or unwholesome or offensive in odor shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-19. - Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders. 
    The creation of dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in such quantities as to render such substance objectionable to the public or harmful to people or property shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-20. - Weeds and brush. 
    Any unauthorized accumulation of weeds or brush on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and a health hazard and is prohibited. 
    Dandelions in a population of ten (10) or more per square yard are declared to be a nuisance and a health hazard and is prohibited. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means volunteer growth of bushes, shrubs and trees such as are growing wild and without care and shall include all cuttings from trees, shrubs and bushes and high and rank shrubbery growth which may conceal filthy deposits. 
    Dandelions means the weed Taraxacum officinale weber. 
    Weeds means weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation which is in excess of twelve (12) inches in height. Bindweed, Canada thistle, perennial sowthistle, Russian knapweed, common ragweed, milkweed, common sunflower, Russian thistle, fireweed, mustards, sandburs and hairy stickweed shall constitute weeds, whether or not they are twelve (12) inches in height. This enumeration is not intended to be exclusive, but rather is intended to be indicative of those types of plants which are considered a detriment to the public health and safety, regardless of the height of said weeds. The term "weeds" shall not include flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens, and small grain plots (wheat, barley, oats and rye). 
    Any landowner in areas zoned as LI (Light Industrial) or HI (Heavy Industrial) may apply for a temporary exemption to this section by applying for a permit from the public works director for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The public works director may, for good cause, issue such a permit. The issuance or denial of a temporary exemption permit is subject to the approval of the city manager. 
    The public works director may designate any city-owned land exempt from this section, subject to the approval of the city manager. A copy of said list shall be available for public inspection in the office of the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00; Ord. No. 30-2008, 12-23-08, eff. 1-2-09) 
Secs. 11-21-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI 

Sec. 11-26. - Definitions. 
    The term "graffiti" as used in this article means the defacing of public or private property by any person or persons by painting, drawing, writing, etching or carving with paint, spray paint, ink, knife or any other method. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-27. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    All property defaced by graffiti which is visible to public view is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, shall be abated as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-28. - Enforcement. 
    The police department shall be responsible for enforcement of this article. After notice, as set forth in section 11-30, of the violation to the property owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of the property owner, lessee or occupant, having control of the subject property, the police department is authorized to commence abatement procedures set forth herein and pursue any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-29. - Removal required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is an owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of the property owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any building, sign, fence or other structure in the city to permit or maintain on any such structure the appearance of graffiti. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person who is the owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of the property owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any building, sign, fence or other structure on which graffiti exists in violation of this article to remove or cause to be removed all graffiti as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-30. - Notice of violation; removal by city; lien. 
(a)  If any of the provisions of this article are violated, the police department may serve, either personally or by mail, a written notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant of the building, sign, fence, or other structure, to comply with the provisions of this article. Service thereof shall be deemed complete upon personal delivery or after five (5) days from the date of mailing if the mailed notice is not returned to the sender undelivered. 
(b)  If the address of a person to be notified pursuant to this section is unknown or a mailed notice is returned undelivered, within five (5) days after the date of mailing, the notice may be served by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation exists, in which event service of the notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of the posting. 
(c)  If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to remove or eradicate the graffiti violation within ten (10) days of service of the notice, the police department may cause the necessary work to be performed to eliminate the graffiti violation and reasonable efforts made to notify the owner, lessee or occupant of the cost thereof plus the charges authorized in this section; provided that in no event shall failure of the owner, lessee or occupant to receive notice of the cost and charges void the lien provided for in this section. The actual cost of the work plus fifteen (15) percent for inspection and other costs in connection therewith shall, in the event payment thereof is not made to the city within thirty (30) days after completion of the work, become a lien against the property as of the date the police department certifies the cost and charges to the office of the Logan County Treasurer. 
(d)  No such written notice of graffiti violation as provided in this section for assessment shall be required prior to a criminal prosecution of violation of this Code or prior to any other remedy provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-31. - Duty to pay assessment. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises to pay the costs and charges provided for in section 11-30 or object thereto as provided in section 11-33. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-32. - Assessments paid to finance director. 
    The amount of assessment for the costs and charges provided for in this article may be paid to the finance director at any time prior to certification of the same to the office of the Logan County Treasurer, but thereafter payment shall be made only to the office of the Logan County Treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-33. - Objections to assessment. 
    If any owner, lessee or occupant desires to object to the assessment made, he/she shall within thirty (30) days after completion of the work on the subject property file a written objection thereto with the city clerk, who shall thereupon set a meeting with the city manager as the date when the objector may appear before the city manager and have his/her objections heard. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-34. - Logan County Treasurer to collect assessment. 
    Upon receipt of the assessment roll, the Logan County Treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts to assessed and certified against the property affected thereby in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes and the redemption thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Secs. 11-35-11-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATION 

Sec. 11-40. - Prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise which exceeds the limits established by this article and any violation hereof shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-41. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Construction activity means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Continuous sound means a study fluctuating or impact sound which exists, essentially without interruption, for at least a specified period of time. 
    dB(A) means the reading for the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. 
    Decibel dB(A) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound. 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or other property. 
    Loudspeaker/public address system means any machine or device used for the amplification of a human voice, music or any other sound, or which amplifies the human voice, music or any other sound. 
    Noise disturbance of the peace means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or 
(3)  Endangers or damages any property. 
    Real property boundary means the real property line that divides ownership of real property between one person or entity and another separate person or entity. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument or apparatus, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-42. - Specific acts prohibited. 
    The following acts are prohibited and declared to be in violation of this article: 
(a)  Horns and signal devices. 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device except as a danger warning authorized by the Sterling Traffic Code, as adopted by this Code of Ordinances; or 
(2)  The creation of, by means of any such horn or signal device, a sound in excess of ninety (90) dB(A) measured at fifty (50) feet from the horn or signal device; or 
(3)  The sounding of any such horn or signal device for any period of time which exceeds one (1) minute of continuous sound. 
(b)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loudspeakers/public address systems, tape players, record players and similar devices. 
(1)  Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio, television set, musical instrument, loudspeaker/public address system, tape player, record player or similar device at any time in such a manner as to permit the discernment of individual sounds at either the real property line or through a party wall within a building. 
(2)  Using, operating, or permitting the use of operation of any radio, television set, musical instrument, loudspeaker, tape player, record player or similar device in a moving motor vehicle at any time at a noise level in excess of eighty (80) dB(A). 
(c)  Loudspeaker/public address system during designated hours. Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that causes the sound therefrom to cross a real property boundary and create a noise disturbance of the peace. 
(d)  Loading operations. 
(1)  Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance of the peace; or 
(2)  Loading of any garbage, trash or compactor truck or any other truck, whereby the loading, unloading or handling is conducted within a residential zoned district or within three hundred (300) feet of any residence, hotel or motel between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and which generates sound exceeding eighty (80) dB(A). 
(e)  Construction activities and drilling work. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment in connection with construction activities or drilling work between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekends or holidays such that the sound therefrom as measured from the real property line where the sound is generated exceeds eighty (80) dB(A) except for emergency work on any public utility or authorized work by city personnel. 
(f)  Live bands and music. The playing, practicing, performing or permitting to be performed any live music exceeding a noise level of eighty (80) dB(A) when measured at a residential real property boundary, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-43. - General prohibition. 
(a)  Declared nuisance. It is hereby declared a nuisance to make, continue or cause to be made any unusual or unnecessary noise in the city, which either annoys, injuries, endangers or is detrimental to the comfort, repose, health, welfare, property or safety of others. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the making and continuing of noises that are necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some person or the public generally or to noises otherwise permitted by this chapter or by ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the absence of a specific restriction or prohibition of a noise disturbance of the peace, provided within this subsection 11-43(a) and (b), the maximum permissible sound pressure levels at the real property boundary where any stationary, fluctuating or continuous source of sound is generated shall be as provided in this section. Sound pressure level limits (dB(A)) in excess of those established for the zoning district and times listed below for an accumulated time in excess of a total of thirty (30) minutes in a four-hour period and measured at the boundary line of the real property where the sound is generated are prohibited and constitute a public nuisance: 
Use District 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. R-1, R-2, R-3, MH 50 dB(A) 50 dB(A) NB, CB 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A) CBD 65 dB(A) 60 dB(A) LI 65 dB(A) 60 dB(A) HI 75 dB(A) 70 dB(A)  
(d)  When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one (1) zone district, the sound pressure level limits of the most restrictive zone district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-44. - Exemptions. 
    The following uses and activities are exempt from the provision of this chapter: 
(1)  Sound emanating from safety signals or warning devices or sound resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(2)  Sound emanating from an activity that is authorized by the city council or the zoning board of adjustment through the approval of zoning, land use permit, or a variance, as applicable, with a specific condition authorizing the exemption or variation from the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Sound emanating from an activity conducted or sponsored by the city. 
(4)  Sound emanating from any bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any clock or chime that is under the control of any church or school. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Sec. 11-45. - Relief from noise restrictions. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may authorize temporary use permits to exceed the noise restrictions of this article for special events, including but not limited to, parades, carnivals or the use of loudspeakers/public address systems, subject to such terms and conditions as the city manager or his designee may determine to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  In addition to the authorization provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, an application for relief from the noise restrictions contained in this chapter may be made to the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to the requirements for any application for a variance as contained in the zoning ordinance of this city. Any decision granting relief from the noise restrictions of this article shall contain all conditions imposed on the relief granted, including but not limited to, the effective dates, time of day, location, sound pressure level and equipment limitation. 
(Ord. No. 27-2000, 8-22-00, eff. 9-1-00) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of offenses, § 1-15; municipal court, § 2-191 et seq. 
State Law reference- Colorado Criminal Code, C.R.S. 18-1-101 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Attempting, conspiring or inducing another to commit unlawful act. 
    It shall be unlawful to attempt to commit, conspire to commit or aid or abet in the commission of any act declared unlawful by this Code or any other ordinance of the city, whether committed individually or in connection with one (1) or more persons, as a principal, agent or accessory. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induce, cause, coerce, require, permit or direct another to violate this Code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2-1989, § 19-40, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 12-2. - False reporting to authorities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Make or cause to be made a verbal, written, electronic or telephonic report to law enforcement authorities or other city authorities of or pertaining to a violation of a city ordinance, medical emergency, fire, disaster, criminal offense, or other incident within the authorities' official concern, knowing the report is false; 
(2)  Cause a telephone transmission to the E911 emergency number, knowing that no emergency exists and with intent to annoy, harass, or interfere with the emergency service systems; or 
(3)  Provide false verbal, written or printed information regarding such person's or other persons' identification to any police officer or any person duly appointed to serve as a special or extra officer when such identification information is lawfully requested by any such officer in the performance of his/her duty. 
(Ord. No. 2-1989, § 19-23, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89; Ord. No. 9-1994, 6-14-94, eff. 6-24-94) 
State Law reference- False reporting to authorities, C.R.S. 18-8-111. 
Sec. 12-3. - Obstructing or resisting police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist, interfere with or oppose any police officer or person duly authorized to serve with or assist any police officer or any person duly appointed to serve as a special or extra officer, when such officer is engaged in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1961, § 19-24) 
Cross reference- Police department, § 2-136 et seq. 
Sec. 12-4. - Refusal to comply with lawful order of police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction, including an order or direction to provide verbal, written or printed information regarding such person's or other persons' identification, of any police officer or any person duly appointed to serve as a special or extra officer, when such officer is engaged in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 28-1987, § 19-25, 12-8-87, eff. 12-21-87; Ord. No. 9-1994, 6-14-94, eff. 6-24-94) 
Sec. 12-5. - Escape from custody of police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to escape from the custody of a police officer or, after being commanded by a police officer otherwise, to rescue another from the custody of a police officer or from the custody of any person aiding a police officer. The provisions of this section shall not apply whenever the escapee is being held for or charged with any felony or misdemeanor under state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2-1989, § 19-26, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 12-6. - Giving false fire alarm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give or make or cause to be given or made a false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1961, § 19-10) 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 12-7. - Disturbing the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or to tend to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, by loud or unusual noises, by unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or by assaulting, striking or fighting another, or for any person to permit any such conduct in any house or upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control, when within his power to prevent, so that others in the vicinity are or may be disturbed thereby. Obstreperous conduct shall be defined as, but not limited to, violations of C.R.S. § 18-9-111, as amended. Tumultuous shall be defined as, but not limited to, violations of C.R.S. § 18-9-106, as amended. 
(Code 1961, § 19-8; Ord. No. 22-1997, 5-13-97, eff. 5-23-97; Ord. No. 8-2001, 4-10-01, eff. 4-20-01) 
Cross reference- Noise, § 11-51 et seq. 
Sec. 12-8. - Discharge of firearms, other explosive devices, and use of bows and crossbows. 
    Except as authorized by state statute, no person shall, within the city or within public parks belonging to the city, fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, firearm, fireworks, except those defined as permissible in C.R.S. § 12-28-101(8), or air, spring or pellet gun of any description, or shoot arrows from any bow, crossbow or similar device, without permission in writing from the chief of police. Such permission shall limit the time and place of firing, for such purposes as dispersal of starlings, shooting of wells, pest control, and other similar uses. For firing on regularly maintained firing ranges, permission shall be limited to certain circumstances prescribed by the chief of police for safety and protection of persons and property. Such limitations may include, but are not limited to, the size and location of the range, the times during the day when the range may be operated, requirements that persons of certain qualifications, to be determined solely in the discretion of the chief of police, be present at all times when persons are firing on the range, a requirement that certain specified safety rules be followed, and a limitation of the use of firearms by persons under a specified age unless accompanied by an adult. Any person obtaining a permit under this section shall be on notice that he assumes the risk for the death of or injury to any person or damage to any property resulting either directly or indirectly from the intentional, reckless, negligent or accidental discharge of any gun. The chief of police and the city will not be liable for any damages which may result from granting a permit. 
(Code 1961, § 19-11; Ord. No. 23-1997, 5-13-97, eff. 5-23-97; Ord. No. 8-2001, 4-10-01, eff. 4-20-01) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms or dangerous missiles prohibited in any parks or recreation areas owned or leased by the city, § 13-63. 
Sec. 12-9. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
    No person shall throw any stone or other missile upon or at any person within the city. 
(Code 1961, § 19-32) 
Sec. 12-10. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not a peace officer, level I or Ia, or a peace officer, level II, while on duty, to carry concealed upon his person any dangerous or illegal weapon as defined by C.R.S. title 18, article 12, as may be amended from time to time, except that it shall be an affirmative defense that the person carrying a concealed weapon was: 
(1)  A person in his own dwelling or place of business, or on property owned or under his control at the time of the act of carrying; 
(2)  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection for his or another person or property while traveling; or 
(3)  A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to C.R.S. section 18-12-105.1, as may be amended from time to time, to carry the weapon by the chief of police of a city, or city and county, or the sheriff of a county. 
(Code 1961, § 19-36; Ord. No. 8-1997, 3-11-97, eff. 3-21-97) 
Sec. 12-10.5. - Firearms prohibited in city buildings and other specific locations where posted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer, to carry any firearm within any building owned or leased by the city or any department or agency thereof whenever signs are posted at the public entrances of such a building informing persons that the carrying of firearms is prohibited in the building. For purposes of this section, officers of the Sterling Municipal Court in possession of a valid Colorado permit to carry concealed handguns shall be deemed law enforcement officers. 
(b)  Any officer, employee, agent or agency of the city responsible for the management of any real property owned or leased by the city is hereby authorized to prohibit, by rule, the carrying of firearms within any specific area under the jurisdiction of said officer, employee, agent or agency. Any such rule shall provide for the posting of signs at the public entrances to any specific area in which the carrying of firearms is prohibited informing the public of such prohibition. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer, to carry any firearm within any specific area owned or leased by the city or any department or agency thereof whenever the carrying of firearms in the specific area has been prohibited by rule as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and signs are posted at the public entrances of the specific area informing persons that the carrying of firearms is prohibited in the specific area. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to affect or impair in any way the authority of any public or private property owner other than the city to prohibit the carrying of firearms into or upon other public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 20-2003, 9-23-03, eff. 10-2-03; Ord. No. 22-2009, 9-8-09, eff. 9-18-09) 
Sec. 12-11. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of sixteen (16) years to loaf, loiter or be in any public street, alley or other public place within the city, on foot or in a conveyance of any nature, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or adult member of his family or other reputable adult person. 
(b)  Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of sixteen (16) years who allows or permits such person to violate any provision of subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1961, §§ 19-20, 19-21) 
Sec. 12-12. - Possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of this state. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; 
b.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
c.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
d.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
e.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
f.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
g.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Electric pipes; 
10.  Air-driven pipes; 
11.  Chillums; 
12.  Bongs; or 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(2)  Marihuana or marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin. It does not include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination if these items exist apart from any other item defined as "marihuana" in this subsection (a). "Marihuana" does not include marihuana concentrate as defined in subsection (2) of this section. 
(3)  Marihuana concentrate means hashish, tetrahydrocannabinols, or any alkaloid, salt, derivative, preparation, compound, or mixture, whether natural or synthesized, of tetrahydrocannabinols. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess marijuana. 
(2)  Any charges brought against an individual for possession of greater than one (1) ounce of marijuana, or for marijuana concentrate, shall not be within the jurisdiction of the municipal court by virtue of this section, but shall be prosecuted pursuant to state statute. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia if he knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of the city and State of Colorado. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
c.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
d.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. No. 19-1998, 7-14-98, eff. 7-24-98; Ord. No. 9-1999, 5-25-99, eff. 6-4-99) 
Sec. 12-13. - Trespassing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon the property, real or personal, of another without the consent of the owner of the property, occupant of the property, or the agent or servant of the owner or occupant of such property. Such entry without consent shall be a violation of this section, whether or not the person so unlawfully entering such property is requested to remove himself immediately from the property. When a person enters onto property after having received written notification not to do so, it shall be prima facie evidence that the entry was without consent. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful for a person who has entered the property, real or personal, of another with the consent of the owner to fail or refuse to remove himself immediately from the property when requested to leave by the owner or occupant of the property or the agent or servant of the owner or occupant. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 19-38; Ord. No. 17-1987, § 19-38, 9-8-87, eff. 9-21-87; Ord. No. 29-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 12-14. - Theft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a theft. A person commits a theft when he knowingly obtains or exercises control over any thing belonging to another where the aggregate value is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), without authorization, or by threat or deception, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(b)  If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned and held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of the store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft. 
(c)  Evidence that any person willfully obtains any food, drink, goods, wares, merchandise, services or lodging under false pretenses; enters any public place and calls for refreshments or other articles and receives and refuses to pay for such articles; departs without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received food, drink, goods, wares, merchandise, services or lodging; or, having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of personal property of another which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return such property to the owner thereof or his representative or to the person from whom he has received it within seventy-two (72) hours after the time at which he agreed to return it, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft. The standard for prima facie evidence regarding intent to commit the crime of theft for rental property with a value less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be the failure to return such property after a period of thirty (30) days has elapsed since the person renting such property was required to return same to the property owner. Rental property with a value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be the only exception to the seventy-two-hour rule specified within this paragraph (c). 
(Code 1961, §§ 19-39, 19-40; Ord. No. 18-1987, §§ 19-39, 19-40, 9-8-87, eff. 9-21-87; Ord. No. 2-1989, § 19-39, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89; Ord. No. 24-1992, 7-28-92, eff. 8-10-92; Ord. No. 18-1995, 9-12-95, eff. 9-22-95; Ord. No. 28-1998, 8-11-98, eff. 8-21-98; Ord. No. 2-2008, 2-26-08, eff. 3-7-08) 
Sec. 12-15. - Injuring or defacing property generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or injure any property not his own, whether public or private. 
(Code 1961, § 19-19) 
Sec. 12-16. - Injuring trees or flowers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure, mark or deface any tree or flower planted for ornament or shade within the city. This section shall not be deemed to apply to any person cutting trees or flowers upon their own property or upon the property of another with the permission of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1961, § 19-33) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 12-17. - Posting of handbills without property owner's consent. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, paint, mark, nail or otherwise fasten or append any advertisement, handbill, poster or notice of any kind upon any curbstone, sidewalk, tree, utility pole, or hydrant, or upon any billboard, wall, door, gate or fence within the city, without the written consent of the owner. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided for in section 1-15, any person who violates this section shall be adjudged to pay the costs of tearing down or obliterating any notice, advertisement, handbill or poster put up contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 3-9) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9; nuisances, Ch. 11; trees and other plantings, § 22-26 et seq. 
Sec. 12-18. - Making unauthorized connection to cable television system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a company's CATV system, for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, sound, or other transmission, without payment to the company. 
(Code 1961, § 19-6.2) 
State Law reference- Theft of cable television service, C.R.S. 18-4-701 et seq. 
Cross reference- Cable communications system, Ch. 5.5. 
Sec. 12-19. - Tampering with cable television facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment of a company's CATV system used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, sound or other transmission. 
(Code 1961, § 19-6.3) 
Cross reference- Cable communications system, Ch. 5.5. 
Sec. 12-20. - Public indecency. 
    Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  An act of deviant sexual intercourse; 
(3)  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire to any person; or 
(4)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person. 
(Code 1961, § 19-16) 
Sec. 12-21. - Indecent exposure. 
    A person commits indecent exposure if he knowingly exposes his genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. Such behavior is declared to be unlawful. 
(Code 1961, § 19-17) 
Cross reference- Nudity prohibited in public parks and recreation areas, § 13-62. 
Sec. 12-22. - Furnishing tobacco products to minors; sale of tobacco products in vending machines. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tobacco products means cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plus and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking. 
    Smokeless tobacco product means any finely cut, ground, powered, or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral cavity or nasal passage, including but not limited to snuff and chewing tobacco. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age by gift, sale or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products, as defined in subsection (a) above. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase any cigarettes or tobacco products, as defined in subsection (a) above. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to have in such persons' possession any cigarettes or tobacco products, as defined in subsection (a) above. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any smokeless tobacco product by use of a vending machine or other coin-operated machine. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products, other than a smokeless tobacco product, by use of a vending machine or any other coin-operated machine which does not display the following warning sign: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND, UPON CONVICTION, A FINE MAY BE IMPOSED. 
The warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place on such machine at all times and shall have a minimum height of three (3) inches and a width of six (6) inches. 
(c)  A violation of the provisions of subsection (b)(5) above shall not constitute a violation of any other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-1990, 6-26-90, eff. 6-29-90) 
Sec. 12-23. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be the same as that specifically provided in section 2-243, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty and such other restrictions on the penalty as may be set forth in section 1-15. In the event that a violation occurs pursuant to this section and a specific penalty is not set forth in section 2-243, the penalty shall be at the court's discretion. It shall, however, still be subject to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 41-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of parks, library and recreation §§ 4-6, 9-1 et seq.; parks, library and recreation board, § 9-4. 
Cross reference- Parks, library and recreation department, § 2-166; open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited on streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways or public places and in any vehicle, § 3-12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; park and recreation areas in subdivisions, § 18-108. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the board of the department of parks, library and recreation of the city, as constituted by article IX of the charter. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or his designee. 
    Department means the department of parks, library and recreation of the city. 
    Director means the director of the department of parks, library and recreation of the city or the director's designee. 
    Group activities means the use of a specific area for organized group use or activity, including but not limited to company picnics, athletic events, theatrical events, group meetings and similar activities, including scheduled use of park areas, pavilions, athletic fields and buildings. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, campsite, recreation area or other area owned by or leased to the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-3, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
    This chapter shall apply throughout all parks and recreational areas owned by or leased to the city, both within and without the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-1, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-3. - Adoption and enforcement of rules and regulations. 
    The director of the department shall have the responsibility to develop rules and regulations relating to properties and related facilities under the supervision of the department, whether inside or outside the city, and for the preservation of order, safety and decency therein. On recommendation of the city manager, the board shall have power to adopt all such needed rules and regulations. For the purpose of enforcing such rules and regulations, all such properties shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city or park employee appointed as a special policeman shall have power to arrest without warrant, on all such properties, any person who has violated any such rule or regulation or committed any offense therein. All violations occurring in the presence of city employees may be processed upon the civilian complaint by such city employee to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-3, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-4. - Authority to seize property. 
    Law enforcement officials shall be empowered to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in a park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city, which property, thing or device is used in violation of any provision of this chapter or in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter and which is related to charges brought pursuant to violations of this chapter or violations of rules and regulations promulgated in accordance with this chapter. Such seizure and confiscation shall be in accord with general federal and state seizure and confiscation law. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-29, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-5. - Obedience to orders of park superintendents and employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the lawful or reasonable order of a park superintendent or park employee. Any person who has been ordered to leave a park or recreation facility and who fails to leave or reenters after leaving shall be considered trespassing. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-6, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-6. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be the same as that specifically provided in section 2-243, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty and such other restrictions on the penalty as may be set forth in section 1-15. In the event that a violation occurs pursuant to this section and a specific penalty is not set forth in section 2-243, the penalty shall be at the court's discretion. It shall, however, still be subject to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 42-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 42-1995, adopted December 12, 1995, effective December 22, 1995, amended Chapter 13 by adding a new Art. IV. For purposes of classification, such new provisions were included herein as § 13-6 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 13-7-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT FOR GROUP OR NONRECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 13-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permit means a permit for group or recreational activities required pursuant to this article. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-22. - Permit required. 
    Permits must be obtained from the director for the following: 
(1)  Any group activity involving fifty (50) or more persons who desire a specific area of any park or recreation facility of the city. 
(2)  Use by any person engaging in any nonrecreational activity in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(a), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-23. - Authority to issue permits. 
    Permits may only be issued by the director. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-24. - Contents of application. 
    The permit application shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any. 
(3)  The days and hours for which the permit is desired. 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired. 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance, if applicable. 
(6)  The nature and duration of the proposed activities. 
(7)  Any other information which the director finds reasonably necessary for fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(b), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-25. - Granting; denial. 
(a)  The director of the department shall have the responsibility to develop rules and regulations for obtaining a permit to engage in group or nonrecreational activities. On recommendation of the city manager, the board shall have power to adopt such needed rules and regulations. In reviewing permit applications and in issuing or denying a permit, the director shall base a determination on: 
(1)  The fact that the primary purpose of parks is to provide areas for the residents of the city and the general public to engage in recreational activities and temporarily exchange the urban environment for a more natural one; and 
(2)  The necessity of protecting and preserving the city's parks for recreational use by the citizens of the city and the general public. 
(b)  The director shall issue a permit when he finds that: 
(1)  The proposed specific activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the parks and is consistent with the primary purpose of the parks; 
(2)  The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, violation of municipal ordinances or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; 
(5)  The proposed activity will not violate any conditions of the city's ownership, occupancy or lease of the park; 
(6)  The proposed activity will not unreasonably endanger wildlife in the park or impact the environment detrimentally; and 
(7)  The desired facilities have not been previously requested for use at the day and hour requested in the application. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(c), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-26. - Response to applicant; review by city manager. 
    The director shall respond in writing to a written permit application within two (2) weeks after receipt of all information necessary to make a determination. All permits shall be reviewed by the city manager in his capacity as chief executive officer, and he may, in such instances as he deems appropriate, order the director to issue the permit subject to findings that the director is required to establish under subsection 13-25(b) and section 13-27, or he may deny the permit. Upon determination by the city manager, the director shall notify the applicant in writing whether the permit has been granted or denied and, if denied, of the reasons for the denial. If the permit was denied by the city manager after being granted by the director, the city manager shall give such reasons for denial. Such action by the city manager shall be taken within ten (10) days from the date the director submits the matter to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(f), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-27. - Contents of permit; bond. 
    All permits issued shall describe both the park area and the date and time when the permit is valid, the nature of the activity permitted, and such reasonable restrictions or requirements as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the standards for issuance set forth in subsection 13-25(b). The permittee shall post a bond or guarantee in a form acceptable to the director in an amount sufficient to ensure restoration of the park to its prior condition or to remedy any unacceptable impact upon the environment or wildlife. The permit shall also state (unless signed by the person to whom the permit is issued), that by acceptance and use of the permit the permittee agrees to indemnify and save and hold harmless the city for any liability the city may incur as a result of such negligence. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(d), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-28. - Cancellation. 
    The director shall have the power and authority to cancel any permit for any violation of the conditions of the permit, as well as for any violation of the rules and regulations governing use of the city parks. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-4(e), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-29. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make false statements or give false information in connection with an application for a permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or prepare to engage in any group or nonrecreational activity in any park or recreation area owned by or leased to the city except as authorized by a written permit issued by the director. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-19(a), (b), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-30. - Display of permit. 
    Any person engaging in group or nonrecreational activities within the park pursuant to permit must carry the permit in his possession while engaging in such activities, and must produce it upon the demand of the director, a park superintendent or employee, or an agent of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-19(b), 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Secs. 13-31-13-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 13-46. - Hours of use. 
(a)  Parks shall be open during designated hours. It shall be unlawful to enter or be in any park when it has been declared closed to the public by the director. Parks shall normally be open daily during the hours posted on signs located at each entrance to the park area, except for activities and events sponsored or authorized by the director. If the park is not posted with signs identifying specific open or closed hours, the park shall be closed daily in accordance with rules and regulations establishing opening and closing hours for all parks or for each park separately. The director, however, may declare any park closed at any time and for any interval of time as necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. Such declaration, when posted, shall have the same effect as a rule or regulation approved by the board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to occupy a parking site with a motorized vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless in the designated camping area at Pioneer Park. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-5, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-47. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful to store or consume any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor as defined in C.R.S. 12-47-101 et seq., the state Liquor Code or any fermented malt beverage as defined in C.R.S. 12-46-101 et seq., the state Beer Code, in any park or recreation area owned by or leased to the city, except at the Overland Trail Museum under a specifically regulated permitting process as adopted by the parks, library and recreation board, as recommended by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-7, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89; Ord. No. 2-2015, 3-24-15, eff. 4-3-15) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 13-48. - Open fires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow open fires on park lands, except in designated grills at Pioneer Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to allow a fire to burn in a careless manner, to leave any fire unattended, or to fail to extinguish completely any fire on park lands. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-8, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 13-49. - Commercial activity. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct any commercial activity on park lands or sell or offer for sale any service, product or activity for which a fee is charged, except when such activity is authorized in writing by the director. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-9, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 13-50. - Motor vehicles generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle within any park of the city except in designated areas or as authorized by signs, the order of the director, a park superintendent or employees or an agent of the police or fire department. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle within any park owned by or leased to the city when it has been declared closed to the public by the director, unless the motor vehicle is parked in a designated area. Parks shall normally be open daily during the hours posted on signs located at each entrance to the park area, except for activities and events sponsored by the director or authorized by the director. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of chapter 10 (pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic), in any park within the municipal limits of the city or other park outside the municipal limits of the city owned by or leased to the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-27, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 13-51. - Driving motorized vehicle on or in water body. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle of any kind on any lake, stream or water area on park lands, whether such lake or stream is frozen or not, unless authorized by the director in writing. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-16, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 13-52. - Snowmobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile in any park, parkway or other recreational area owned by or leased to the city, unless authorized by permit. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-13, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 13-53. - Animals running at large. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit the animal to run at large within any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the definitions found in section 4-1 are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-26, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 13-54. - Defecation by animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal which has defecated in any park, parkway or recreational facility to fail to clean up and remove such excrement or feces. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-10, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 13-55. - Horse riding. 
    It shall be unlawful to ride a horse or other animal on park lands except upon an authorized bridle path or on other areas which are specifically designated by the director for such use. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-18, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 13-56. - Ice skating. 
    It shall be unlawful to ice skate on any water body supervised by the department or included in any park or recreation facility unless the specific area to be used is so posted or public announcement has been made by the director allowing such activity. When such areas are open for use, they are subject to such rules and regulations as shall be approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-11, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-57. - Sledding. 
    It shall be unlawful to sled within any park or recreation facility of the city, except in areas designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-12, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-58. - Golfing. 
    No person shall drive, putt or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls or golf clubs in any area of any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city, except in areas set aside or posted for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-28, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-59. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful to camp within any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city, except in designated areas of Pioneer Park or as approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-20, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-60. - Fishing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person on park lands to violate any of the provisions contained in chapter 1 of the Rules and Regulations of the Colorado Division of Wildlife, which is adopted by reference pursuant to C.R.S. title 31, article 16. Any violation of chapter 1 of the Rules and Regulations of the Colorado Division of Wildlife shall be a violation of this section and punishable as specified in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-14, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-61. - Trapping or hunting wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful to place traps on park lands, except as authorized by permit, and it shall also be unlawful to possess, pursue, wound, take or acquire any deer, wildlife or wild birds. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-15, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-62. - Nudity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person on park lands to appear or disrobe so as to expose or uncover his or her lower torso in such a manner as to expose the cleft of the buttocks or genital organs. It shall be unlawful for any female who is five (5) years or older to appear or disrobe in such a manner as to expose the areola. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-17, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Indecent exposure prohibited, § 12-21. 
Sec. 13-63. - Discharge of firearms or dangerous missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge, fire or shoot any air gun, slingshot, pellet gun, blowgun, arrow, firearm or other projectile or projectile-launching device in any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city, except in designated areas. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-24, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms or other explosives prohibited in the city, § 12-8. 
Sec. 13-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 27-1997, adopted May 27, 1997, effective June 6, 1997, repealed § 13-64 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to fireworks and derived from Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-25, adopted March 14, 1989, effective March 17, 1989. 
Sec. 13-65. - Destruction of public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly remove, destroy, mutilate, modify or deface any building, structure, water control device, fence, gate, notice, sign, survey or section marker, tree, shrub or other plant or vegetation or any other item of public property within any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-21, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Sec. 13-66. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any garbage, trash, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere within any park or recreation facility owned by or leased to the city other than in the receptacles provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-22, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 13-67. - Use of trash receptacles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use the receptacles provided for in section 13-66 for the purpose of depositing yard clippings or other garbage or trash generated on private property. Evidence such as envelopes, boxes, cartons, bills or any other documents with a person's name thereon found in such receptacle shall be prima facie evidence that that person deposited such items in the receptacle personally. 
(Ord. No. 3-1989, § 19A-23, 3-14-89, eff. 3-17-89) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 11. 
Chapter 14 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Personnel, § 7-1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; departments, § 2-121 et seq.; municipal court, § 2-191 et seq.; animal warden appointed, § 4-2; director of emergency management, § 6-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Department of personnel, §§ 4-6, 7-1; personnel director, § 7-2; personnel board, § 7-3. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-26-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-2018, adopted March 13, 2018, effective March 23, 2018, repealed div. 2, §§ 14-51-14-53, which pertained to the personnel board, and derived from the 1961 Code, §§ 2-32-2-34; Ord. No. 3-1987, §§ 2-32-2-34, adopted March 10, 1987, effective March 23, 1987; Ord. No. 3-1994, adopted March 8, 1994; and Ord. No. 3-2007, adopted Feb. 13, 2007, effective Feb. 23, 2007. 

Secs. 14-51-14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-71. - Personnel manual. 
    The personnel rules, policies, regulations and other administrative provisions are contained in a manual on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 14-72. - Holidays. 
    The following days shall be official holidays of the city: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2)  President's Day, third Monday in February. 
(3)  Memorial Day, last Monday in May. 
(4)  Independence Day, July 4. 
(5)  Labor Day, first Monday in September. 
(6)  Veterans' Day, November 11. 
(7)  Thanksgiving Day, fourth Thursday in November. 
(8)  First Friday after Thanksgiving Day. 
(9)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(Ord. No. 19-1991, 10-22-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. 18-1994, 9-27-94, eff. 10-7-94) 
Sec. 14-73. - Disciplinary actions and appeal. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    City manager means the city manager, or his or her designee in the event of a prolonged absence from work of the city manager. Disciplinary actions subject to the appeal process means disciplinary actions that are punitive in nature as follows: 
(1)  Suspension without pay. 
(2)  Demotion. 
(3)  Termination or dismissal. 
    Working day means the normal city hall administrative operating hours during the workweek (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday). Days of city hall closure will not be counted as a working day under this section. 
(b)  City manager responsibility. The city manager shall be responsible for the development and implementation of a review process, through personnel policies, to review disciplinary actions not specifically addressed in this section. 
(c)  Authority to discipline employees. The department head of each department of the city may recommend the discipline of or termination of an employee. In the case of a division head with direct reporting responsibility to the city manager, the division head shall function as would a department head in the discipline or termination process. 
(d)  Appeal process of disciplinary actions. 
(1)  The appeal hearing is the opportunity for the employee to explain or present the employee's side of a disputed disciplinary action. The appeal hearing shall be informal in nature and therefore the formal rules of evidence will not be followed. 
(2)  An employee is offered the opportunity to request an appeal of a disciplinary action as listed in this section. An appeal shall be granted only after an employee has received notification from the employee's department head of the disciplinary action. After receipt of the department head notification, the employee must request the appeal. An appeal request shall be in writing, signed, and dated by the employee and delivered to the human resource office prior to 5:00 p.m. on the third working day after the employee's receipt of the departmental disciplinary notification. If an employee does not request an appeal within this time period, the opportunity to appeal is forfeited and the disciplinary action will become final. From the date of the departmental delivery of the notification of disciplinary action to the final determination of the disciplinary action by the city manager, the employee shall be placed on administrative leave (suspension with pay). 
(3)  The appeal hearing shall be held on or before the tenth working day following the receipt of the request for an appeal hearing. The employee requesting the appeal shall be informed of the date and time of the appeal meeting. Should an employee fail to appear on the established meeting date, the disciplinary action will become effective retroactively to the original delivery date of the notification of the disciplinary action by the department head requesting the disciplinary action. 
(4)  Information to be available to the city manager hearing the appeal shall include the disciplinary action notification, employment record of the employee requesting the appeal, the employee's request for appeal, and other documents pertaining directly to the disciplinary action. The purpose of the hearing is for the city manager to determine if the disciplinary action imposed is warranted and if the disciplinary action is appropriate for the alleged actions or behaviors of the employee. The findings of the city manager shall be made and distributed no later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth working day following the appeal hearing. The city manager shall be afforded the discretion to conduct further investigations into the disciplinary action should the city manager deem it advisable and in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(5)  Any action taken by the city manager regarding the appealed disciplinary action shall be final. 
(6)  That this appeal process shall only apply to regular, nonintroductory, nonprobationary employees. 
(Code 1961, § 2-40; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-39, 3-10-87, eff. 3-23-87; Ord. No. 22-2007, 11-27-07, eff. 12-7-07; Ord. No. 23-2007, 1-8-08, eff. 1-18-08; Ord. No. 4-2018, 3-13-18, eff. 3-23-18) 
Sec. 14-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 22-2007, adopted November 27, 2007, effective December 7, 2007, deleted § 14-74, which pertained to hearing and derived from Ord. No. 19-1996, 4-23-96, eff. 5-3-96. 
Sec. 14-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 22-2007, adopted November 27, 2007, effective December 7, 2007, deleted § 14-75, which pertained to notice of hearing. 
Sec. 14-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 22-2007, adopted November 27, 2007, effective December 7, 2007, deleted § 14-76, which pertained to decision of hearing officer. 
Sec. 14-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 22-2007, adopted November 27, 2007, effective December 7, 2007, deleted § 14-77, which pertained to appeals. 
Secs. 14-78-14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFIED SERVICE 

Sec. 14-91. - Citizenship. 
    Applicants for appointment or promotion in the classified service shall be citizens of the United States. 
(Code 1961, § 2-37; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-37, 3-10-87, eff. 3-23-87) 
Sec. 14-92. - Veterans preference. 
    Veterans shall receive a preference for appointments and promotions in the classified service in accord with article XII, section 15, of the state constitution. 
(Code 1961, § 2-35; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-35, 3-10-87, eff. 3-23-87) 
Sec. 14-93. - Examinations generally. 
(a)  Appointments and promotions for all police officers and firefighters shall be made according to the merit and fitness of the persons appointed or promoted, as ascertained by competitive testing. 
(b)  Appointments and promotions for all other personnel of the police and fire departments shall be made according to the merit and fitness of the persons appointed or promoted, as ascertained so far as practicable by competitive testing. 
(Code 1961, § 2-35; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-35, 3-10-87, eff. 3-25-87; Ord. No. 33-1999, 12-14-99, eff. 12-24-99; Ord. No. 4-2018, 3-13-18, eff. 3-23-18) 
Sec. 14-94. - Fraudulent practices in connection with examinations. 
    No person shall, with respect to an examination for the classified service, willfully or corruptly, by himself or in cooperation with one (1) or more persons: 
(1)  Defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in respect to his right of examination; 
(2)  Falsely mark, grade, estimate or report upon the examination or proper standing of any person examined under this division, or aid in so doing, or make any false representation concerning any person's examination or standing or concerning the person examined; 
(3)  Furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any persons so examined or to be examined; or 
(4)  Impersonate another person or permit or aid another person to impersonate him in any application, examination or registration. 
(Code 1961, § 2-36; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-36, 3-10-87, eff. 3-25-87) 
Sec. 14-95. - Oath of police officers and firefighters. 
    Before entering upon the duties of office, every police officer and firefighter shall take and subscribe before the director of finance, and file with the director of finance, an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the state, the laws of the state and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he is about to enter. 
(Code 1961, § 2-38; Ord. No. 3-1987, § 2-38, 3-10-87, eff. 3-25-87) 
Secs. 14-96-14-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PENSIONS AND OTHER BENEFITS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Board of trustees of police pension fund, § 2-71 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-116-14-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Public employee social security benefits, C.R.S. 24-53-101 et seq. 

Sec. 14-131. - Participation of city. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. 24-53-101 et seq., the city shall extend to its employees the basic protection provided by the old age and survivors insurance system in the Federal Social Security Act, except those employees that are covered under an approved state pension plan. 
(Code 1961, § 2-2) 
Sec. 14-132. - Contributions. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby authorized to pay, in accordance with this article, from the funds of the city to the appropriate agency pursuant to state and federal law, contributions with respect to the wages of the employees of the city and contributions withheld from the wages of employees of the city as required by state and federal law. 
(b)  The director of finance is authorized to impose upon the employees of the city a contribution with respect to their wages and to deduct the amount of such contribution not exceeding the amount of tax imposed by the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, 26 U.S.C. 3101, for service constituting employment within the meaning of that act. 
(Code 1961, § 2-3) 
Chapter 15 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Improvement districts, § 8-7; bonds, §§ 8-8-8-10. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; taxation and finance, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Public improvements, C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 15-1995, adopted August 8, 1995, effective August 18, 1995, repealed §§ 15-1-15-5, 15-36-15-57, 15-81-15-103 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to general public improvements, administration and general procedure, and assessment and lien procedure and derived from §§ 16-1-16-18 and 16-30-16-60 of the 1961 Code, and from § 16-64 of Ord. No. 4-1987, adopted March 24, 1987, effective March 23, 1987. Ordinance No. 15-1995 also added new §§ 15-1-15-5 to read as herein set forth. 

Sec. 15-1. - Procedure under state statutes. 
    The city council may proceed under all applicable state statutes to initiate and finance local improvement districts or special or local improvement bonds. When local improvements are not financed by bonds, but are instead funded by the city, then pursuant to the home rule powers of the city, a special district may be created by the city council, pursuant to section 15-6. 
(Ord. No. 15-1995, 8-8-95, eff. 8-18-95; Ord. No. 37-1998, 9-8-98) 
Charter reference- Special or local improvements, § 8-8. 
Sec. 15-2. - General powers of council. 
    The city council shall have the power to contract for and make improvements and [to] local improvement districts. 
(Ord. No. 15-1995, 8-8-95, eff. 8-18-95) 
Sec. 15-3. - Award of contracts; recommendation by director of public works. 
    All contracts for public improvements shall be awarded by the city council after review for compliance with state and federal statutes and upon recommendation by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 15-1995, 8-8-95, eff. 8-18-95) 
Sec. 15-4. - Acquisition by independent contract or day labor. 
    Local improvements may be acquired by independent contract or by day labor under the supervision of the director of public works, and shall be in compliance with section 6-7 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 15-1995, 8-8-95, eff. 8-18-95) 
Sec. 15-5. - Advertising for bids; bond of contractor. 
    Whenever local improvements are to be constructed by an independent contractor, the director of public works shall give public notice of this fact and call for bids for doing the work. All contractors shall provide performance bonds provided by surety which meets council approval. In the event of default by a contractor, the director of public works may re-let the remainder of the work without further ordinance and recover excess cost, if any, by suit on the original bond. Advertisements for bid will contain a provision allowing the city to reject any and all bids, and if all bids are rejected, additional advertisements for bid will not require the passage of another ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-1995, 8-8-95, eff. 8-18-95) 
Sec. 15-6. - City-funded special improvement districts. 
    When local improvements are not financed by bonds, but from the general fund of the city, pursuant to the home rule powers of the city, the city council may form a special improvement district for the purpose of repayment to the city of all funds used to finance the improvements. Any special improvement district formed by the city council and funded by the city shall first be initiated by petition requesting formation of the special district, and signed by fifty-one (51) percent of the landowners representing fifty-one (51) percent of the land located within the district. The city council may, if feasible, create the special improvement district, by ordinance, provided sufficient funds exist for the financing of the proposed improvements for which the special district will be formed. The ordinance shall specify the assessments to be made for repayment to the city, including, but not limited to, interest, if applied, and payment periods required. Upon final payment to the city, the special improvement district shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 37-1998, 9-8-98) 
Secs. 15-7-15-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 15-126. - Construction of sidewalks generally. 
(a)  In districts for the construction and reconstruction of sidewalks alone, or in combination with other improvements, the work shall include the necessary grading from curbline to lot line. The owner of any lot or tract to be assessed shall have the right to construct or reconstruct his own walks in conformity with the plans and specifications for the district, within thirty (30) days from the publication of the ordinance authorizing the improvement. Whenever sidewalks are ordered in combination with improvements other than grading sidewalk areas, a separate contract may be let for the construction and reconstruction of the sidewalks exclusive of the necessary grading. 
(b)  The whole cost of construction and reconstruction of sidewalks, including intersections and necessary grading and removal of obstructions, shall be assessed upon the lots or lands in front of which such improvements are made, as follows: the grading, removal of obstructions, intersections and all other general expenses, including cost of collection and interest, pro rata per front foot; new walks pro rata per front foot where constructed; and reconstructed walks upon each lot or piece of land where reconstructed according to the cost of reconstruction. 
(Code 1961, § 16-19) 
Sec. 15-127. - Construction of sewers generally. 
(a)  The city may establish and maintain separate or combined sewer systems, which systems shall be divided into district and subdistrict sewers for storm drainage or sanitary drainage or both, upon initiation by the city council. In ordering the construction of any sewers, the proceedings shall be as required under the general provisions of this chapter, but such improvements shall not be subject to remonstrance as provided for by section 15-45. 
(b)  Such sewers shall be established and constructed at such time and in such locations, of such extent, dimensions and materials, and in accordance with such full details and specifications as may be prescribed by the council. Whenever necessary, land and rights-of-way for any sewer ordered by the council may be purchased or condemned on behalf of the district, and the cost charged to such district. 
(Code 1961, § 16-20) 
Sec. 15-128. - District sewers. 
(a)  Generally. The council may order the construction of district sewers and appurtenances for sanitary drainage for districts to be known as sanitary sewer districts; the construction of district sewers and appurtenances for storm drainage for districts to be known as storm sewer districts; the construction of district sewers and appurtenances for storm and sanitary drainage for districts to be known as combined sewer districts; the construction of relief sewers or intercepting sewers, and appurtenances for storm drainage, sanitary drainage or both, for districts to be known as relief sewer districts, or intercepting sewer districts; and the construction of district sewers and appurtenances for sanitary drainage for districts to be known as special sanitary sewer districts, the construction to be approved by ordinance passed by the council. Such sewers shall be constructed so as to connect, within or without the district, with some other sufficient sewer or sewage disposal station or with some natural drainage. Such districts, except special sanitary sewer districts, may be composed of subdistricts, to be specifically named or numbered in the ordinance. District sewers, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall include all submains necessary to provide outlets for all subdistrict laterals within the district. Special district sewers shall include the necessary mains to provide outlets for all laterals within the special sewer district. 
(b)  Subdistrict laterals. The council may, at the time of ordering the construction of district sewers or at any time thereafter, order the construction of subdistrict laterals in any subdistrict so as to connect the subdistrict laterals with the submains or with the district main sewer, the construction to be approved by ordinance as in the case of district sewers. 
(c)  Assessment of costs. The cost of district sewers shall be assessed upon all the real estate in the district, in proportion as the area of each piece of real estate in the district is to the area of all the real estate in the district, exclusive of public highways and parks, and the cost of subdistrict laterals shall be assessed in like manner upon all the real estate in the subdistrict; provided that the construction of any submain may be omitted until such time as it may be required, in which case subdistricts so left without submains shall not be assessed for any part of the cost of submains constructed along with and as a part of the sewer district. Whenever submains so omitted are required and constructed they may be ordered as provided for other sewers, and their cost shall be assessed to the subdistricts which are supplied with submains. 
(d)  Temporary connections from property without district. Temporary connections may be made with any sewer from property lying without the district, with the consent of the council and upon such terms as it may require. 
(e)  Connections with private sewers; authority to require connections. Private sewers connected with district sewers may be constructed under such restrictions and subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the council, but no expense shall be incurred by the city in constructing them, and the city shall have power, by ordinance, to compel the owner of any premises in any sewer district or subdistrict to connect the private sewer with the district or subdistrict sewer at his own expense. 
(f)  Connections before cost or assessment paid. No lot, premises or tract in any sewer district shall be connected with the sewer district sewer unless, before the completion, the estimated cost or, after completion, the assessment, has been paid, except that, in cases where the cost of sewers is to be assessed upon property in a district and the payment therefor had been fixed by the council to be made in installments, then connections may be made at any time when deemed advisable by the director of public works. 
(g)  Payments when assessments held illegal. If, in any sewer district, any assessment upon the lots therein for the construction of the sewer has, in any court of competent jurisdiction, been held illegal, the owner of any lot in such district shall only be permitted to connect with such sewer upon payment into the treasury for the use of the holder of warrants or bonds issued for the construction of such sewer, or, if such warrants have been taken up, then into the general fund of the city, such amount as may be fixed by ordinance. 
(h)  Provisions of chapter not applicable to certain storm sewers and drains. Nothing contained in this chapter concerning sewer districts shall be construed as applicable to storm sewers and drains acquired as a part of a street improvement program. 
(Code 1961, §§ 16-21-16-28) 
Sec. 15-129. - Sewer extensions. 
    The city may extend and maintain any existing public sewer or any district sewer main, wherever constructed, from its outlet to any point within or without the city. Such sewer extensions shall be established and constructed at such times, in locations within or without the city, of such extent, dimensions, and material, and in accordance with such full details and specifications as may be prescribed by the council. Necessary lands and rights-of-way may, upon the order of the council, be purchased or condemned on behalf of the city, and the whole cost thereof, sewer rights and rights-of-way, may be paid by the city. 
(Code 1961, § 16-29) 
Sec. 15-130. - Construction of sidewalks, curbs or curbs and gutters otherwise than in districts. 
(a)  The council may, by ordinance, order the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs or curbs and gutters otherwise than in districts whenever, in its opinion, it shall be proper, desirable, necessary or advisable, because sufficient sidewalks, curbs or curbs and gutters have been constructed in the vicinity to make it reasonable that intervening or adjoining walks, curbs or curbs and gutters should be constructed or reconstructed. In all such cases, the city manager shall notify the owner or his agent to construct or reconstruct such walks, curbs or curbs and gutters within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and served in person upon the owner or agent, if found within the city, and, if not, it may be served by registered mail addressed to his last known address or by publication for five (5) days in a newspaper published in the city. 
(b)  Whenever the owner shall fail to construct or reconstruct such walks, curbs, gutters or curbs and gutters in the time specified in the notice, the city manager may have the work done by contract or day labor by the city employees and, when completed, shall prepare a statement showing the whole cost of such improvement and apportion the same to the lots in front of which such improvements were made, according to the actual cost thereof, and certify the statement to the city council. 
(c)  The city manager shall give notice, to be served in person if the owner or agent is found within the city, or by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or agent of property to be assessed for such improvement, of the cost charged against his property, and notify him that this cost will be assessed against his property by the city council at the next regular meeting held, not less than ten (10) days after the notice, at which meeting he may appear and make any objections to the assessment that he may have. 
(d)  The city council, at the proper meeting or adjournment thereof, shall, by resolution, fix and make the assessment against the property to be charged for such improvements and direct the director of finance to certify the assessment to the treasurer of the county for extension of each assessment upon his tax rolls and to collect the assessment in the same manner as other taxes are collected upon the property, unless, within thirty (30) days from the date of the fixing of the assessment by the council, the owner shall pay such assessment to the director of finance. 
(Code 1961, § 16-61) 
Sec. 15-131. - Construction of sewers otherwise than in districts. 
    Whenever the city council deems it necessary that any sewer should be constructed and which may be of such length or nature that an improvement district therefor should not be established, it may construct the sewer and assess the cost thereof against the adjacent property and property afforded a means of connection therewith. When the cost of such construction has been ascertained, the director of public works shall prepare a schedule showing the cost chargeable and shall give notice to be served in person, if the owner or agent is found within the city, or by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or agent of the property to be assessed for such improvement, notifying him of the cost chargeable against his property and notifying him that this cost will be assessed against his property by the city council at the next regular meeting held not less than ten (10) days after the notice, at which meeting he may appear and make any objection to the assessment that he may have. The city council, at the proper meeting or any adjournment thereof, shall, by resolution, fix and make the assessment against the property to be charged for such improvement and direct the director of finance to certify the assessment to the treasurer of the county for extension of such assessment upon his tax rolls and to collect the assessment in the same manner as other taxes are collected upon the property, unless, within thirty (30) days from the date of the fixing of the assessment by the council, the owner shall pay such assessment to the director of finance. 
(Code 1961, § 16-62) 
Sec. 15-132. - Connection of utilities prior to paving. 
    Whenever any paving district or local improvement providing for paving is ordered under the provisions of this chapter, the city manager, if he deems it advisable, may order the owners of the abutting real estate to connect their several premises with the water and gas mains or with any other utility in the street in front of their several premises and, upon default of the owners for twenty (20) days after such order to make such connections, the city may contract for and make the connections or do the work by day labor in the manner and in accordance with the specifications prescribed for such work and the whole cost of each connection shall be assessed against the premises with which the connections are made in accordance with subsection 15-130(d). 
(Code 1961, § 16-63) 
Chapter 16 - SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be the same as that specifically provided in section 2-243, except that where the person charged is under the age of eighteen (18) years, there shall be no jail sentence imposed as a penalty and such other restrictions on the penalty as may be set forth in section 1-15. In the event that a violation occurs pursuant to this section and a specific penalty is not set forth in section 2-243, the penalty shall be at the court's discretion. It shall, however, still be subject to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 43-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 43-1995, adopted December 12, 1995, effective December 22, 1995, amended Chapter 16 by adding a new Art. III. For purposes of classification, such new provisions were included herein as § 16-1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 16-2-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH 

Sec. 16-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage and rubbish or waste means all waste and discarded materials from dwellings, flats, roominghouses, hotels, clubs, restaurants, boardinghouses, eating places, shops and places of business, including trash and debris, waste and discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, grass, weeds, wastepaper, cans, glass, ashes, offal, boxes, and cuttings from trees, lawns and gardens. Waste shall not include materials subject to manufacture into by-products or materials developed from new construction or remodeling on any premises. 
    Garbage and rubbish collection system means and includes all processing of garbage and rubbish within the city. 
    Service means the service of regular collection and hauling away of garbage and rubbish by and under the supervision of the city. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of sanitation of the city. 
    Utility charges means all garbage and rubbish collection service charges and other charges set by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1961, § 13-1; Ord. No. 16-1989, § 13-1, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-27. - Collection generally. 
(a)  All garbage and rubbish generated from residential property within the city shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the city. All garbage and rubbish generated from commercial and industrial use of property within the city shall be collected, removed and disposed of only by persons granted a permit by city council resolution. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, residential property shall be interpreted to include the following, as may be defined by reference to appendix A and by other chapters of this Code: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, and mobile home dwellings (classes A, B, C, D and E); 
(2)  Home occupation uses of the dwellings listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(3)  Home-based and intermediate day care uses of the dwellings listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section; and 
(4)  Group homes. 
For purposes of this section, residential property shall exclude boardinghouses; roominghouses; hotels; motels; nursing homes; large day care use buildings; college, university and school dormitories; and trailer parks. Determination of situations not defined in this section shall be made by the public works board upon recommendation of the director of public works, subject to appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1961, § 13-3; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-3, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 16-28. - Collection permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or haul over the city streets any trash, garbage or refuse unless such person has a permit from the city for such hauling or collection; provided that this section shall not apply to departments of the city government. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a person from hauling or disposing of his own refuse accumulated at his residence or business in such a manner as not to endanger the public health or safety, not to create a nuisance to the inhabitants of the city, and not to litter the streets and alleys of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 13-4; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-4, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 16-29. - Storage for collection. 
    Garbage and rubbish shall only be kept for collection upon the property which generated it. It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to collect the garbage or rubbish generated upon one (1) property and deposit it on any other property within the city, except in city-owned: 
(1)  Rollout receptacles; or 
(2)  Superintendent-designated shared non- 
wheeled receptacles or those receptacles provided by city-permitted trash and garbage collectors. Evidence, such as envelopes, boxes, cartons, bills, checks or any other documents with a person's name found thereon, shall be prima facie evidence that person deposited such items on other property within the city. 
(Code 1961, § 13-5; Ord. No. 16-1989, § 13-5, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89; Ord. No. 9-1990, 8-28-90, eff. 8-31-90) 
Sec. 16-30. - Establishment of service charges; charge for vacant residence. 
(a)  Fees for garbage and rubbish service shall be considered utility charges. Fees shall be recommended by the director of public works to the city council for review and set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. 
(b)  All residences within the city for which garbage and rubbish service is being charged by the city, upon becoming vacant, shall continue to be charged for garbage and rubbish service as long as water service is being provided to such residences. 
(Code 1961, § 13-5.1; Ord. No. 16-1989, § 13-5.1, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-5.1, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 16-31. - Billing of service charges. 
    All utility charges established pursuant to this article shall be billed pursuant to the procedure in section 21-26 et seq. 
(Code 1961, § 13-6; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-6, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 16-32. - Sanitation enterprise fund. 
    All funds collected by the city for utility charges provided in this article shall be credited to the sanitation enterprise fund created by Ordinance No. 19, series of 1988, and all expenditures from this fund shall be appropriated by the city council. 
(Code 1961, § 13-7; Ord. No. 16-1989, § 13-7, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 16-33. - Unlawful deposits and accumulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage or rubbish in such a manner that the garbage or rubbish is or tends to become a nuisance, or in such a manner as endangers or tends to endanger the public health. It shall be unlawful for any person having the occupancy, control or management of any premises to cause or permit any garbage or rubbish to be accumulated thereon in such a manner that the garbage or rubbish is or tends to become a nuisance or in such a manner as endangers or tends to endanger the public health. It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, throw, place, scatter, deposit or bury any garbage or rubbish in or upon any public street, alley or other public place or upon the premises of another, except in city-owned: 
(1)  Rollout receptacles; or 
(2)  Superintendent-designated shared non- wheeled receptacles or those receptacles provided by city-permitted trash and garbage collectors. Evidence, such as envelopes, boxes, cartons, bills, checks or any other documents with a person's name found thereon in any public street, alley or other public place or upon the premises of another, shall be prima facie evidence that person threw, placed, scattered, deposited or buried such items. 
(Code 1961, § 13-8; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-8, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 9-1990, 8-28-90, eff. 8-31-90) 
Sec. 16-34. - Prohibited and unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited and unlawful for any person to deposit any uncontained waste, discarded food, animal and vegetable matter (except grass clippings, leaves, and tree limbs) or offal in any city-owned garbage or rubbish container. 
(b)  It shall be prohibited and unlawful to deposit any tree limbs or trimmings more than four (4) inches in diameter and three (3) feet in length; construction, demolition or remodeling debris; concrete, dirt, sod, plaster or heavy materials; hot ashes or hot coals; flammable liquids, such as, but not limited to, cleaning fluid, waste oils, gasoline; small appliances and small furniture items which will not allow lids to close on the containers; tires; herbicides, pesticides, used batteries, acids or solid iron in any city-owned garbage or rubbish container. 
(c)  Any and all such prohibited and unlawful items stated in this section and found by any city official in a city-owned garbage or rubbish container shall be prima facie evidence that the person who is permitted to use such city-owned garbage or rubbish container deposited the same therein. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a child under eighteen (18) years of age or for any person in loco parentis with a child under eighteen (18) years of age to permit such child to play in, on or around any city-owned garbage or rubbish container. 
(Ord. No. 9-1990, 8-28-90, eff. 8-31-90) 
Sec. 16-35. - Vehicles used for collection and disposal. 
(a)  All wagons, trucks, cars or vehicles used for the collection and removal of garbage within the city shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall have tight beds or containers from which no garbage, litter or liquid may escape. 
(b)  All public or private vehicles used for the collection, disposal or transportation of trash shall have enclosed bodies or suitable provision for covering the body. Provision and use of a tarpaulin or canvas cover to enclose open bodies of collection vehicles may be permitted when specifically approved by the superintendent of sanitation. 
(c)  Vehicles used for the collection, disposal or transportation of trash shall have watertight metal bodies or containers of easily cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance or insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 1961, § 13-9; Ord. No. 21-1989, § 13-9, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 16-36. - Disposal sites. 
    All garbage and rubbish disposal sites owned or under the control of the city, together with all matter whatsoever deposited or existing thereon, shall be the property of the city, and no person shall enter upon such sites or carry off, dispose of or in any manner disturb or molest any matter or thing deposited or existing upon such sites, except under the direction or authority of the superintendent. 
(Code 1961, § 13-10; Ord. No. 16-1989, § 13-10, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 16-37. - Burning. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to set on fire or burn any solid waste, garbage and rubbish, or any hay, grass, leaves, weeds, wood or other combustible or flammable materials, including wastepaper, or anything whatsoever, in any ash pit or other receptacle or upon the ground, except in an approved incinerator meeting the minimum standards as set forth in the Air Pollution Control Act of 1970, a law of the state, provided that a permit therefor shall first have been obtained from the appropriate air pollution control authority. Any such act is hereby declared a nuisance because of smoke or odor, and also because of state law, rules and regulations. 
(b)  A person wishing to burn weeds, grass and other vegetation may obtain a permit to do so from the fire chief, or his designated representative. The permit shall limit the date, time and manner of burning; the material to be burned; the procedure or equipment which shall be allowed for burning; and any additional conditions or circumstances which may be required by the fire chief to provide for safety. All such permits shall be revocable by the fire chief or his designated representative at any time. 
(Code 1961, § 13-11; Ord. No. 16-1987, § 13-11, 9-8-87, eff. 9-29-89) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks, library and recreation department, § 2-166; comprehensive planning, § 2-296 et seq.; open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited on streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways or public places and in any vehicle, § 3-12; animal shelter established, § 4-4; parking restrictions, § 10-46 et seq.; parks and recreation areas, Ch. 13; public improvements, planning, construction, assessments and collection procedures, Ch. 15; specifications and requirements for improvements in subdivisions, § 18-76 et seq.; drainage and storm sewer specification and design requirements in subdivisions, § 18-103; trailer park regulations, § 20-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Installation of cable television facilities in streets, proposed streets and other public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain, within any public street in the city or within any other public property of the city or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a permit authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained and unless such permit is in full force and effect. 
(Code 1961, § 19-6.1) 
Cross reference- Cable communication systems, Ch. 5.5; licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 17-2. - Obstructions generally. 
    No person shall encumber or obstruct any street, alley, curb, storm sewer, drainageway, or sidewalk with building materials or any article or thing, whether with merchandise, or otherwise, without having first obtained the permission of the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 24-7) 
Sec. 17-3. - Obstruction of streets by trains. 
    No railroad company shall obstruct any street within the city by stopping any train upon or by leaving any car or locomotive engine standing on its track where the track intersects or crosses any street, except for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or to receive necessary fuel and water. In no case shall such obstruction exceed five (5) minutes for each train, car or locomotive engine. 
(Code 1961, § 19-27) 
Sec. 17-4. - Cellar or vault openings on streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep open any cellar door, pit or vault or other subterraneous opening on any street or sidewalk or to suffer the opening to be left open or to be kept in an insecure condition so that passersby will be in danger of falling into such cellar, pit, vault or other opening. 
(Code 1961, § 24-8) 
Sec. 17-5. - Construction and repair of curbs. 
(a)  Notice. When the director of public works determines the necessity of constructing, reconstructing or repairing a curb, it shall, through the director of public works, notify the owner, agent or person having charge of the property adjoining the street where the curb is to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify the particular work to be done. 
(b)  Failure to comply with order; assessment. Whenever the director of public works decides that any curbing shall be constructed or repaired, he may order the curbing constructed or repaired by the owner of the property fronting on the street where the curbing is to be constructed or repaired. If such owner does not construct the curbing or repair the curbing as directed by the director of public works within thirty (30) days after service of the notice, the city may construct or repair the curbing and assess the cost thereof to the lots fronting upon the curb so constructed or repaired pro rata to each lot for its proportionate share of the cost of such construction. The amount shall be assessed and shall be a lien upon the property pursuant to the procedure in section 21-26 et seq. 
(Code 1961, §§ 24-5, 24-6) 
Secs. 17-6-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Sidewalk requirements in subdivisions, § 18-106. 

Sec. 17-21. - Obstruction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk within the limits of the city by throwing debris thereon or allowing weeds to grow thereon in front of the property belonging to such person. The deliberate placing of a hose and sprinkler so that water therefrom will obstruct the walk shall be deemed an obstruction within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 24-7) 
Sec. 17-22. - Removal of snow, ice, rubbish, etc. 
(a)  The owner, occupant or agent of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep such walk safe for pedestrians. It shall be unlawful for such owner, occupant or agent to permit snow, ice, dirt, mud, rubbish or filth to remain on the sidewalk longer than twenty-four (24) hours after the termination of the falling of such snow or the accumulation of such ice, dirt, mud, rubbish or filth. If the sidewalk is not paved or flagged, it shall be necessary to remove such snow, ice, dirt, mud, rubbish or filth from a space four (4) feet in width to allow for safe pedestrian passage. 
(b)  If the snow, ice, mud, dirt, rubbish or filth is not removed from any sidewalk as required by subsection (a) of this section, the superintendent of streets may cause such material to be removed and shall certify the entire cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, to the director of finance, to be considered as utility charges, pursuant to the procedure in section 21-26 et seq. 
(Code 1961, §§ 24-2, 24-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of the city to require the owners and occupants of abutting property to keep sidewalks clean and free of snow, C.R.S. 31-12-101. 
Sec. 17-23. - Repair. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of premises abutting on any sidewalk in the city to maintain the sidewalk in good repair. It shall be unlawful for any such person to allow such sidewalk to become or to continue so out of repair as to endanger persons lawfully using such sidewalk. 
(Code 1961, § 24-1) 
Sec. 17-24. - Structures on public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to issue permits for the purpose of erecting, placing, or causing to be placed fences, retaining walls, planters, benches, and other seating, or like structures, primarily to promote short term outdoor sales, on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Said permits may be issued only to owners of property or the lessee of real property operating in accordance with the provisions of his or her lease and with the consent of the lessor which abut public rights-of-way, and shall be limited to that portion of a right-of-way defined by the projected lot lines of the property owner or lessee applying for said permit. 
(c)  Application for a permit shall be filed with the city manager, or designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and phone number. 
(2)  The legal description and common address of the private property and adjacent sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(3)  A complete description of the proposed use, including a statement of the sizes and quantity of tables, chairs, and service equipment proposed to be placed upon the sidewalk or other public right-of-way if the use is intended for a sidewalk café. 
(4)  Site plan: A plan of the portion of public right-of-way proposed for use by the abutting property owner or lessee. Said plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include dimensions; location of the proposed use; description of the proposed use, including height, types of material, and general character; and a legal description of the area proposed for use. The city manager, or designee, may require further information as necessary to adequately determine the safety of the proposed use. 
(5)  Hold harmless: The owner/applicant shall hold the city harmless against any claims, liabilities, damages, or lawsuits (including the city's attorneys' fees) arising from the location of said use on the public right-of-way. 
(d)  All items permitted under this section shall not be placed within two (2) feet from the curb. A minimum four-foot sidewalk aisle shall be maintained for pedestrian travel at all times. 
(e)  The city manager, or designee, shall timely review all applications and may approve the application, deny the application for cause, or refer the application to the applicant for further information. 
(f)  Approved applications shall be forwarded by the city manager, or designee, to the public works director for the issuance of a building permit, if required. 
(g)  Decorative type landscaping may be installed on any public right-of-way without approval of the city manager, or designee, provided said landscaping does not encroach upon the four-foot sidewalk aisle. 
(h)  Any permit issued for a permitted use on public right-of-way shall continue at the sole discretion of the city. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may remove or cause to be removed, with reasonable prior notice, any use of public right-of-way permitted under the provisions of these regulations, for the purpose of widening, constructing, or otherwise improving any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or use, without compensation to the owner of said permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 6-2016, 6-14-16, eff. 6-24-16) 
Secs. 17-25-17-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 21. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency means any unforeseeable situation requiring excavation of a street or sidewalk to prevent imminent danger to the health or safety of natural persons, major property damage or loss, or loss of necessary services to a substantial number of natural persons. 
    Excavate means to cut, open, dig up, disturb, deface, construct, repair, maintain, replace, install, reinstall, bore, jack, tunnel, or cause such work to be done. 
    Permit means an excavation permit issued pursuant to division 2 of this article. 
    Street means any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, public right-of-way, thoroughfare, and public property within the city. 
(Code 1961, § 24-19) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-42. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to any person who for any reason excavates in any street or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of installing, maintaining or repairing any underground or surface utility or structure or for any other purpose whatsoever, or who causes such work to be done. 
(Code 1961, § 24-20) 
Sec. 17-43. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of this article shall be punishable under section 1-15 in addition to any increase of fees which may be provided for in this article. In addition, any violation of this article shall be grounds for the suspension of the permit and stoppage of any excavation or other work by the director of public works until the violation is corrected. 
(Code 1961, § 24-46) 
Sec. 17-44. - Administration of article; authority of director of public works. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to administer this article. The director of public works is specifically empowered by this article to promulgate rules and regulations having to do with the form of permit, the required quality of work and the standards and specifications therefor, the procedures for inspection, and the information to be required before a permit will be issued pursuant to the requirements of this article. All requirements of the director of public works with regard to backfill material, procedures and soil compaction shall be adhered to. The director of public works shall have the authority to stop any excavation within the city until the provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Code 1961, § 24-28) 
Sec. 17-45. - Liability of permittee. 
    Any person who excavates in any street in the city shall be answerable for any damage occasioned to persons, animals or property by the reason of carelessness or negligence or by any intentional act connected with such work, and by obtaining a permit for such work shall thereby be deemed to consent and agree to hold the city harmless from any such damage or injury. The acceptance of a permit under this article shall be deemed to be the permittee's acceptance of the duty to repair any and all damage to city pipes, cables, lines, utilities or structures which may occur due to the permittee's excavation. The director of public works shall stop any work being done by the permittee within the city and shall not issue any new permits until such damage is paid for in full. 
(Code 1961, § 24-44) 
Sec. 17-46. - Obstruction of street; placing materials in sidewalk or gutter. 
    No person shall stop or obstruct more than the space of one (1) block and one (1) intersection at any one (1) time in any one (1) street or keep the street blocked up for more than one (1) day after the excavation is completed, unless written permission is first obtained from the director of public works. No person performing any excavation work may place any dirt or other materials on any sidewalk or in any gutter and all excavation work shall be performed so as to permit the free passage of water along the gutter. 
(Code 1961, § 24-35) 
Sec. 17-47. - Placement of lights and barricades. 
    No person shall excavate in any street or sidewalk in the city without providing, during the nighttime, sufficient warning lights, to be placed with a suitable barricade or temporary fence as provided in section 17-48 around such excavation. During the daytime, the barricade or temporary fence shall be maintained and be kept in place, but warning lights shall not be required. The suitability and sufficiency of the barricades and lights required in this section shall be determined by the director of public works. No excavation shall be left open overnight except by written permission of the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 24-36) 
Sec. 17-48. - Barriers for excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, including contractors and city officers and employees, to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any street or sidewalk without providing, during the night, a temporary fence or suitable barrier around or in front of such excavation in order to prevent persons, animals or vehicles from falling into it pursuant to requirements on file in the office of the public works department and approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 24-9) 
Sec. 17-49. - Traffic safety devices required. 
    Every excavation in any street in the city shall be protected at all times by traffic safety devices approved by the director of public works, in order to minimize the disruption of the flow of traffic in the vicinity of the work. 
(Code 1961, § 24-3) 
Sec. 17-50. - Damaging or removing safety devices. 
    No person shall damage, displace, remove or interfere with any barricade or temporary fence, warning light or other safety device which is placed around or about any excavation or construction work in any street in the city pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1961, § 24-38) 
Sec. 17-51. - Protection of utilities and structures. 
    Any person who is subject to this article when undertaking a project of excavation shall cooperate with the city and other utilities having facilities in the same area by inquiring as to the location of all utilities and structures located aboveground and underground which might be affected by the proposed excavation. At all times, the installations, utilities and structures of the city upon or below ground shall have priority in the public streets. 
(Code 1961, § 24-39) 
Sec. 17-52. - Boring or tunneling. 
    If the director of public works determines it to be in the best interest of the city to require the applicant for a permit to bore, jack or tunnel a utility line or other line or pipe that is to be placed in a public street instead of making a cut in the street therefor, he shall have the authority to impose such requirement and issue a permit for such boring, jacking or tunneling. 
(Code 1961, § 24-34) 
Sec. 17-53. - Time for completion of work. 
    All work authorized by a permit shall be commenced within a reasonable time after the issuance of the permit and shall be diligently and continuously performed until completion. If weather, process of law or any other unexpected obstacle causes work to be stopped for so long a time that public travel will be unreasonably obstructed, the director of public works may order the excavation refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in the permit were actually completed. 
(Code 1961, § 24-33) 
Sec. 17-54. - Completion of work by city. 
    In conformity with section 17-53, if, after notice by the director of public works, the permittee fails to complete his work within forty-eight (48) hours subsequent to such notice, the city may complete the work created by any excavation. The costs of such completion, plus fifteen (15) percent, shall be charged by the city to the permittee. 
(Code 1961, § 24-43) 
Sec. 17-55. - Duty to repair damages. 
    Any person who excavates in any street or sidewalk in the city shall replace, repair or reinstall any damage and disruption whatsoever to the streets or sidewalks of the city, including paving and surfacing, caused by construction, excavation, maintenance and repair of any utility or structure, according to the specifications of the director of public works. The city may make the repairs, replacement and reinstallation at the option of the director of public works and bill the person therefor to ensure the quality of the work and to preserve the character of the streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 24-41) 
Sec. 17-56. - Duty to make corrections. 
    In the event of settlement, subsidence or failure of a repair made by the permittee of a particular excavation or part thereof within a period of three (3) years after the street or sidewalk repair is completed, the permittee who had performed the excavation work shall be notified by the director of public works and be given reasonable opportunity to correct the condition to the satisfaction of the director of public works. If the permittee fails to correct the condition to the satisfaction of the director of public works and the city is required to correct the condition, the permittee shall be responsible for repaving and repair costs occasioned thereby plus fifteen (15) percent. The permittee shall discontinue any and all other work in the streets within the city and shall be issued no additional excavation permits until such time as the required repair has been completed and paid for. 
(Code 1961, § 24-40) 
Sec. 17-57. - Extension of period of repair. 
    A failure to have a final inspection performed by the director of public works or his designee under the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of public works shall extend the commencement of the three-year period of repair under section 17-56 until such time as a final inspection and final signature is attached to the permit. 
(Code 1961, § 24-46) 
Sec. 17-58. - Installation of utilities in new developments. 
    In any area of new development, it shall be the duty of every person to install all mains, conduits, cables, poles and the like which may be deemed necessary for water, gas, sewer, storm drainage, telephone and electricity facilities or any other utilities, prior to the installation, construction or paving of any street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1961, § 24-42) 
Sec. 17-59. - Hindering or obstructing work prohibited. 
    It is a violation of this article to hinder or obstruct any excavation or resurfacing operation or other work done in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 24-45) 
Secs. 17-60-17-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 17-76. - Required; application. 
(a)  No person shall excavate in any street or sidewalk in the city without having first secured a permit therefor from the director of public works. An application for the permit shall be made at least seven (7) days prior to the planned excavation. 
(b)  Every person desiring to do any excavation work shall apply to the director of public works for a permit therefor, on a form provided by the director of public works, stating the applicant's name; the location, length, width and purpose of the proposed excavation; the proposed dates of commencement and completion of the work; plans and specifications for the work; a statement that the work will be performed in strict compliance with the plans, specifications, procedures, rules and regulations approved by the director of public works; and any other information which may be required under the rules and regulations by the director of public works. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan giving the exact location of the proposed excavation and utility or structure to be installed, repaired, maintained or replaced. The site plan shall include the location of all the existing utilities and structures in the vicinity of the proposed excavation and shall be provided to the director of public works in duplicate. 
(Code 1961, §§ 24-21, 24-26) 
Sec. 17-77. - Persons to whom permits may be issued. 
    Permits shall be issued only to those persons who are currently licensed as building contractors under chapter 9, article II, to public and private utility company employees, and to natural persons determined by the director of public works to be performing work on a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or curb cut for the benefit of the person's primary private residence. 
(Code 1961, § 24-31) 
Sec. 17-78. - Fee. 
    Applicants for a permit shall pay a fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council and kept on file in the office of the city clerk, to the director of public works. The fee shall accompany all applications for permits, for issuance of the permit and inspection of the completed work. No permit shall be for more than one (1) excavation project. 
(Code 1961, § 24-23) 
Sec. 17-79. - Penalty for commencing work without obtaining permit. 
    The director of public works shall suspend all operations of any person who makes any excavation in any street in the city without first having obtained a permit as provided in this division. Such person shall obtain a permit applicable to that particular excavation and shall pay twice the usual fee that would have been charged if a permit had properly been obtained prior to making the excavation. Such penalty fees shall be in addition to any penalties that may be imposed by any court for violation of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 24-24) 
Sec. 17-80. - Proof of insurance required prior to issuance. 
(a)  Every applicant, before being granted a permit, shall furnish the city with proof of insurance, in such form as is approved by the director of public works, with an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, with the following provisions for coverage, including, but not limited to, liability coverage, including motor vehicle, bodily injury and property damage, in the amount of four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00) per occurrence with an annual aggregate coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such insurance shall cover all operations of the permittee and all of his vehicles to be used in the course of his operations in the city. 
(b)  Any other provisions of this article or this Code notwithstanding, the amount of insurance shall at no time be less than that required under the statutes of the state under those sections dealing with governmental immunity. A waiver of this requirement may be made by the director of public works for a natural person determined by the director of public works to be performing work on a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or curb cut for the benefit of his primary residence. 
(Code 1961, § 24-27) 
Sec. 17-81. - Conditions on issuance. 
    Permits shall be issued on the condition that all work performed shall be in accordance with this article and the rules, regulations and specifications promulgated by the director of public works, all of which are intended to provide for the proper care and maintenance of the streets in the city and the safety and protection of the persons and property of the general public. 
(Code 1961, § 24-29) 
Sec. 17-82. - Permit to be kept on site. 
    The permit shall be kept at the site of the excavation while the work is in progress and shall be exhibited upon request to any police officer, the director of public works, or any other authorized representative of the city. 
(Code 1961, § 24-22) 
Sec. 17-83. - Emergency work. 
    Any person may make an excavation in any street or sidewalk in response to an emergency. However, such person must immediately notify the director of public works or, if the emergency situation is discovered after regular business hours, the police department, of such excavation, and must obtain a permit and pay the required fees on the first working day after making such excavation. Should such person fail to make this notification and obtain the required permit, the matter will be dealt with as provided in section 17-79. 
(Code 1961, § 24-25) 
Sec. 17-84. - Waiver. 
    The director of public works shall waive the permit requirements of this article for any excavation done by any city crew or employee who is working under the supervision of the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 24-30) 
Sec. 17-85. - Record of permits. 
    The director of public works shall prepare and keep a record of permits, numbered in the order in which they were issued. The records shall show the name and address of the permittee; the location, nature, purpose and extent of the excavation or opening; the time in which the street is to be restored; the permit fee; and such other and further items that will enable anyone to obtain a complete history of each permit from its issuance to its termination. The copies of the permits kept by the director of public works, properly bound, may be used as a basis for such record. 
(Code 1961, § 24-32) 
Secs. 17-86-17-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CEMETERY 

Sec. 17-101. - Plat; official title; description. 
    The plat of the cemetery recorded on March 10, 1970, in the office of the county clerk at book 4, page 38, record no. 485-490, showing all boundaries, sections, lots, divisions, roads, drives and paths, is hereby adopted as the official plat of the cemetery which shall be known as Riverside Cemetery. The Riverside Cemetery is established upon property owned by the city located and described in deed no. 37240 recorded in the office of the county clerk in book 81, page 437; in deed no. 303206 recorded in book 333, page 514; in deed no. 403644 recorded in book 500, page 57; and in deed no. 404726 recorded in book 501, page 433; and other land acquired or to be acquired by the city for cemetery purposes. 
(Code 1961, §§ 22-1, 22-2) 
Sec. 17-102. - Authority of department of parks, library and recreation. 
    The department of parks, library and recreation shall have the entire supervision and control of the cemetery and is hereby authorized to make all necessary rules and regulations governing future additions, maintenance, care and control of the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-3) 
Sec. 17-103. - Superintendent. 
(a)  The department of parks, library and recreation with the approval of the city manager, shall appoint a superintendent of the cemetery, whose duty it shall be to have charge of the cemetery and of the maintenance and improvement of the grounds. He shall have charge of all interments in the cemetery and keep a record of the interments, showing the exact location in the cemetery of the lot in which the remains of any deceased person have been deposited. 
(b)  The superintendent shall require the exhibition to him of a properly executed burial permit, as required by the state, before allowing any interment to take place in the cemetery. 
(c)  The superintendent shall enforce the provisions of this Code, including this chapter, and all rules and regulations adopted by the department of parks, library and recreation for the government of the cemetery. 
(d)  The superintendent shall have charge of the digging of all graves in the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-4) 
Sec. 17-104. - Fees. 
    All prices for sale of cemetery spaces and all fees for openings, closings, disinterments, transfers of ownership of spaces and all other prices, fees and charges shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. Adjustments may be made in such prices, fees and charges, following review, by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 17-1989, § 22-26, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 17-105. - Payment and deposit of funds; perpetual care fund. 
    All money received for the sale of lots, digging of graves and other services about the cemetery shall be paid directly to the director of finance, who shall give proper receipts therefor. All money so received shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. All money received for perpetual care shall be placed in a separate fund by the director of finance and invested as provided by law. Perpetual care of lots and graves shall be limited to the income or earnings of the perpetual care fund, and no part of the principal shall be expended for such care. 
(Code 1961, § 22-6) 
Sec. 17-106. - Sale of lots. 
(a)  The prices of such lots, including those with the furnishing of perpetual care, in the cemetery, as the city council shall deem advisable to offer for sale, shall be filed with the director of finance, who shall keep an accurate record of all sales of lots in the cemetery, showing the name of the purchaser with the description of the lot purchased in a book provided by the city for that purpose. 
(b)  When any person selects a lot, the cemetery superintendent shall give such person a memorandum showing the legal description of the lot. Upon presentation to the director of finance and payment of the purchase price of the lot, the director of finance shall cause a proper deed of conveyance giving a right to burial only to be executed to the purchaser, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and duly authenticated under the seal of the city. Such deed shall forbid the use of the lot for any purpose other than the burial of human bodies and the purchaser shall expressly agree in the deed to observe such restriction, and shall agree also that the planting and decorating of the lot and of the whole cemetery and the placing of monuments, markers, vaults and any structure or object above the surface of the ground shall be subject to the general supervision and approval of the city council and its officers and employees appointed for that purpose, particularly the superintendent, and that the purchaser's rights shall be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as shall be adopted from time to time relative to the use of the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-5) 
Sec. 17-107. - Burials and disinterments. 
    No interment shall be made in the cemetery and no body shall be removed therefrom until the proper death certificate and all permits required by law and all the information necessary to complete the records of the cemetery have been furnished the director of finance or the superintendent of the cemetery. No interment shall be made within the cemetery without a permit from the director of finance. The permit shall be presented to the superintendent of the cemetery and returned by him to the office of the director of finance after interment. 
(Code 1961, § 22-7) 
Sec. 17-108. - City not to be liable for property loss or damage. 
    The city shall take reasonable precautions to protect lot owners and the property rights of owners within the cemetery from loss or damage, but it expressly shall not be liable for loss or damage beyond its control, and particularly from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals and the like, whether the damage be direct or consequential. 
Sec. 17-109. - Foundations of monuments and other structures. 
    All foundations for monuments and other structures in the cemetery must be of sufficient depth and stability to support the proposed structure and, to this end, no structure may be erected until the foundation therefor has been approved by the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-8) 
Sec. 17-110. - Rights of superintendent regarding maintenance and improvements on lots. 
(a)  The superintendent of the cemetery shall have the right to enter upon any lot and cut down or remove any tree or shrub or any part thereof which is deemed detrimental to the cemetery or unsightly or inconvenient to the public or to adjoining lots. He shall also be authorized to enter upon any lot to make any improvement deemed for the advantage of the grounds. 
(b)  If any vegetation, object or structure or any part of any vegetation, object or structure within the cemetery is deemed to be objectionable or unsightly by the superintendent, he shall have the right to remove the vegetation, object or structure. 
(Code 1961, §§ 22-9, 22-11) 
Sec. 17-111. - Lot owners not to interfere with lot grade or cemetery plan. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot in the cemetery to change the grade of such lot or interfere in any way with the general plan for the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-12) 
Sec. 17-112. - Cleanup of rubbish, tools, etc. 
    All rubbish, unsightly material or debris accumulating in the cemetery from any work or any cause must be removed at once by the person causing its accumulation. All derricks, tools and the like must also be removed immediately upon completion of work and the grounds left in as good a condition as found. 
(Code 1961, § 22-10) 
Sec. 17-113. - Excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in the cemetery without the written consent of the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-15) 
Sec. 17-114. - Possession and discharge of firearms. 
    Section 12-8 regarding firearms, applies to the cemetery. It shall be unlawful to possess any such weapons in the cemetery, except to the extent permitted by the cemetery superintendent for military funerals and related Memorial Day services. Permitted use shall not include the discharge of any live ammunition or projectile. 
(Code 1961, § 22-13) 
Sec. 17-115. - Removal of property. 
    It shall be unlawful to remove any object from any place in the cemetery without the consent of the superintendent. 
(Code 1961, § 22-14) 
Sec. 17-116. - Obstruction of drives and paths. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-16) 
Sec. 17-117. - Injuring stones, graves, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to in any way injure, deface or destroy any stone, structure, grave, flower, tree, shrub, vine or any other thing in the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-17) 
Sec. 17-118. - Driving over closed paths or roadways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over any path or roadway in the cemetery which has been closed to vehicular traffic by the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-8) 
Sec. 17-119. - Pets and animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a pet or any animal owned by him, or a pet or any animal in his custody or control, to run at large within the cemetery. Persons having pets or animals shall promptly remove any excrement caused by the pet or animal. 
(Code 1961, § 22-19) 
Sec. 17-120. - Use of gates. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the cemetery except through the cemetery gates. 
(Code 1961, § 22-20) 
Sec. 17-121. - Disturbances. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the quiet of the cemetery by any noise of any kind, or to disturb the decorum of the cemetery by offensive conduct. 
(Code 1961, § 22-21) 
Sec. 17-122. - Trespassing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain within the cemetery after the gates are closed or after having been asked by the superintendent to leave. 
(Code 1961, § 22-22) 
Sec. 17-123. - Commercial activity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, solicit, sell or peddle flowers, plants, monuments or any commodity or service within the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-23) 
Sec. 17-124. - Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle at a speed greater than posted within the cemetery. 
(Code 1961, § 22-24) 
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Community development department, § 2-151 et seq.; the community development department shall be responsible for advising the city council, planning commission, etc., regarding all matters relating to planning and zoning, § 2-153; comprehensive planning, § 2-296 et seq.; standards in areas of special flood hazards for subdivision proposals, § 8-66(4); specific standards in all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, § 8-67; trailer park regulations, § 20-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
(a)  The following rules shall apply in interpreting this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular, and words in the present tense shall include the future. 
(2)  The word, "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(3)  The word "may" is discretionary and not mandatory. 
(4)  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" shall include all structures of every kind. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(7)  The word "council" means the mayor and the council. 
(8)  The word "commission" means the planning commission. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor public way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
    Applicant means the owner, or representative of the owner, of land proposed to be subdivided. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
    Block means a piece of land usually bounded on all sides by streets or other transportation routes such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such as water bodies or public open space, and not traversed by a through street. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building line means a line extending across the full width of a lot parallel to the street right-of-way and in front of which no building may be constructed. 
    Cul-de-sac means a dead-end street terminating in a vehicular turnaround area. 
    Dedication means the transfer of property from private ownership to the public. 
    Developer: See Applicant. 
    Easement means a right given by the owner of land to another party for specific limited use of that land. 
    Final subdivision plat means the final map or drawing, described in this chapter, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to the city council for final approval and subsequent recording. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waves or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Frontage means the side of a lot abutting on a street and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. 
    Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building. 
    Improvements: See Lot improvements or Public improvements. 
    Lot means any continuous parcel of land legally defined by survey abutting a dedicated public way, except that a lot in a residential district need not abut a dedicated public way where access is provided by recorded plat, reservation, deed, covenant or contract. 
    Lot area means the horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. The lot area required for zoning compliance shall be land other than that under any water body or wetland. Lot area shall be calculated on a square footage basis with an acre equaling forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Lot frontage means that portion of a lot fronting upon and providing rights of access to a dedicated street. Lot frontage shall be measured continuously along only one (1) street. 
    Lot improvement means a physical betterment of real property, which includes rough and final grading and such other improvement as shall be specifically required by the planning commission due to reasons of topography or other conditions and as shall be deemed necessary by the planning commission for the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
    Lot line means the lines bounding a lot defined as follows: 
(1)  Front lot line means the line separating the lot from the street on the narrow side. 
(2)  Rear lot line means the line opposite the front lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line other than front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot for which a recorded plat or deed shows that it was owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the recording of a lot of such area, depth and width in the same location would not have been prohibited by applicable ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
    Lots, types of: 
(1)  Corner lot means a lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street and where, in either case, the interior angle formed by the intersection of street lines does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(2)  Interior means a lot other than a corner lot with one (1) frontage on a street other than the alley. 
(3)  Reversed corner lot means a corner lot having its side street line substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
(4)  Through lot means a lot which has public streets adjoining both front and back lot lines. 
    Lot width means the distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines through that part of the building or structure where the lot is narrowest. 
    Major subdivision means all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of four (4) or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements. 
    Minor subdivision means any subdivision containing not more than three (3) lots fronting on an existing street, not involving a new street or the extension of municipal facilities or the creation of public improvements and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision of the master plan, appendix A, the official zoning map, or this chapter. 
    Nonresidential subdivision means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
    Owner means any person having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter. 
    Preliminary plat means the map of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. 
    Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which municipal responsibility is established. 
    Replat means the platting of a previously platted subdivision where lot lines are adjusted but where easements and public dedicated property lines remain unaltered. 
    Resubdivision means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
    Right-of-way means land set aside for use as a street, alley, or space for utility lines. 
    Sale or lease means any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease devise, or transfer, or an interest in a subdivision or part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise, or other written instrument. 
    Setback means the distance between any property line and the wall or support of structure. 
    Sketch plat means a sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat, or final plat in the case of minor subdivision, to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the planning commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
    Street means any public or private right-of-way used for or intended to be used for passage or travel by motor vehicles and affording a principal means of access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include such terms as "highway," "road," "avenue," "boulevard," "lane," "place," and similar terms. 
    Street, arterial means a limited access street of great continuity, existing or planned, which serves as a principal trafficway carrying traffic volumes from one (1) side of the city to the other. 
    Street, collector means a street carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets within the community. 
    Street, local means a street of very limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve a small number of dwelling units. 
    Subdivider means any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, §§ 24A-12, 24A-13, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-1, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
    This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the city, in accordance with the master plan. 
(3)  To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the city. 
(4)  To ensure that public facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivision and resubdivision in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions of subdivided land. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-2, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-4. - Policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the official master plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
(b)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewer and capital improvements such as recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements. 
(c)  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to the master plan, the zoning ordinance and the official map of the city, and it is intended that this chapter shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the Uniform Building Code, the zoning ordinance, and the official map and master plan of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-3, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-5. - Authority for chapter. 
    This chapter is authorized by article 8, section 8-3(b) of the charter, and is hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of the charter. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-4, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-6. - Scope and jurisdiction of chapter. 
    This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land located within the corporate limits of the city, and shall also extend to and cover any major street plan adopted by the city council and applicable under state statute beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-5, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-7. - Interpretation of chapter; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  Interpretation of chapter. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Conflict with public and private provisions. 
(1)  Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, and whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard shall control. 
(2)  Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where a provision of this chapter is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or regulation than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this chapter, or the determinations of the planning commission or the council in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this chapter or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this chapter and determinations made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-6, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-8. - Saving provision. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the city, except as expressly provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-7, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-9. - Compliance with conditions of planning commission. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state constitution to the city. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the planning commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-8, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-10. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his designee to enforce this chapter and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such a parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and filed with the county clerk and recorder. 
(c)  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with the intent of evading this chapter shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-11, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-11. - Variances. 
    No variances to this chapter shall be granted by city staff, the city planning commission, the city board of adjustment or the city council. However, when strict compliance with this chapter or the purposes of this chapter may prevent substantial justice from being done and may prevent the public interest from being better promoted, minor deviations from strict compliance shall be noted by staff and shall be made known by staff to the planning commission and to the city council, as part of city staff presentations, at appropriate times for consideration by both bodies, prior to approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-9, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-12. - Fees. 
    Any application for subdivision, replat, subdivision variance, or any other application within the scope of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by the city council upon the recommendation of the public works department and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the costs involved. A schedule of fees may be found in the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-10, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Secs. 18-13-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Conference with administrative staff. 
    Prior to preparing a subdivision plat, the applicant shall consult with the public works director or his designee in order to familiarize himself with the procedure for adoption of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets, reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, and the availability of existing services. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-14(a), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-32. - Replatting. 
    A replatting may be allowed if a determination can be made by city administration that the request is confined to the following: 
(1)  Lot lines may be revised from those shown on the recorded plat provided that: 
a.  No lot or parcel of land shall be created that is less than the minimum requirements for the area or dimensions as established by this chapter or the zoning ordinance of the city; 
b.  No increase in density of the approved final plat is proposed; 
c.  No changes in easements used for drainage are proposed unless accompanied by complete engineering data; 
d.  Street locations and street rights-of-way are not to be changed; 
e.  No changes in use within the platted area are proposed; and 
f.  The plat shall not be altered in any way which will adversely affect the character of the recorded final plat. 
(2)  A replat proposal shall be approved on an administrative basis. 
a.  The applicant shall file a plat with the public works department for approval. 
b.  Administrative staff members shall study the replat, taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter. Staff members may advise the applicant of specific changes or additions, if any, required as a prerequisite to the approval of the plat. 
(c)  The director of public works or his designee shall render approval or disapproval within seven (7) days of receiving the plat, unless the director of public works determines that the replat should be referred to the planning commission. 
(3)  All other changes to a recorded plat shall be considered a subdivision and shall comply with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-14(b), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89; Ord. No. 14-1999, 7-27-99, eff. 8-6-99) 
Sec. 18-33. - General procedure. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any building permit for a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be issued, the subdividing owner or his authorized representative shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Minor subdivision (containing not more than three (3) lots): 
a.  Sketch plat. 
b.  Final subdivision plat. 
(2)  Major subdivision (containing four (4) or more lots): 
a.  Sketch plat. 
b.  Preliminary subdivision plat. 
c.  Final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-14(c), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-34. - Official submission date. 
    For both major and minor subdivisions, the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the public hearing on final approval of the subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat at which the statutory period required for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence to run. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-14(d), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-35. - Submission and approval of sketch plat. 
(a)  Application procedure and requirements. Prior to subdividing land, the applicant shall file an application with the public works department for approval of a sketch plat. The application shall: 
(1)  Be made on forms available in the public works department. 
(2)  Include all contiguous holdings of the owner with an indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership which shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the office of the county clerk and recorder. 
(3)  Be accompanied by a minimum of five (5) copies of the sketch plat as described in this chapter and complying in all respects with this chapter. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a fee as determined by the city council. 
(5)  Include an address and telephone number of an agent within the territory of the municipality which shall be authorized to receive all notices required by this chapter. 
(b)  Approval. Administrative staff members shall study the sketch plat, taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter and the best use of the land being subdivided. Staff members may advise the applicant of specific changes or additions, if any, required as a prerequisite to the approval of the sketch plat. Approval of the sketch plat shall constitute authorization to the applicant to prepare and submit a preliminary plat in the case of a major subdivision and a final subdivision plat in the case of a minor subdivision. Such approval or disapproval shall be rendered by the director of public works or his designee within seven (7) days of receiving the sketch plat. The planning commission may require additional changes as a result of further study of the subdivision and preliminary or final subdivision plats. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-15, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-36. - Submission and approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Application procedure and requirements. Based upon the approval of the sketch plat, the applicant shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a preliminary plat incorporating the requirements agreed upon in the sketch plat phase. 
(1)  Submission by applicant. 
a.  At least fourteen (14) days prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission, ten (10) copies of the proposed subdivision plat shall be submitted by the applicant to the public works department. 
b.  The applicant shall provide one (1) copy of the preliminary plat to the superintendent of schools and to each of the utility companies. 
c.  The applicant shall provide stamped envelopes addressed to each of the adjacent property owners within three hundred (300) feet as indicated by the clerk and recorder's office. 
(2)  Administrative staff review. Administrative staff shall review the preliminary plat and provide comments to the planning commission prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat. Such hearing shall be advertised in the same manner as the subsequent public hearing on the final subdivision plat. 
(b)  Preliminary approval. After the planning commission has reviewed the preliminary plat and administrative staff comments and testimony submitted at the public hearing is heard, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes or additions. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat within fourteen (14) days after the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the public hearing on the preliminary plat is held. If conditionally approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications shall be indicated. One (1) copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval. Approval of the preliminary plat is an authorization to the subdivider to proceed with the development of the final subdivision plat. 
(c)  Public improvements. In accordance with article III of this chapter, the planning commission shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all roads and public improvements to be dedicated; all improvements which shall be required to be established for water, fire and utilities; and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the planning commission in order to have the subdivision plat conform to the master plan of the city. 
(d)  Effective period of preliminary approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year, at the end of which time final approval on the subdivision must have been obtained from the planning commission. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth in this subsection shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to resubmit a plat for preliminary approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations, if applicable. 
(e)  Zoning regulations. Every plat shall conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of proposed final approval, except that any plat which has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the zoning ordinance rendering the plat nonconforming as to bulk or use, provided that final approval is obtained within the one-year period. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-16, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-37. - Submission and approval of final subdivision plat. 
(a)  Application procedures and requirements. Following the approval of the sketch plat in the case of a minor subdivision, or of the preliminary plat in the case of a major subdivision, the applicant shall prepare or cause to be prepared a final subdivision plat incorporating the requirements agreed upon in the sketch plat and preliminary plat phases. 
(1)  Submission by applicant. 
a.  At least fourteen (14) days prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission, ten (10) copies of the proposed final subdivision plat shall be submitted by the applicant to the public works department. 
b.  The applicant shall provide all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, utilities, parks and easements, in a form approved by the city attorney. The final subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
The owner(s) hereby irrevocably offer(s) for dedication to the City of Sterling all the streets, easements, parks and required utilities shown in the Subdivision Plat in accordance with the irrevocable offer of dedication dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ and recorded in the County Clerk and Recorder's Office. 
By: _____
Owner Date: _____  
c.  The applicant shall provide stamped envelopes addressed to each adjacent property owner within three hundred (300) feet as indicated in the county clerk and recorder's office. 
d.  The applicant shall submit a performance bond for the benefit of the city for the performance of all required subdivision public and lot improvements and for all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication for the dedication to the city free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. The amount of the performance bond shall be one hundred fifteen (115) percent of an estimate of all costs for all street, water, sanitary and other improvements, including lot improvements on individual lots as required in this chapter, specified in the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the planning commission and the city council, such estimate as provided by the applicant's certified engineer and approved by the director of public works. The performance bond required shall be in such form as is satisfactory to the city attorney. 
In addition to the performance bond requirements as specified by this subsection d, the applicant shall also submit to the city, after certification of completion by the public works director, a subdivision bond to guarantee that any defects in the improvements within the subdivision shall be corrected at the applicant's expense, for a period of three (3) years from the date of certification. The subdivision bond required shall be in such form as is satisfactory to the city attorney. At the direction of the city council, the city administration may impose liquidated damages to be paid daily and set at an amount determined by the city council at the time of subdivision approval, and not to exceed a period of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the time period set by the city council to construct all improvements. 
e.  The applicant shall submit construction plans as outlined in this chapter. 
(2)  Notice of public hearing. Upon receipt of the final subdivision plat and all supporting material, the chairperson of the planning commission shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the planning commission to be held at least fourteen (14) days after the date of submission. The secretary of the planning commission will submit a notice for publication in one (1) newspaper of general circulation to be published at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing and mail notices to all property owners as specified in subsection (a)(1)c. of this section, and shall maintain file copies of the plat for public review prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Public hearing and determination. 
(1)  At the public hearing, the planning commission shall give an opportunity to any interested persons to examine or comment on the plat. After the public hearing, the planning commission shall, within fourteen (14) days after closing of the public hearing, recommend to the city council approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the subdivision application, which shall set forth in detail any conditions to which the approval is subject, or reasons for disapproval. 
(2)  One (1) copy of the final subdivision plat shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval noted thereon, and the reasons therefor accompanying the plat. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-17, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89; Ord. No. 2-1990, § 24A-17, 4-13-90, eff. 4-23-90; Ord. No. 52-1997, 9-23-97, eff. 10-3-97) 
Sec. 18-38. - Site specific development plans; vested rights. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Site specific development plan means those developments for which the landowner desires the creation of a vested property right, the approval by the city council of the project at a public hearing, which hearing shall be specifically requested by the landowner, and which public hearing shall be either: 
a.  Conducted immediately following at the same city council meeting as the approval of the final plat; or, 
b.  If no final plat approval is required, conducted following the successful approval of the development at all other required stages of the development review process. 
Failure of the landowner to request such a public hearing renders the approval not a site specific development plan, and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created. 
(2)  Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with the notice required by C.R.S. 31-23-304 for zoning regulations, or with any other required notice. At such public hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  Effective date; amendments. A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the city council approval action relating thereto as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. If amendments to a site specific development plan are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the city council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(d)  Required language; notice of approval. Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to article 68 of title 24, C.R.S., as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(e)  Payment of costs. In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific develop ment plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the finance director as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. Such costs or fees relative thereto shall be as determined and set by the city council. 
(f)  Approval not to affect other requirements. Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(g)  Limitations. Nothing in this section is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of C.R.S. title 24, article 68. In the event of the repeal of C.R.S. title 24, article 68, or a judicial determination that the article is invalid or unconstitutional, this section shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-18, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-39. - Signing and recording of subdivision plat. 
(a)  Signing of plat. 
(1)  After a performance bond has been provided to the city and the performance bond is satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution, and all conditions of the enacted ordinance pertaining to the plat have been satisfied, the chairperson of the planning commission shall endorse approval on the plat. 
(2)  There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the city, as shown by a certificate signed by the public works director and city attorney that the necessary dedication of public lands and public improvements has been accepted, subject to completion under the performance bond. 
(b)  Recording of plat. 
(1)  The chairperson of the planning commission shall sign the reproducible mylar original of the subdivision plat. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the secretary of the planning commission to file the plat with the county clerk and recorder's office within seven (7) days of the date of signature. Simultaneously with the filing of the plat, the secretary of the planning commission shall record the agreement of dedication, together with such legal documents as shall be required to be recorded by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-19, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Secs. 18-40-18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 18-56. - Sketch plat. 
    Sketch plats submitted to the public works department, prepared in pen or pencil, shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch and show the following information, were applicable: 
(1)  Name. 
a.  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
b.  Proposed name, if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any previously recorded plat. 
c.  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. This is the name by which the property is locally known. 
(2)  Ownership. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner or agent of the property, and citation of the last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
c.  Existing covenants on the property, if any. 
d.  Name, address and telephone number of the professional person responsible for subdivision design of public improvements, and for surveys. 
(3)  Description. Location of property by lot, section, township, range and county, graphic scale, north arrow, and date. 
(4)  Features. 
a.  Location of property lines, existing easements, railroad rights-of-way and watercourses. 
b.  Location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract. 
c.  Names of adjoining property owners within three hundred (300) feet of any perimeter boundary of the subdivision, as available from the latest tax assessment rolls. 
d.  Existing permanent buildings. 
e.  Existing permanent utility rights-of-way on or immediately adjacent to the site. 
f.  The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing lots. 
g.  The approximate location and widths of proposed streets. 
h.  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewer systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal. 
i.  Preliminary provisions for collecting or discharging surface water drainage. 
j.  The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for parks, playgrounds or other public uses. 
k.  A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the surrounding area with zoning districts properly designated. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-20, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-57. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Generally. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and may be prepared in pen or pencil. The sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used. The plat shall be drawn on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets. The map prepared for the preliminary plat may also be used for the final subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn on reproducible mylar. Preparation in pencil will make required changes and additions easier. 
(b)  Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following: 
(1)  The title of the subdivision, true north point, scale, and date of the plat. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of land to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner, and the name of the land surveyor. 
(3)  The location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, and the names of the adjoining property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet. 
(4)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines on the property. 
(5)  The location of existing streets, easements, watercourses, railroad tracks, and other pertinent features as determined by the planning commission. 
(6)  The location and width of all proposed streets and easements, alleys, and other public rights-of-way. 
(7)  The locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing lots. 
(8)  The tract survey boundaries and any traverse to permanent survey monuments, which must be certified by a land surveyor registered to practice in the state. Survey precision shall be such as to limit error to not more than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
(9)  Legal description. 
(10)  Indication of the use of the lot (single-family, multiple-family, etc.) and all other uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider. 
(11)  Blocks and lots shall be consecutively numbered. 
(12)  Space shall be provided for comments from the city administration, utility companies, and the planning commission. 
(13)  The form for endorsement by the planning commission chairperson shall be as follows: 
NOTICE OF CONDITIONAL APPROVAL 
Notice is hereby given that this Preliminary Plat has received the conditional approval of the Planning Commission for the City of Sterling, Colorado, and that the Planning Commission is now ready to receive the Final Plat for consideration. 
_____
Date _____
Chairperson, 
Planning Commission  
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-21, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-58. - Construction plans. 
    Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat. The following shall be shown: 
(1)  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road, the elevation along the centerline of the existing road within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection shall be shown. The plat shall show approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and control angles on all streets. 
(2)  The planning commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross sections of all proposed streets at one-hundred-foot stations be shown. 
(3)  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross section of street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-way, manholes and catchbasins; the location, size and elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers and drains; and location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities. 
(4)  Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including but not limited to existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, and easements. 
(5)  Site grading plan for the entire subdivision. 
(6)  Title, name, address, seal and signature of professional engineer and surveyor, and date. 
(7)  Notation of approval as follows: 
_____
Public Works Director _____
Date _____
Planning Commission Chairperson _____
Date  
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-22, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-59. - Final subdivision plat. 
    The final subdivision plat shall be presented in ink on reproducible Mylar at the same scale as the preliminary plat, and contain the same information, except for any changes or additions required by the planning commission. The preliminary plat may be used as the final subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in accordance with the planning commission's conditions. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following: 
(1)  A systematic identification of all lots and blocks and names for streets. 
(2)  A sufficient dedication to the public of all streets, alleys, easements, parks and other public areas as shown on the plat. 
(3)  A certification by the surveyor or engineer as to the accuracy of the survey and drafting of the plat. 
(4)  A certification by an attorney admitted to practice in the state, or by a title insurance company authorized to do business in the state, that the person(s) named below is/are the owner(s) of the property in fee simple, free and clear of all recorded liens except the following: (wherein recorded liens are itemized). 
(5)  A certification of filing to be completed by the county recorder, indicating date and time of filing. 
(6)  A certification that all expenses for improvements shall be financed by the subdivider, not the city, in accordance with the regulations outlined in article III of this chapter. 
(7)  Certificates showing approval of the plat by the planning commission and approval and acceptance of the plat by the city council. The certificate of the planning commission shall be in the following form: 
Approved by the Planning Commission for the City of Sterling, Colorado, this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
_____
Chairperson, 
Planning Commission ATTEST: _____
Recording 
Secretary  
The certificate of city council shall be in the following form: 
This plat, and the dedication to the public of the streets and public ways shown hereon, and the public utility easements as shown are hereby accepted and approved by the City Council of the City of Sterling, Colorado, this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
_____
Mayor ATTEST: _____
Ex Officio City Clerk  
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-23, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89; Ord. No. 2-1990, § 24A-23, 4-10-90, eff. 4-23-90; Ord. No. 2-2007, 2-13-07, eff. 2-23-07; Ord. No. 18-2013, 9-24-13, eff. 10-5-13) 
Secs. 18-60-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-76. - Performance bond required; completion of improvements. 
(a)  Bond required; approval; certification of initial improvements. Before the plat is signed by the chairman of the planning commission, all applicants shall be required to submit a performance bond in accordance with subsection 18-37(a)(1)d, and secure the city attorney's approval of the form of the bond and secure the certification of the director of public works and the city attorney that the initial public improvements, such as for water system, fire, sewer system, basic utilities and such other special requirements that have been deemed necessary by the planning commission, have been completed at that point. 
(b)  Time limit for completion of improvements. 
(1)  Such performance bond shall, based upon determination by the city council, upon the planning commission recommendation, provide a period of time within which the required improvements must be completed, but such period of time shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from the effective date of final approval by the city council. 
(2)  The planning commission may, prior to expiration of the bond, upon request of the poster of the bond, and upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the city council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. No extension of the completion date shall be effective until the issuer of the bond has, in writing, granted the extension requested. 
(c)  Payment of costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at the applicant's expense, without reimbursement by the city or any improvement district therein. 
(d)  Failure to complete improvements. If the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the council or extension thereof, upon planning commission recommendation, in the ordinance approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond or extension thereof the council shall thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed, regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-24, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-77. - Inspection of improvements. 
    The director of public works or his designee shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure satisfactory completion. If the director of public works or his designee finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements. The applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the public improvements according to specifications. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-25(a), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-78. - Release or reduction of performance bond. 
(a)  Release of bond. The applicant's engineer or surveyor shall certify to the public works director that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision. Upon the submission of a certificate by the director of public works stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the performance bond shall be released. 
(b)  Reduction of bond. There shall be no reduction in the performance bond prior to completion of all public improvements unless, according to subsection 18-37(a)(1)d the applicant's engineer has submitted a certified cost of the public improvements remaining to be completed according to subsection 18-37(a)(1)d and the cost has been approved by the director of public works. In no event shall the amount to which the bond is reduced be less than two hundred (200) percent of the approved cost of the completion of the public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-25(b), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-79. - Escrow deposits for lot improvements. 
(a)  Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by this chapter cannot be performed, the director of public works or his designee may, nevertheless, issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety or general welfare, upon acceptance by the director of finance of a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the director of public works for the cost of the improvements. 
(b)  Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which escrow monies have been accepted by the director of finance at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the developer within a period of nine (9) months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been properly installed at the end of the time period, the director of public works shall give two (2) weeks' written notice to the developer requiring him to install improvements, and if the improvements are not installed properly in the discretion of the director of public works, the director of public works may request the city to authorize contracting the work for the installation of the necessary improvements, in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-26, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-80. - Conformance with applicable rules and regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements established in this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)  The city Code. 
(3)  The official master plan, official map, and capital improvements program as adopted by the city. 
(4)  The rules of the state highway department, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
(5)  The rules of the state health department. 
Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformance with the guidelines provided in this section or the policy and purposes of this chapter established in section 18-4. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-27(a), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-81. - Self-imposed restrictions. 
    If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or this chapter, such restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the planning commission may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the county clerk and recorder in a form to be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-27(b), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-82. - Monuments. 
    The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in this section and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
(1)  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines and at street intersections, angle points of curves and block corners. They shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other. 
(2)  The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by reasonably permanent monuments solidly embedded in the ground. Affixed securely to the top of such monument shall be a durable cap bearing the state registration number of the land surveyor responsible for the establishment of the monument. 
(3)  All internal boundaries shall be monumented in the field by monuments as described in subsection (2) of this section. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, and at all angle points in any line. 
(4)  All monuments shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be removed by frost. 
(5)  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the planning commission recommends approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-27(c), 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Secs. 18-83-18-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-101. - Lots. 
(a)  Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
(b)  Dimensions. 
(1)  Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
(2)  Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines, or radial to curving street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Double frontage lots; access to lots. 
(1)  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide a separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(2)  Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial street. Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic onto arterials. 
(d)  Soil preservation and grading. 
(1)  Grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot recovered with soil with an average depth of at least six (6) inches, which shall contain no particles over two (2) inches in diameter, over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, however, escrow funds may be accepted as provided in section 18-79 under the terms provided in that section. 
(2)  Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(e)  Removal of debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of such materials shall be required prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy in the subdivision. No such material shall be left or deposited on any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of public improvements, whichever is later. 
(f)  Fencing. Each subdivider or developer shall be required to furnish and install fences wherever the planning commission deems it necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. The fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the zoning ordinance and shall be noted as to height and material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the fence improvements have been duly installed. 
(g)  Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among adjacent lots. The planning commission may approve an alternate plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a city responsibility. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum area of a lot required under the zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of design approved by the director of public works or his designee. 
(h)  Performance bond to include lot improvement. The performance bond shall include an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained in this section. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of the performance bond, the city may enforce the provisions of the bond where the provisions of this section or any other applicable law, 
ordinance or regulation have not been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-28, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-102. - Roads. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Frontage on improved road. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided has frontage on and access from an existing street on the official map, or unless such street is: 
a.  An existing state or county highway; or 
b.  A street shown upon a plat approved by the planning commission and recorded in the county clerk and recorder's office. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations and specifications, or be secured by a performance bond required under this chapter, with the width and right-of-way required by this chapter. 
Whenever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, such road shall be suitably improved as provided in this subsection. 
(2)  Grading and improvement. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the city's construction standards and specifications and shall be approved by the director of public works or his designee, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
(3)  Topography and arrangement. 
a.  Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at or above the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the street extension map and the master plan. 
c.  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
d.  Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
e.  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to. 
f.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the planning commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(4)  Blocks. 
a.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths in accordance with the zoning ordinance, with an alley twenty (20) feet in width dividing the tiers lengthwise for the installation of as much of the utilities as can be practically located therein for service to the rear lot line of each of the tiered lots. The public works director shall waive the requirements for an alley in a proposed block where the lots will permanently share a community backyard with no fencing between the lots, and have sufficient provisions for the access and installation of utilities consistent with the Municipal Code. 
b.  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development proposed, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length, nor be less than six hundred (600) feet in length. Deviations of these requirements are subject to planning commission approval. 
c.  In long blocks, the planning commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the planning commission through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet wide where deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers or other community facilities. 
(5)  Road names. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other road names in existence in the city so as not to cause confusion. A road which is or is planned as a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name. 
(6)  Road regulatory signs. Road regulatory signs shall be installed, the cost for which shall be included as a part of the performance bond required. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. The type and location of street name signs is to be determined by the director of public works or his designee. 
(7)  Streetlights. Appropriate streetlights shall be installed at the cost of the applicant. The cost for streetlights shall be covered by the performance bond. The spacing for streetlights shall be determined according to luminal levels approved by the director of public works. 
(8)  Continuation of principal streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and for efficient provision of utilities. 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  Generally. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police and fire protection, snow removal, sanitation and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required: 
TABLE 1. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ROADS 
Street 
Width Right-of-Way 
(feet) Paved or 
Roadway 
(feet) Arterial 80 50 Collector 60 44 Local 50 36 Alleys 20 18  
Note: Materials and installation are subject to the city's street system specifications. 
(2)  Road surfacing and improvements. 
a.  After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in this chapter. The surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding area. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the director of public works or his designee. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. 
b.  All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the city and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
(3)  Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in this chapter shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three (3) to one (1). 
(4)  Intersections. 
a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point unless specifically approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one (1) side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet, and minimum flow line at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
d.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground or vegetation in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-29, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89; Ord. No. 47-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95; Ord. No. 12-2009, 4-28-09, eff. 5-8-09) 
Sec. 18-103. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)  General requirements. The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for stormwater or floodwater runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be done in a method approved by the planning commission, in accordance with city specifications, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. Flood damage prevention requirements of this Code shall be strictly adhered to by the applicant. 
(b)  Stormwater facilities. 
(1)  Location. The applicant shall be required by the planning commission to carry away any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with the city construction standards and specifications. 
(2)  Accessibility to public storm sewers. 
a.  Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities or, if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater subject to the specifications of the director of public works or his designee. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the director of public works or his designee. 
b.  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the director of public works or his designee and the planning commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance bond required for the subdivision plat. 
(3)  Areas of poor drainage, flood or flooding. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is subject to flood or flooding, the planning commission may approve such subdivision provided that the applicant complies with the flood damage prevention requirements of this Code. 
(c)  Drainage easements. 
(1)  Required. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(2)  Standards. 
a.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within the road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside of the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be dedicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.  When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
c.  The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-30, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Cross reference- Flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 18-104. - Water facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to the specifications of the state and local health departments. All water mains shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter. 
(2)  Water mains shall be approved by the director of public works or his designee in accordance with city engineering specifications. 
(3)  To facilitate the approval required in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and stub outs to lot lines shall be shown on the preliminary plat. The cost of installing such facilities shall be included in the performance bond to be furnished by the developer. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart and within five hundred (500) feet of any structure and shall be approved by the fire department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements including water and sewer stub outs, shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-31, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Cross reference- Water service, § 21-61 et seq. 
Sec. 18-105. - Sanitary sewer facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the city construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations and standards of the director of public works, state health department, and other appropriate agencies. 
(b)  Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the sanitary sewer shall be tapped and stubbed out to the lot line, and the owner thereof shall be required to connect to the sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste. It shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. 
(c)  Design criteria. 
(1)  These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances where considered justified by the director of public works or his designee. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area in conformance with the design criteria outlined in the city's sanitary sewer system specifications. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-32, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Cross reference- Sewer system, § 21-116 et seq. 
Sec. 18-106. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpaved right-of-way of all roads as shown in table 2. Sidewalks shall be attached to the curb. 
(2)  Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are required by this chapter or where required in the discretion of the planning commission. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be improved as required by subsection 18-102(b)(2). 
(b)  Pedestrian access. The planning commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements not less than ten (10) feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
TABLE 2. SIDEWALKS REQUIRED BY 
DEVELOPMENT DENSITY 
Residential Nature of 
 Road   Low- 
 Medium   High Business/ 
Industrial Local road Both sides 
3 feet wide Both sides 
4 feet wide Both sides 
5 feet wide Collector road Both sides 
4 feet wide Both sides 
5 feet wide Both sides 
5 feet wide Arterial road Both sides 
4 feet wide Both sides 
5 fee wide Both sides 
5 feet wide  
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-33, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Cross reference- Sidewalks, § 17-21 et seq. 
Sec. 18-107. - Location of utilities. 
(a)  Location. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone and cable TV, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Wherever existing utility facilities are located aboveground, except where existing on a public right-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. 
(b)  Easements. Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the alley, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-34, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Sec. 18-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 48-1995, adopted December 12, 1995, effective December 22, 1995, repealed § 18-108 in its entirety. Formerly, § 18-108 pertained to public uses and derived from Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-35, adopted August 22, 1989, effective September 4, 1989. 
Sec. 18-109. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
    Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change or grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and trees shall be welled and protected against change of grade where required. The sketch plat shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by this chapter, and shall further indicate all those marked for retention. The city forestry division shall receive a copy of the plat for review and shall comment and recommend back to the planning commission in accordance with chapter 22, article II. 
(Ord. No. 10-1989, § 24A-36, 8-22-89, eff. 9-4-89) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of finance and records, §§ 4-6, 6-1; director of finance, § 6-2; purchases, § 6-4; competitive bids, § 6-4; budgets, § 5-1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; occupation tax on alcoholic beverage businesses, § 3-111 et seq.; public improvements, planning, construction, assessments and collection procedures, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Taxation, C.R.S. 31-1-101 et seq., 39-1-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupation tax on business selling 3.2 beer or malt, vinous or spirituous liquor levied, § 3-111 et seq. 
State Law reference- Occupation taxes, C.R.S. 31-15-501. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 19-26-19-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAS UTILITY COMPANIES 

Sec. 19-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gas or natural gas means such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum, manufactured, or any mixture thereof. 
    Gas utility company means any person who sells, provides or distributes gas within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Taxable amount means the monthly amount of the occupation tax levied upon a utility company by this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-1, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-52. - Interpretation of division. 
    The tax provided in this division is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this division shall be construed to mean that any gas utility company is issued a franchise by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-9, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-53. - Administration of division. 
    The director of finance shall administer the provisions of this division. The city manager may promulgate rules or regulations to aid in the enforcement and administration of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-8, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-54. - Authority to inspect records. 
    The city and its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the gas utility companies that are subject to the provisions of this division and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-6, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-55. - Levy; amount. 
(a)  Effective June 27, 1987, there is hereby levied upon every utility company that sells, provides or distributes gas a taxable amount for each and every calendar month that any such company sells, provides or distributes gas. 
(b)  The taxable amount shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-2, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-56. - Time of payment. 
    The tax levied by this division shall begin to accrue against each and every gas utility company doing business in the city on July 1, 1987, and on the first day of each calendar month thereafter. The taxable amount shall be due and payable by such utility company on the tenth day after the last day of each calendar month. Any taxable amount not paid on such tenth day shall become delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-3, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-57. - Interest on deficiency. 
    Interest on any deficiency in payment of the tax levied by this division shall be at the rate imposed under C.R.S. 39-21-110.5, plus one-half percent per month from the date when due. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-4, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-58. - Failure to pay. 
    If any gas utility company subject to the provisions of this division shall fail to pay the taxes as provided in this division, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, plus reasonable costs of collection, including reasonable attorneys fees. Such amount shall be a debt due and owing from such company to the city. The city attorney, upon direction of the city council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the debt. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-4, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Sec. 19-59. - Hearings. 
    Any utility company subject to the provisions of this division may request a hearing on the levy of the occupation tax after receiving a notice of final determination, assessment, demand for payment, or denial of claim for refund. 
(Ord. No. 11-1987, § 13A-7, 6-9-87, eff. 6-12-87) 
Secs. 19-60-19-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TELEPHONE UTILITY COMPANIES 

Sec. 19-76. - Interpretation of division. 
    The tax provided in this division is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this division be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the city. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-6) 
Sec. 19-77. - Tax in lieu of certain other taxes. 
(a)  The tax provided in this division shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business in the city on any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The tax provided for in this division shall not be in lieu of sales tax, ad valorem taxes, special property assessments for local improvements, or fees imposed for excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-7) 
Sec. 19-78. - Prior offenses and liabilities to continue. 
    All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division shall be treated as though all prior applicable ordinances and amendments thereto were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-8) 
Sec. 19-79. - Police power. 
    The city reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions of this division, such ordinances as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police powers. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-10) 
Sec. 19-80. - Authority to inspect records. 
    The city and its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this division and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-5) 
Sec. 19-81. - Levy; amount. 
    There is levied on and against each telephone company operating within the city a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the city and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the city. The amount of the tax levied by this division shall be: 
(1)  Six dollars ($6.00) per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided on January 1 of each year subsequent to 1979; plus 
(2)  A yearly inflationary increase per telephone account which is counted annually under subsection (1) of this section equal to the yearly percentage rise in the telephone component of the Bureau of Labor and Statistics Consumer Price Index for all items, all urban consumers, U.S. city average, based on the standard reference base period as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor (base year on effective date of division: 1967-100) or any comparable subsequent index with which the Department of Labor may replace the described index; plus 
(3)  The administrative cost of determining the telephone component described in subsection (2) of this section. 
The amount of the tax shall be determined according to the following formula: 
Total Payment = (Z;sub \sub;) (X;sub \sub;) + N = ( (Z i-1 ) (Y;sub \sub;) + Z i-1 ) + N 
where: 
i = the number of years past 1979 Y;sub \sub; = the yearly percentage increase in the telephone component of the Consumer Price Index, all cities, all items, all urban consumers Z;sub \sub; = the total payment per telephone due in any given year X;sub \sub; = the number of telephones on January 1 of any given year Z o = 6 N = the administrative cost of determining the telephone component of the Consumer Price Index.  
For the year 1979 only, the number of telephone accounts will be determined as of June 1 using the formula set forth in this section as if the number of telephone accounts had been determined as of January 1, and all moneys paid to the city under any other agreement based on gross revenues shall be deducted from the total amount due and owing for the year under this division. For every year subsequent to 1979, the number of telephone accounts will be determined as of January 1. 
Each payment shall be due by the fifteenth day of the subsequent month for which payment is being made. Payment shall be computed by using the number of telephone accounts being serviced on the fifteenth day of the month for which payment is made. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-1; Ord. No. 62-1997, 12-9-97, eff. 12-19-97) 
Sec. 19-82. - Accrual; installment payments. 
    The tax levied by this division shall begin to accrue on June 1, 1979, and shall be due and payable in six (6) equal monthly installments for the remaining portion of 1979 and in twelve (12) equal monthly installments for years subsequent to 1979. Each installment shall be paid on or before the last business day of each calendar month. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-2) 
Sec. 19-83. - Statement of accounts required. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in section 19-82, each telephone utility company subject to this division shall file with the city clerk, in such form as the clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the city on such date. The statement shall be filed within thirty (30) days after each January 1 of each year after 1979, showing the number of such accounts on January 1 of that year. Upon written notice from the city clerk of any change in the boundaries of the city, any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this division shall provide a supplementary statement of telephone accounts to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the mailing or hand delivery of the notice. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-3) 
Sec. 19-84. - Failure to file statement of accounts. 
    It is unlawful for any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this division to fail, neglect, or refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided for in section 19-83. Each day after the statement becomes delinquent during which the officer, agent, manager or other person so fails, neglects or refuses to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-11) 
Sec. 19-85. - Failure to pay tax. 
    If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this division fails to pay the taxes as provided in this division, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the amount, together with an addition of ten (10) percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be a debt due and owing from such company to the city. The city attorney, upon direction of the city council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the debt. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-4) 
Sec. 19-86. - Civil actions. 
    In any case of a failure to comply with any provisions of this division, the city or any person affected by such failure may, in addition to the penalties provided by law, initiate a civil action for injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate relief to prevent, enjoin, abate, remove or eliminate such violation of this division. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-4) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 19-87. - Telephone companies to provide certain services to city. 
    Each telephone utility company subject to chapter 19, article II, division 3, shall allow the city to maintain attachments for the police, fire and other emergency alarm systems without charge on the company's equipment and poles and provide emergency communications services to the city free of charge. 
(Code 1961, § 24B-9) 
Secs. 19-88-19-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference- Local sales and use tax, C.R.S. 29-2-101 et seq.; state sales and use tax, C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq. 

Sec. 19-116. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to impose a sales tax upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services in the city pursuant to the authority granted to home rule cities of the state by article XX of the constitution of the state and in accordance with C.R.S. 29-2-101 et seq. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-2; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-117. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the definitions of words in this article shall be as those words are defined in C.R.S. 39-26-102, and the definitions in C.R.S. 39-26-102 are incorporated in this article by reference. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-3; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-118. - Authority of the finance director. 
    The administration of this article is hereby vested in the finance director. 
(1)  Forms and procedures. The finance director shall prescribe forms and administrative procedures for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax. 
(2)  Regulations. The finance director may formulate and promulgate, after hearing, appropriate regulations to effectuate the purpose of this article. 
(3)  Additional information. The finance director may require any person to make additional returns, render statements, furnish records, or make informational reports to determine whether or not such person is liable for payment or collection of the tax. 
(4)  Subpoenas. The finance director may issue a subpoena to command a person to attend and give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records. 
a.  Any subpoena issued under the terms of this article shall be served as set forth in the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, including the payment of witness fees. When the witness is subpoenaed at the insistence of the city, such fees shall be paid by the city. When a witness is subpoenaed at the insistence of the taxpayer, the finance director may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee be paid by the taxpayer. At the discretion of the finance director, a deposit to cover the cost of the subpoena and witness fees may be required. 
b.  If a subpoena issued by the finance director is duly served and the respondent fails to attend, give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records as commanded, the finance director may request the city attorney to file a motion with the municipal court for an order enforcing the subpoena. 
(5)  Oaths. The finance director is authorized to administer oaths and take testimony at the hearing. 
(6)  Agents. The finance director may designate agents to assist in the performance of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. 
(7)  Partial payments. The finance director may accept any partial payment made and apply such payments towards the tax due. Deposit of such payments shall not in any way imply that the remaining balance is or has been abated. 
(8)  [Penalty.] If the finance director determines that a person has registered or caused to be registered a motor vehicle outside the city and that such motor vehicle should have been registered at an address in the city, the finance director is authorized to assess a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) against the person. A written notice of the penalty assessment shall be issued, paid and protested in the same manner as a notice of assessment. The finance director may enforce collection of the penalty assessment in the same manner as provided in this article for the collection of tax due. Assessment and collection of the penalty shall not preclude the collection of any tax due or fee or the imposition of any civil or criminal penalty provided by law. 
(9)  Notices. Notices required by this article shall be in writing and delivered in person or sent post paid by first class mail, to the last known address of the taxpayer. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-9(a); Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-118.1. - Audit of records. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount of tax due from any person engaged in business in the city, the finance director may authorize an agent to conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. 
(b)  All books, accounts and records shall be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by an authorized agent of the finance director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested by the finance director or authorized agent, the finance director may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or his representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(c)  Any charitable corporation claiming exemption under the provisions of this article is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-118.2. - Coordinated audit procedure. 
(a)  Any taxpayer licensed in this city pursuant to section 19-119, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(b)  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the finance director of this city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon this city's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(c)  Except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of the statute of limitations as provided herein, may be audited by this city during the twelve (12) months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(d)  If this city desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to paragraph (c) above, the finance director shall so notify the finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The finance director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(e)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this city, this city's finance director shall facilitate arrangements between this city and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit, unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The finance director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(f)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this city, this city's finance director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the city and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The finance director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(g)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section shall not apply: 
(1)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit, 
(2)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this section, 
(3)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of the statute of limitations as provided herein, or, 
(4)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in paragraph (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-119. - Licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, or to furnish certain services as specified in this article, without first having obtained a license therefor. The license shall be granted and issued by the city clerk and shall be in force and effect until the licensee ceases to do business within the city limits, unless sooner revoked. Such license shall be granted only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such license, the name of such business and location, and such other facts as the city clerk may require. 
(b)  In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate places by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(c)  Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name and place of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(d)  The finance director may cancel any license upon receipt of a written notice that the taxpayer is no longer engaged in business in the city, or upon the taxpayer's failure to respond to three consecutive notices of delinquency. The finance director shall give notice to the taxpayer that the license has been canceled. 
    The finance director may, after a reasonable notice and after a full hearing, issue a finding and order to revoke the license of any person found to have violated any provision of this article. 
    Any person may appeal a finding and order revoking their license in district court, pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
    No taxpayer shall continue engaging in business in the city after their license has been canceled or revoked. 
(e)  No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq. (wholesalers, contractors, barbershops and beauty shops). 
(f)  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, or the furnishing of certain services as specified in this article, without having first secured a license therefor as provided in this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-4; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
State Law reference- License, C.R.S. 39-26-103. 
Sec. 19-120. - Property and services taxed. 
(a)  Beginning January 1, 1981, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax in the amount provided in this article upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services, as provided in the Emergency Retail Sales Tax Act of 1935 set forth in C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq., which provisions are incorporated in this article by reference, and upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property, on sales of food and purchases of machinery or machine tools, on the furnishing of services on sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil and coke for domestic and commercial consumption, and on every other item permitted by C.R.S. 29-2-105. 
(b)  The amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq. or use tax imposed by this Code. 
(c)  The gross receipts from sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax imposed by C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq., regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-5; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
State Law reference- Sales tax levy authorized, C.R.S. 29-2-105. 
Sec. 19-121. - Exemptions. 
(a)  (1)  There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article only the exemptions of tangible personal property and services which are mandatory under the provisions of C.R.S. 29-2-105, which exceptions are incorporated in this article by reference. All sales not required to be exempt in C.R.S. 29-2-105 are hereby taxable. In addition to those exemptions as specified in C.R.S. 29-2-105, all sales by churches, youth organizations and charitable organizations shall be exempt from collecting sales tax on net proceeds up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Net proceeds shall be defined as proceeds from the sale of taxable goods, after deducting all expenses incurred in the sale of those goods. Further, such sales shall be infrequently conducted, that no regular place of sale is maintained and that all proceeds from such sales are used for the activities of the organization conducting the sale. A copy of any organization's source of funds and its expenditures must be provided to the city within ninety (90) days of the end of the organization's fiscal year. Charitable organizations must provide proof that they have 501(c)(3) status on or before January 31. Such proof shall consist of the organization's current federal exemption letter and a copy of the Colorado certificate of exemption from paying sales tax for the first year, and a signed affidavit that the requirements are still in place for every year thereafter. Organizations without proof of 501(c)(3) status can apply for an independent review of their status as a charitable organization, and if the organization's qualifications are the same as a 501(c)(3), the city may grant exemption from collecting sales tax, as with all other charitable organizations. 
(2)  On or after September 1, 2008 there shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article sales that benefit a Colorado school as specified in C.R.S. 39-26-725. 
(b)  All sales of tangible personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(1)  The purchaser is a nonresident of or has its principal place of business outside of the city; and 
(2)  Such tangible personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the city under the laws of the state. 
(c)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in C.R.S. 29-2-109, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the city evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(d)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. A credit shall be granted against the city's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. 
(e)  The burden of proving that any retailer is exempt from collecting or paying sales tax shall be on the retailer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the finance director may prescribe. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-6; Ord. No. 12-1986, §§ 1, 3, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00; Ord. No. 3-2002, 2-26-02, eff. 3-8-02; Ord. No. 8-2008, 7-8-08, eff. 7-18-08) 
State Law reference- Mandatory exemptions, exceptions, C.R.S. 29-2-105. 
Sec. 19-122. - Amount of tax; schedule. 
    There is imposed upon all sales of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services, as specified in section 19-120, a three-percent sales tax upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property and the furnishing of certain services as provided in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-7; Ord. No. 10-1986, § 2, 10-28-86, eff. 1-1-87; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-123. - Allocation of additional one-percent tax. 
(a)  The net revenues derived or received by the city from the imposition of the additional one (1) percent sales tax levied effective on January 1, 1987 shall be deposited in the general undesignated fund. 
(b)  All current balances in the street, storm sewer drainage, flood control and economic development funds shall be transferred to the general undesignated fund. 
(Ord. No. 10-1986, § 3, 10-20-86, eff. 1-1-87; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00; Ord. No. 20-2004, 9-7-04, eff. 9-17-04) 
Sec. 19-124. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 24-2009, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010, repealed § 19-124, which pertained to vendor's fee and derived from Code 1961, § 22A-9(b); Ord. No. 31-2000, adopted Sept. 26, 2010; and Ord. No. 17-2003, adopted Sept. 9, 2003. 
Sec. 19-125. - Place at which retail sales considered consummated. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal propertysold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside the limits of the city or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the city. 
(b)  If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city or has more than one (1) place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of the sales tax imposed by this article shall be determined by the provisions of C.R.S. 39-26-101 et seq., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1961, § 22A-8; Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-126. - Retailer responsible for collection and payment of tax. 
    Every retailer engaged in business in the city shall be liable and responsible for payment of an amount equivalent to the taxable sales multiplied by the rate established by section 19-122. 
(1)  Tax added to price. Retailers shall add the tax imposed, or the average equivalent thereof, to the price, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item. Except as provided in this subsection, no retailer shall advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any consumer, directly or indirectly, that the sales tax or any part thereof shall be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, or that it will not be added to the price, or if added, that it or any part thereof shall be refunded. 
a.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit any retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink from electing to include in his purchase price any tax levied under section 19-122. Once having made the election and having reported his decision to the city on such forms as are prescribed by the director of finance, he must continue to impose and collect the tax in the manner elected unless granted authorization to change by the director of finance. Any excess taxes collected are to be remitted to the city in accordance with paragraph (3) 
b.  Sales tax may be included in the price of items sold from coin operated devices, or the price of utilizing such devices. 
(2)  Tax constitutes debt. Any tax added to the price by a retailer shall constitute a debt from the purchaser to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(3)  Excess tax. No retailer shall retain any sales tax collected in excess of the tax computed, but shall report such excess collections on the return for the period in which it was collected and include it in the calculation of tax due. 
(4)  Disputed tax. When a dispute arises between a retailer and a purchaser who claims that the sale is exempt from the tax, the retailer shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax. The purchaser may then submit a claim for refund to the city within sixty (60) days of the date of purchase. Any tax refunded by the city will be paid directly to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-126.1. - Trust status of tax in possession of retailer. 
    All sales tax collected by any retailer shall be the property of the city and remain public money in the hands of such retailer, who shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-126.2. - Acquisition or cessation of business. 
(a)  Acquisition of an existing business. 
(1)  Seller's responsibilities. Any person engaged in business in the city who sells such business shall file a final return. The reporting period for such return shall end on the date of the transfer of ownership of the business. 
(2)  Purchaser's responsibilities. 
a.  Any person who purchases an existing business shall be responsible for determining the total tax liability of that business and shall withhold from the initial purchase payment an amount sufficient to cover any such tax liability, unless the former owner produces a receipt from the city showing that all tax due has been paid or a certificate from the city that there is no tax due. 
b.  Any amount so withheld shall be paid to the city within ten (10) days of the date of the sale of the business. 
c.  Any purchaser who fails to withhold such tax due or fails to pay to the city the amount so withheld within the ten (10) day period allowed, shall, as well as the seller, be liable for any unpaid tax due. 
(b)  Cessation of business. Every person engaged in business in the city who quits doing business in the city shall file a final return. The reporting period for such return shall end on the last day of business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-127. - Filing returns; due date. 
(a)  Every taxpayer shall file a return, whether or not tax is due, and remit any tax due to the city on or before the twentieth day of the month following the reporting period. 
(b)  A retailer engaged in business in the city at two (2) or more locations, whether inside or outside the city, who collects sales tax, may file one (1) return for all such locations, when accompanied by a supplemental schedule showing the gross sales and net taxable sales for each location. 
(c)  For good cause shown in a written request of a taxpayer, the finance director may extend the time for making returns and paying tax due. 
(d)  No person shall make any false statement in connection with a return. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-128. - Reporting periods. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved, taxpayers must file returns and pay tax as follows: 
(1)  A taxpayer whose monthly tax due is less than ten dollars ($10.00) may file returns and pay tax annually, semi-annually, quarterly or monthly; 
(2)  A taxpayer whose monthly tax due is less than twenty dollars ($20.00) may file returns and pay tax semiannually, quarterly or monthly; 
(3)  A taxpayer whose monthly tax due is less than forty dollars ($40.00) may file returns and pay tax quarterly or monthly. 
(4)  A taxpayer whose monthly tax due is forty dollars ($40.00) or more shall file returns and pay tax monthly. 
(b)  The reporting period for a final return shall end on the date of the transfer of ownership of the business. 
(c)  If the accounting methods employed by the taxpayer, or other conditions, are such that returns made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the finance director may, upon written request of the taxpayer, accept returns at such intervals as will, in the opinion of the finance director, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer, but not jeopardize the collection of the tax. 
(d)  If any taxpayer who has been granted permission to file returns and pay tax on other than a monthly basis becomes delinquent, authorization for such alternate method of reporting may be revoked by the finance director and immediately following notice of such revocation, the taxpayer shall file returns and pay tax on a monthly basis as if the alternate method of reporting and paying the tax had never been granted. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-129. - Duty to keep books and records. 
(a)  Every person engaged in business in the city shall keep and preserve for at least three (3) years after the date of the taxable transaction suitable records which will allow the accurate determination of the tax due. 
(b)  Every person shall provide all such records for audit by the finance director during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-130. - Tax information confidential. 
    All specific information gained under the provisions of this article which is used to determine the tax due from a taxpayer, whether furnished by the taxpayer or obtained through audit, shall be treated by the city and its officers, employees or legal representatives as confidential. 
(1)  Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, the city manager and agents, clerks and employees thereof shall not divulge or make known in any way any information disclosed in any document, report or return filed under this article, except such information as is displayed on the tax license. The officials charged with the custody of documents, reports and returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the manager in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, when the report of a fact shown thereby is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit into evidence, so much of said reports or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or a duly authorized representative thereof of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with such person's tax. Copies of such records may be certified by the city manager or an agent thereof and when so certified shall be evidence equally with the originals and may be received as evidence of their contents. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof or the inspection of returns by the city attorney or other legal representatives of the city. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city manager may furnish to the taxing officials of the State of Colorado, its political subdivisions, any other state, or political subdivision, or the United States, any information contained in tax returns and related documents filed pursuant to this article or in the report of an audit or investigation made with respect to a return, if the recipient jurisdiction agrees with the manager to grant similar privileges to the city and if such information is to be used by the jurisdiction only for tax purposes. 
(5)  If a city employee or officer violates the provisions of this section, such employee or officer shall be dismissed from office. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-131. - Timely payment; computation of dates. 
(a)  Evidence of timely payment shall be shown by the city validation date stamp showing the date of receipt. 
(b)  Any due date, payment date or deadline for paying tax due, providing information or taking other action, which falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by either the federal government or State of Colorado, shall be extended to the first business day following such weekend or holiday. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-132. - Claims for recovery. 
    The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales tax to the city. 
(1)  As used herein, "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales tax paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(2)  When it is determined by the director of finance of the city that sales tax owed to the city has been reported and paid to another municipality, the city shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice, the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(3)  The city may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the city, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection or the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the city. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim and a request that the municipality approve or deny in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the city submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(4)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the city shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the city shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(5)  The city may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(6)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six (36) month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-133. - Overpayment from returns and refund. 
    If the amount remitted with the return is more than the tax due as computed from information in such return, the taxpayer shall be notified. 
(1)  If the overpayment is at least fifteen dollars ($15.00), a notice of overpayment will be issued. After examining such notice, the taxpayer shall submit a claim for refund with an amended return. No refund of such overpayment shall be paid unless a signed claim for refund is submitted on or before the thirtieth (30 th ) day after the date of notice of overpayment. 
(2)  If the overpayment is less than fifteen dollars ($15.00), it shall be credited to the tax due for the next reporting period. 
(3)  If the city ascertains through an audit of a taxpayer's records that the tax due is less than the full amount paid, a notice of overpayment shall be issued. Such notice will serve as documentation for a claim for refund, if such claim is signed and submitted by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice of overpayment. 
(4)  Refunds of tax paid to a retailer by a purchaser who claims that the sale is exempt from the tax may be requested by such purchaser by signing and submitting a claim for refund on or before sixty (60) days from the date of such purchase. 
(5)  No tax overpayment except as provided in section 19-133(2) shall be refunded, unless a claim for refund is signed and submitted to the city by the taxpayer. 
(6)  An application for refund of tax shall: 
a.  Be made on a claim for refund form furnished by the city; 
b.  Be signed by the taxpayer; and 
c.  Include adequate documentation of the claim. 
(7)  The finance director shall examine the claim for refund and give written notice to the taxpayer of the amount to be refunded or denied. 
(8)  The right of any person to obtain a refund pursuant to this article shall not be assignable. 
(9)  No person shall make any false statement in connection with a claim for refund. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-134. - Underpayments from returns. 
    If the amount remitted with a return is less than the tax computed from information in such return, the taxpayer shall be notified. 
(1)  If the underpayment is at least fifteen dollars ($15.00), a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(2)  If the underpayment is less than fifteen dollars ($15.00), it shall be added to the tax due for the next reporting period. 
(3)  If any taxpayer neglects or refuses to obtain a license, the amount of tax due shall be estimated, based upon such information as may be available, and a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(4)  If any taxpayer neglects or refuses to file a return by the due date, the tax due shall be estimated, based upon such information as may be available, and a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(5)  Estimated tax due shall be adjusted if a return reporting actual tax due is filed on or before the payment date of the notice of assessment. 
(6)  If the city ascertains through an audit of the taxpayer's records that the tax due has not been fully reported or paid by the applicable due date, a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(7)  A penalty shall be levied on any tax deficiency. Such penalty shall be ten (10) percent of the tax deficiency. 
(8)  If any tax deficiency is due to fraud or the intent to evade the tax, the penalty shall be ten (10) percent of the total tax deficiency. 
(9)  If three (3) notices of assessment have been issued to the same taxpayer within thirty-six (36) consecutive months, a special penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax due, or one hundred dollars ($100.00), whichever is greater, shall be levied. 
(10)  The finance director may abate any penalty assessed in this section, if the taxpayer submits a written request for such abatement on or before the payment date of the applicable notice of assessment, and if the finance director finds good cause therefore. 
(11)  Interest shall be calculated for each month or portion of a month from the due date that a tax deficiency remains unpaid. For transactions consummated on or after (October 6, 2000), the monthly interest rate shall be one (1) percent. 
(12)  When a timely protest is made to a notice of assessment, no additional interest shall be assessed on any tax upheld by the finance director for the period between the interest date of such assessment and the payment date established in an informal meeting or thirty (30) days after the date of a findings of fact, conclusion and decision issued after a hearing. 
(13)  Interest properly assessed on any tax deficiency shall not be abated. 
(14)  The finance director or specifically authorized agent shall issue a notice of assessment for any tax deficiency, penalties, or interest due. 
a.  Notices of assessment shall be in writing and delivered in person or sent postpaid by first class mail, to the last known address of the taxpayer. 
b.  The payment due date for the tax due pursuant to a notice of assessment shall be as stated in the notice of assessment. 
(15)  The finance director may abate up to nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) of any tax deficiency if the finance director finds good cause therefor. The finance director shall submit a report of amounts abated to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00; Ord. No. 36-2001, 12-11-01, eff. 12-21-01) 
Sec. 19-135. - Protest of notice of assessment or denial of refund. 
(a)  Any notice of assessment may be protested by the taxpayer to whom it is issued. 
(1)  Such protests must be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment, and must identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the contention that the tax is not due. The time period set forth in this section may, in the absolute discretion of the finance director, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(2)  When a timely protest is made, no further enforcement action will be instituted by the city for the portion of the assessment being protested, unless the taxpayer fails to pursue the protest in a timely manner. 
(b)  Protest of denial of refund. Any denial of a claim for refund may be protested by the taxpayer who submitted the claim. Such protest must be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty (20) days of the finance director's denial and shall identify the amount of the denial contested and the basis for the contention that the refund is due. The time period set forth in this section may, in the absolute discretion of the finance director, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(c)  Any timely protest entitles a taxpayer to a hearing under the provisions of this article. 
(1)  If, in the opinion of the finance director, the issues involved in such protest are not a matter of interpretation or may be resolved administratively, the finance director may recommend an informal meeting with the taxpayer. 
(2)  Participation in such an informal meeting does not prevent either the taxpayer or the city from holding a hearing, if the dispute cannot be resolved by such meeting. 
(d)  If taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the finance director, the finance director shall hold such hearing and issue a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal, and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required, but the taxpayer may assert any facts, make any arguments and file any briefs and affidavits which, in the opinion of the taxpayer, are pertinent to the protest, in which case the finance director may submit a brief. The finance director shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the finance director's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except that the city may extend such period, if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the finance director shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor 
(e)  After such hearing, the taxpayer shall not be entitled to a second hearing on the same notice of assessment or denial of refund. 
(f)  Unless the decision of the finance director is appealed as provided in this article, the remaining tax due, if any, shall be paid on or before thirty (30) days after the date of the findings of fact, conclusions and decision. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-135.1. - Review by district court. 
(a)  If the petitioner or an applicant for a refund is aggrieved at the final decision of the finance director, then he may proceed to have same reviewed by the district court. The procedure of review shall be in accordance with Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  Within fifteen (15) days after filing an appeal in the district court, the taxpayer shall file with the court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the finance director that are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. 11-35-101(1), equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the finance director. The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the finance director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals of the state or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the district court, either retained by the finance director and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the finance director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the district court. 
(c)  The district court shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the finance director in administering the provisions of this article by writ under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any writ issued pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be issued by the clerk of the district court upon a verified petition of the taxpayer filed within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision of the finance director in any such matter. Such writ shall be served within five (5) days after its issuance and shall be returnable at such time as the district court may determine, but not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date of issuance of such writ. The finance director shall certify the record of his proceedings to the district court. 
(d)  Any party may review the decision of the district court in the Supreme Court of the state upon writ of error thereto. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-135.2. - Alternate review by department of revenue. 
    In lieu of the procedure provided for above, the taxpayer may elect a hearing on the finance director's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to procedure set forth in this section. 
(1)  As used in this section, "state hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or a delegate thereof as provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3). 
(2)  When the finance director asserts that sales tax is due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, then the finance director shall mail a notice of assessment to the taxpayer by certified mail. The notice of assessment shall state the additional sales tax due. The notice of assessment shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3). The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the finance director's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of sales tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies, or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection (3). For purposes of this subsection (3), "exhaustion of local remedies" means: 
a.  All hearing requirements with the finance director as specified in section 19-135(d) have been met; or 
b.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the finance director, and the finance director has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in section 19-135(d). 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in section 19-135(d), then the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such notice of assessment or claim for refund, and such request shall be made, and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3) through (7), inclusive. 
(5)  If the notice of assessment or claim for refund involves only the finance director, then in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency or denial of a claim for refund to the district court, as provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(8), if the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in section 19-135(d). 
(6)  No provision of this section shall prohibit the taxpayer from pursuing judicial review of a final decision of the finance director as otherwise provided in section 19-135. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-135.3. - Appeals. 
(a)  Subsequent to a hearing, the taxpayer may appeal the decision of the finance director in district court pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  Upon appeal to the district court, the taxpayer shall either file with the finance director a bond for twice the unpaid amount or deposit the unpaid amount with the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136. - Lien for tax due. 
(a)  Issuance. If any tax due is not paid by the payment date of a notice of assessment, the finance director may issue a notice of lien on the real and personal property of the taxpayer. Such lien shall specify the name of the taxpayer, the tax due, the date of the accrual thereof and the location of the property, and shall be certified by the finance director. 
(b)  Filing. The notice of lien shall be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in Colorado in which the real or personal property of the taxpayer is located. Such filing shall create a lien on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. 
(c)  Priority. The attachment and priority of such lien shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such lien shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures owned or used by any taxpayer, including those used under lease, installment sale or other contract agreement, and shall take precedence on all such property over all other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(2)  Such lien on the real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer that is not goods, stock in trade and business fixtures shall be a first and prior lien, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights have attached and been perfected prior to the filing of the notice of lien. 
(3)  The personal property of an owner who has made a bona fide lease to a taxpayer shall be exempt from the lien created in this subsection, if such property can reasonably be identified from the lease description and if the lessee is given no right to become the owner of the property leased. This exemption shall be effective from the date of the execution of the lease, if the lease is recorded with the county clerk and recorder of the county where the property is located or based. 
(4)  Motor vehicles, which are properly registered in this state showing the lessor as owner thereof, shall be exempt from such lien, except that such lien shall apply to the extent that the lessee has an earned reserve, allowance for depreciation not to exceed the fair market value, or similar interest, which is or may be credited to the lessee. 
(5)  Where a lessor and lessee are blood relatives or relatives by law or have twenty-five (25) percent or more common ownership, a lease between such lessee and such lessor shall not be considered as bona fide for purposes of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement against real property. If a notice of lien is filed against real property, the finance director may direct the city attorney to file a civil action to enforce such lien. The court may determine the interest in the property of each party, decree a sale of the real property and distribute the proceeds according to such findings. Procedure for the action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from the sale and the execution of deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the court may appoint a receiver of the real property involved in such action, if equity so requires. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.1. - Perpetuance of lien. 
(a)  Any lien for tax due shall continue until the finance director files a release of lien. 
(b)  Any person who purchases or repossesses real or personal property upon which a lien has been filed by the finance director for tax due shall be liable for the payment of such tax due up to the value of the property taken or acquired. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.2. - Release of lien. 
    Upon payment of the tax due or enforcement of the lien, the finance director shall file a release of lien with the county clerk and recorder of the county in which the lien was filed. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.3. - Civil action to recover tax due. 
(a)  Any unpaid tax due shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the city and the finance director may direct the city attorney to file a civil action to collect such tax due. 
(b)  The return filed by a taxpayer or the notice of assessment issued by the finance director shall be prima facie proof of the tax due. 
(c)  If a judgment is obtained by the city, collection of the tax due may be made by attachment, garnishment or other means established by law. When attachment is sought, no bond shall be required of the finance director, nor shall any sheriff require of the finance director an indemnity bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 136.4. - Jeopardy assessment. 
(a)  Issuance. If the collection of any tax due from a taxpayer, whether or not previously assessed, will be jeopardized by delay, the city manager may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, order the finance director to determine the tax and issue a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment. Any tax so assessed shall be due and payable immediately. 
(b)  Security for payment. Enforcement of a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment may be stayed if the taxpayer gives security for payment, which is satisfactory to the city manager. 
(c)  Dispute of jeopardy assessment. If, in the opinion of the taxpayer, the jeopardy assessment is not for the correct amount of tax due, the taxpayer shall pay the tax due as assessed and submit a claim for refund to the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 136.5. - Distraint and sale. 
(a)  Unless such property is exempt by state statute from distraint and sale, the city manager may sign and issue a warrant directed to any employee or agent of the city, or any sheriff of any county in Colorado, commanding the distraint and sale of personal property of the taxpayer on which a lien has attached for the payment of the tax due. 
(1)  Such warrant may be issued if the tax due is not paid on or before twenty-one (21) days from the payment date of a notice of assessment, and no protest of such assessment has been timely filed. 
(2)  Such warrant may be issued immediately, if a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment has been issued. 
(b)  If the taxpayer does not volunteer entry to the premises, the city manager may apply to the municipal court for a warrant authorizing any employee or agent of the city to search for and distrain property located inside the city to enforce the collection of tax due. 
(1)  The city manager shall demonstrate to the court that the premises to which entry is sought contains property that is subject to distraint and sale for tax due. 
(2)  If a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment has been issued, the city manager shall specify to the court why collection of the tax will be jeopardized. 
(3)  The procedures to be followed in issuing and executing a warrant pursuant to this subsection shall comply with Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.6. - Disposal of distrained property. 
(a)  A signed inventory of the property distrained shall be made by the city or its agent. Prior to the sale, the owner or possessor shall be served with a copy of said inventory, a notice of the sum of the tax due and related expenses incurred to date, and the time and place of sale. 
(b)  A notice of the time and place of the sale, together with a description of the property to be sold, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county where distraint is made or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the finance director, the notice shall be posted at the courthouse of the county where distraint is made, and in at least two (2) other places within such county. 
(c)  The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of distraint. The sale may be postponed by the city or agent for no more than ninety (90) days from the date originally fixed for the sale. 
(d)  The property shall be sold at public auction for not less than a fair minimum price, and if the amount bid for the property is less than the fair minimum price so fixed, the property may be declared to be purchased by the city and the city shall file a release of lien thereof. If the property is purchased by the city, such property may be disposed of in the same manner as other city property and the lien thereon shall be released. 
(e)  The property may be offered first by bulk bid, then subsequently for bid singularly or by lots, and the city or its agent may accept the higher bid. 
(f)  The property offered for sale may be redeemed if the owner or possessor or other person holding an unperfected chattel mortgage or other right of possession pays the tax due and all collection costs not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the sale. 
(g)  The city or its agent shall issue to each purchaser a certificate of sale, which shall be prima facie evidence of its right to make the sale and transfer to the purchaser all right, title and interest of the taxpayer in and to the property sold. 
(1)  When the property sold consists of certificates of stock, the certificate of sale shall be notice to any corporation, company or association to record the transfer on its books and records. 
(2)  When the property sold consists of securities or other evidences of debt, the certificate of sale shall be good and valid evidence of title. 
(h)  Any surplus remaining after satisfaction of the tax due, plus any costs of making the distraint and advertising the sale, may be distributed by the city first to other jurisdictions, which have filed liens or claims of sales and use or personal property ad valorem taxes, and second to the owner, or such other person having a legal right thereto. 
(i)  The finance director shall submit a written account of the sale to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.7. - Exempt property. 
    Property of the taxpayer subject to distraint shall include the personal property of the taxpayer and the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures owned or used by any taxpayer, including those used under lease, installment sale or other contract arrangement. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.8. - Return of the property. 
    The taxpayer, or any person who claims an ownership interest or right of possession in distrained property may petition the city manager, or the municipal court, if the property was seized pursuant to a warrant issued by the court, for the return of the property. 
(1)  The grounds for return of the property shall be that the person has a perfected interest in such property, which is superior to the city's interest, or that the property is exempt from the city's lien. 
(2)  The fact finder shall receive evidence on any issue of fact necessary to the decision of the petition. If the factfinder determines by a preponderance of the evidence in favor of the taxpayer or other petitioner, the property shall be returned. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.9. - Status of tax due in bankruptcy and receivership. 
    Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer is subject to receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or distrained for property taxes, all tax due shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of the taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any such taxpayer under process or order of the finance director the amount of tax due. The officer shall pay any tax due before making payment to any judgment creditor or other claimants. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-136.10. - Violations; summons and complaint; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to perform any applicable affirmative duty specified in this article, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The failure of any person engaged in business in the city to obtain a license. 
(2)  The failure of any taxpayer to file a timely return or to make timely payment of any tax due. 
(3)  The failure of any resident individual or business to comply with the registration requirements for automotive vehicles. 
(4)  The making of any false or fraudulent statement by any person in any return, claim for refund or hearing. 
(5)  The evasion of collection of any sales tax by any person or the aiding or abetting of any other person in an attempt to evade the timely payment of tax due. 
(b)  The finance director may direct the issuance of a complaint and summons to appear before the municipal court to any person who may be in violation of this article, or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the finance director to enforce this article. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both, pursuant to the limits established in section 1-15 of this Code. Each and every twenty-four (24) hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00) 
Sec. 19-137. - Statute of limitations. 
    Unless the limitation period has been extended as provided in this section, the statute of limitations for provisions contained in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Refunds. 
a.  Any claim for refund for disputed tax shall be submitted to the city on or before sixty (60) days from the date of such purchase. 
b.  Any claim for refund resulting from a notice of overpayment shall be submitted to the city on or before thirty (30) days after the date of such notice of overpayment. 
c.  Any other claim for refund shall be filed on or before three (3) years after the date such overpayment was paid to the city. 
(2)  Assessments. No notice of assessment shall be issued more than three (3) years after the due date of such tax due. 
(3)  Liens. No notice of lien shall be issued more than three (3) years after the due date of the tax due. If the limitation period is extended, a notice of lien may be filed on or before thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of assessment issued for such extended period. 
(4)  Returns. 
a.  When a taxpayer fails or refuses to file a return, the tax due may be assessed and collected at any time. 
b.  In the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with intent to evade tax, the tax due may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such tax due may be initiated at any time. 
(5)  Protests. No protest of a notice of assessment or denial of a claim for refund shall be valid if submitted to the finance director in other than written form or after the period allowed in this article. 
(6)  The period of limitation may be extended before its expiration. 
a.  The taxpayer and the finance director may agree in writing to extend the period. 
b.  If the city provides written notice to the taxpayer prior to the expiration of the period of limitation that the latter's records will be audited pursuant to this article, such period of limitation shall be extended for the audit period until thirty (30) days after the date of the notice of assessment or notice of overpayment issued as a result of such audit. The term "audit period" includes all reporting periods with due dates which fall within the thirty-six (36) month period preceding the date of the notice of audit. 
(7)  Performance of an audit does not constitute a statute of limitations or preclude additional audits of the same period within the parameters of this section. 
(Ord. No. 31-2000, 9-26-00, eff. 10-6-00; Ord. No. 12-2010, 10-12-10, eff. 10-22-10) 
Sec. 19-138. - Transient vendors/peddlers. 
(1)  A transient vendor includes any person, group, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who does not have a regularly established place of business within the city and who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, property and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartments, or shops, or street, alley or vacant lot, or any other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. The person, firm or corporation so engaged is not relieved from complying with the provisions of this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(2)  A peddler includes any person who travels within the City of Sterling conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchase. 
(3)  Transient vendors and peddlers do not include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business; estate auctions; real estate agents and insurance agents licensed by the state; newspaper deliverers; any public utility and its employees franchised to do business within the city; auto salesmen; persons engaged in noncommercial religious activities; persons selling only religious literature; persons, groups, firms or corporations serving under the auspices of charitable, religious, civic, philanthropic, school or any licensed nonprofit organization; persons serving established business routes and persons calling by invitation; sales from time to time by residential premises owners who dispose of their personal property on their property. 
Persons, firms or corporations selling goods, wares or merchandise who participate in special events within the city, sponsored by a local group or organization, or who participate in any city-sanctioned event, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any transient merchants or peddlers to engage in any such business within the city without first obtaining a license. A license shall be required for each temporary location within the city. Each location shall have a separate application and fifty dollar ($50.00) fee. 
(5)  Those transient merchants or peddlers desiring to peddle, solicit, sell or attempt to sell goods, wares or merchandise within the city shall make application to the city clerk and, upon approval of said application, shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee shall be payable in full upon approval of the application. The merchant must also provide written authorization from the property owner that said property owner approves of the use of his property by the transient vendor. The license, when issued, shall be valid for the number of consecutive days indicated on the application and approved by the city clerk, or his/her designee. If, upon expiration of the license, the licensee wishes to continue to conduct the licensed business in the city, the licensee must reapply for a new license and pay the fifty-dollar ($50.00) fee. 
(6)  The transient merchant or peddler is required to complete a city sales tax return, which shall be due the twentieth day of the month following the close of their business activity in the city. The fifty dollars ($50.00) application fee shall be refunded for any amount over the tax due on a timely filed return; or retained by the City of Sterling if no sales tax return is received. No refund will be made on a late filed return. 
(7)  Transient merchants or peddlers are subject to all other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5-2005, 2-8-05, eff. 2-18-05) 
Secs. 19-139, 19-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference- Use tax, C.R.S. 39-26-201 et seq. 

Sec. 19-141. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in C.R.S. 39-26-201, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Sec. 19-142. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to impose a three-percent use tax on the privilege of using or consuming in the city any construction and building materials purchased at retail and for the privilege of storing, using and consuming motor and other vehicles on which registration is required purchased at retail, and for the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property. 
(Code 1961, § 25A-2; Ord. No. 11-1986, § 2, 10-28-86, eff. 1-1-87; Ord. No. 5-2010, 5-11-10, eff. 5-21-10) 
Sec. 19-143. - Collection, administration and enforcement generally. 
(a)  The tax imposed in this article on motor or other vehicles on which registration is required shall be collected, administered and enforced as provided by C.R.S. 39-26-208. 
(b)  The tax imposed in this article on the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the city any construction and building materials purchased at retail and for the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property shall be collected as follows: 
(1)  Such use tax shall be paid to the director of finance and shall be collected at the time building permits are issued for building and construction by the department of public works. The payment of such tax shall be the responsibility of the person applying for the building permit. For the purposes of this section the value of the construction and building materials to be stored, used or consumed as part of any project shall be deemed to be an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the total valuation of the construction project as stated on the building permit issued. If the tax is paid in this way, no further sales or use tax information will be required for final building inspection on the project. 
(2)  As an alternative to the estimation procedure set forth in subsection (1) of this section, the taxpayer may make arrangements with the director of finance to pay the tax monthly or on a mutually agreed upon basis, on the basis of returns to be filed with the director of finance. Under this option a final project cost report must be filed and approved before final building inspection is allowed and a certificate of occupancy is issued. Unless the taxpayer pays the tax as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, failure to file the return required under this subsection shall be a violation of this article. 
(3)  The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw up and make available forms on which the returns and reports described in subsection (2) of this section may be filed and to promulgate such additional rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 25A-6; Ord. No. 5-2010, 5-11-10, eff. 5-21-10) 
Sec. 19-144. - Map of municipal boundaries. 
    The director of finance shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the city. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting vendor may rely on such map and any update thereof available to such vendor in determining whether to collect a use tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such a vendor who in good faith complies with the most recent map available to it. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 16, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-145. - Levy. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person in the city a three-percent tax or excise for the privilege of using or consuming in the city any construction and building materials purchased at retail and the privilege of storing, using or consuming motor and other vehicles on which registration or title is required purchased at retail, and for the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property. 
(Code 1961, § 25A-4; Ord. No. 11-1986, § 2, 10-28-86, eff. 1-1-87; Ord. No. 2-1997, 1-28-97, eff. 2-7-97; Ord. No. 5-2010, 5-11-10, eff. 5-21-10) 
State Law reference- Levy on certain items authorized, C.R.S. 29-2-109. 
Sec. 19-146. - Allocation of additional one-percent tax. 
(a)  The net revenues derived or received by the city from the imposition of the additional one-percent use tax levied effective on January 1, 1987, shall be deposited in the general undesignated fund. 
(b)  All current balances in the street, storm sewer drainage, flood control and economic development funds shall be transferred to the general undesignated fund. 
(Ord. No. 11-1986, § 3, 10-28-86, eff. 1-1-87; Ord. No. 11-2010, 9-14-10, eff. 9-24-10) 
Sec. 19-147. - Exemptions. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the city. 
(2)  The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business. 
(3)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresident thereof for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the city; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this state by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of a business in this state. 
(4)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government or the state or its institutions or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only, or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(5)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the contained, label or the furnished shipping case thereof. 
(6)  The storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county equal to or in excess of that imposed by this article. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this article with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased by him in a previous statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this article. 
(7)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the city and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency. 
(8)  The storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the city and he purchased the vehicle outside of the city for use outside the city and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and he registered, titled and licensed the motor vehicle outside of the city. 
(9)  The storage of construction and building materials, for transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986. 
(Code 1961, § 25A-5; Ord. No. 12-1986, § 2, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87; Ord. No. 2-1997, 1-28-97, eff. 2-7-97; Ord. No. 14-2005, 4-26-05, eff. 5-6-05; Ord. No. 15-2010, 11-9-10, eff. 11-19-10) 
Sec. 19-148. - Credit for sales or use taxes paid to another municipality. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. A credit shall be granted against the city's use tax with respect to the person's storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property, the amount of the credit to equal the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 4, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-149. - Nonapplicability to use or consumption occurring more than three years after most recent sale. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the city which occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the state for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 5, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-150. - Proration for certain construction equipment. 
(a)  Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be subjected to the full applicable use tax of the city. 
(b)  With respect to transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less shall be subjected to the city's use tax in an amount calculated as follows: the purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is one (1) and the denominator of which is twelve (12), and the result shall be multiplied by two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. 
(c)  Where the provisions of subsection (b) of this section are utilized, the credit provisions of section 19-148 shall apply at such time as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to other statutory and home rule municipalities on any such equipment equal two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter. 
(d)  In order to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the taxpayer shall comply with the following procedure: 
(1)  Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the boundaries of the city, the taxpayer shall file with the city finance department an equipment declaration on a form provided by the city. Such declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer anticipates the equipment will be located within and removed from the boundaries of the city, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, shall state the actual or anticipated purchase price of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other information as reasonably deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  The taxpayer shall file with the city an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every ninety (90) days after the equipment is brought into the boundaries of the city or, for equipment which is brought into the boundaries of the city for a project of less than ninety (90) days duration, no later than ten (10) days after substantial completion of the project. 
(3)  The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration on any equipment for which the purchase price was under two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(e)  If the equipment declaration is given as provided in subsection (d) of this section, then, as to any item of construction equipment for which the customary purchase price is under two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which was brought into the boundaries of the city temporarily for use on a construction project, it shall be presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local sales or use tax as high as two (2) percent for 1986 and three (3) percent thereafter and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In such case, the burden of proof in any proceeding before the city, the executive director of the state department of revenue, or the district court shall be on the city to prove such local sales or use tax was not paid. 
(f)  If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, the taxpayer may not avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. However, substantial compliance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall allow the taxpayer to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 6, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-151. - Limitation on actions for collection. 
(a)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, no use tax or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed or distraint warrant issued or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the tax or interest be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun, at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the director of finance may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the use tax may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 7, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-152. - Limitation on actions for refunds. 
(a)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, an application for refund of use tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who claims an exemption pursuant to section 19-147 shall be made within sixty (60) days after the storage, use or consumption of the goods or services whereon an exemption is claimed. 
(b)  An application for refund of tax moneys paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of storage, use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 8, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-153. - Interest on underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment. 
(a)  If any amount of use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under section 19-157 shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the director of finance. 
(b)  Interest prescribed under sections 19-153 through 19-156 shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
(c)  If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(d)  Interest prescribed under sections 19-153 through 19-156 on any use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 9, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-154. - Deficiency due to negligence. 
    If any part of the deficiency in payment of the use tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of the ordinances or authorized rules and regulations of the city, with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten (10) percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under section 19-157, in addition to the interest provided by section 19-157, on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand to him by the director of finance. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of the deficiency and, in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the director of finance and an additional three (3) percent per month on the amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 10, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-155. - Neglect or refusal to make return or to pay tax. 
    If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any use tax as required, the director of finance shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten (10) percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under section 19-157, plus one-half of one (0.5) percent per month from the date when due. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 11, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-156. - Penalty interest on unpaid tax. 
    Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the city, and shall draw interest at the rate imposed under section 19-157, in addition to the interest provided by section 19-153, from the time when due until paid. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 12, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-157. - Rate of interest. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provisions of sections 19-153 through 19-156, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the state commissioner of banking pursuant to C.R.S. 39-21-110.5. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 13, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-158. - Additional remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of use taxes. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 14, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-159. - Lien on taxpayer's property. 
    If any tax imposed in this article is not paid after it is due, the director of finance shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the city claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and personal property of the taxpayer, except as to preexisting liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose right has attached prior to the filing of the notice. This notice shall be on forms prepared by the director of finance, and, when filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in this state in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property, such notice shall create a lien as provided in this section on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. 
(Code 1961, § 25A-7) 
Sec. 19-160. - Posting of bond or deposit of funds by taxpayer during appeals. 
(a)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, within fifteen (15) days after filing a notice of appeal, the taxpayer shall file with the district court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated in the final decision by the director of finance which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. 11-35-101(1), equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the director of finance. 
(b)  The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the director of finance in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the supreme court or the court of appeals or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either retained by the director of finance and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to section 19-157. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the director of finance need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 15, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Sec. 19-161. - Alternative procedure for resolution of disputes. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the city director of finance's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. 
(1)  As used in this section, state hearing means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or delegate thereof as provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3). 
(2)  When the city asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the city shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3). The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the city's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of use tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection (3). For purposes of this subsection (3), exhaustion of local remedies means: 
a.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and such city has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the city may submit a brief. The city shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the city's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the city may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the city shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or 
b.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and the city has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in subsection (3)a of this section. 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subsection (3) of this section, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3) through (7). 
(5)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the city, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the county as provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(8), provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in subsection (3) of this section. 
(6)  If the city reasonably finds that the collection of use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the city may utilize the procedures set forth in C.R.S. 39-21-111. 
(Ord. No. 12-1986, § 17, 1-13-87, eff. 1-23-87) 
Secs. 19-162-19-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Audit, § 3-8; budget, § 5-1 et seq.; fiscal year, § 5-1. 
Cross reference- Billing and collection procedure including assessments and liens for all services required by the city, § 21-26 et seq.; water service charges assessment and collection, § 21-92 et seq.; charges and collection procedures for sanitary sewer service, § 21-152 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-181. - Collection of sums due city; liens; interest; charges. 
(a)  The director of finance shall receive and collect all charges for the use of city property or special services rendered by the city, sums due the city on any contracts, and all other sums due the city. 
(b)  When special services are rendered by the city, the charges therefor shall constitute a lien upon the property benefitted. The charges for all services shall be treated as are utility charges and shall be subject to the provisions of section 21-26 et seq. 
(c)  When a charge is to be collected by the director of finance for the use of city property, special services rendered, sale of excess city property, or charges as provided in subsection (d) below, such obligation shall bear interest thirty (30) days from the date of use, service or sale until the entire principal and interest are paid, at a rate of one (1) percent per month on the unpaid balance. 
(d)  For any payment given by a party to the city, in purported payment of any obligation due the city, which is not cleared by the financial institution on which it is drawn, for reasons such as, but not limited to, insufficient funds, account closed, etc., there shall be added to the obligation due the city the charge of eighteen dollars ($18.00) to cover the additional cost of collection to the city associated therewith. Such charge may be increased or decreased by city council resolution, upon satisfactory showing that such collection cost has changed sufficiently to warrant an increase or decrease in the charge. Such charge shall be collected in the same manner as prescribed for any other indebtedness due the city. Any receipt theretofore given in reliance upon such payment shall be null and void and no other receipt shall be given for the payment of the original indebtedness until the charge has also been paid. Upon the necessity of assessing a third charge to a party in any twelve-month period, payments from said party, whether due or to be due in the future, shall only be made by certified funds, cashier's check, or cash. 
(Code 1961, § 2-1.1; Ord. No. 31-1992, 9-22-92, eff. 10-26-92; Ord. No. 11-2011, 11-8-11, eff. 11-18-11) 
Sec. 19-182. - Payment of costs incurred in franchise negotiations. 
(a)  Bond. All entities seeking a franchise from the city shall remit with the franchise application a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to the city. All costs incurred by the city during the course of the negotiation of any franchise agreement shall be assessed against this bond. 
(b)  Accounting of costs. The city shall mail to the franchisee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, an accounting of all costs charged against the bond, within thirty (30) days after adoption of the franchise ordinance. Such accounting will itemize all costs incurred by the city, including but not limited to city staff expenses, including overtime, expert consulting fees, legal fees, and related expenses. The uncharged balance of the bond will be returned to the franchisee with this accounting statement. In addition, the applicant for a franchise shall pay all costs of an election, if one is required, and costs of publication as may be required by the charter or other ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Protests. If the franchisee disputes the reasonableness of the charges, it may seek review of the assessment by filing a protest with the city council within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the accounting statement. If such a protest is filed, the city council shall set a hearing date. The franchisee shall be notified of this hearing date by certified mail, return receipt requested. The hearing shall be for the purpose of hearing protests as to the reasonableness of the expenses incurred. At this hearing, the franchisee may present evidence regarding the reasonableness of the charges. The franchisee shall bear the burden of proof. The city manager or his designee may respond to any allegations of unreasonableness. During the hearing, evidence may be received in the form of documents, exhibits and witnesses. The city council shall not be bound by the state rules of evidence. The hearing shall be open to the public. The city council may approve the assessment or make modifications based upon the evidence presented. Any action of the city council is final. 
(d)  Challenges to validity of section. Any entity challenging the validity, legality or constitutionality of this chapter, if unsuccessful, will reimburse the city for all costs incurred, including attorneys' fees, in such litigation. 
(Ord. No. 1-1988, §§ 1-3, 1-26-88, eff. 2-8-88) 
Secs. 19-183-19-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FUNDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- General fund, § 6-9; special funds created by ordinance, § 6-10. 
Cross reference- Water enterprise fund, § 21-91; sewer enterprise fund, § 21-151. 

Sec. 19-201. - Capital improvement fund. 
(a)  Created. A special capital improvement fund is created for the city. 
(b)  Purpose. The special capital improvement fund is created for the purpose of accumulating such funds and for such projects as the city council may designate to provide for the needs of the city as future growth may dictate. 
(c)  Designation of projects. The city council by motion or resolution may designate projects within the capital improvement fund and may by motion or resolution direct that funds which may become available be placed within a specific project in the capital improvement fund. 
(d)  Project completion. When in the opinion of the city council sufficient funds have been accumulated and the needs of the city dictate, the council may by motion direct the transfer of project funds held in the capital improvement fund to another fund to accomplish the project. When all funds held for a particular project within the capital improvement fund are transferred to another fund for accomplishment of the project, that project within the capital improvement fund shall be closed. If all funds held for a particular project are not required for completion of that particular project, such unexpended funds shall by motion of the council be transferred to the general fund. 
(e)  Transfer of funds. The city council at its discretion and as the needs of the city dictate may direct transfer of funds from one (1) project to another within the capital improvement fund. If circumstances arise in which the council determines it to be in the best interest of the city, the council may direct transfer of project funds within the capital improvement fund to another city fund. No transfer of funds, except for the purpose of accomplishing the project for which funds were accumulated, shall be made until a public hearing has been held. 
(f)  Abolishment of fund. If, in the opinion of the city council, there is no further need for the capital improvement fund, the council may by ordinance direct the abolishment of the capital improvement fund and direct the transfer of any remaining funds in the capital improvement fund to the general fund of the city. 
(g)  Project expenses. Expenses incurred toward a particular project within the capital improvement fund shall be charged against funds held for that project. 
(Code 1961, §§ 2-44, 2-45, 2-48-2-52) 
Sec. 19-202. - Economic development fund. 
    An economic development fund is hereby created pursuant to the charter and city Resolution No. 2-1-1986, the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) is deposited in the fund, to be expended only for the purposes set forth in this section. 
(1)  These funds shall be used on a case-by-case basis; any use of these funds will require approval by the city council by ordinance for each project, after review and recommendation by the city administration. 
(2)  No funds shall be used for promotional purposes, feasibility studies, operating expenses, or capitalization of any firm or corporation, or loans to any firm or corporation. Funds will be used primarily to aid in the development process through construction of public facilities such as streets and water and sewer utilities. Funds may be used for the purchase or lease of lands and buildings, subject to applicable state law. 
(3)  Any project must be within the city limits. As creating new jobs is the key to economic development, funds will be limited to expanding existing enterprises and to encouraging new industry. The city administration and city council approval of each project will be based primarily on how many jobs are created by the project. 
(Ord. No. 7-1986, 8-26-86, eff. 9-5-86) 
Sec. 19-203. - Sanitation enterprise fund. 
(a)  Created. A sanitation enterprise fund is created pursuant to section 6-10 of the charter. 
(b)  Deposits and expenditures. Money received from the operation of the sanitation enterprise shall be deposited in this fund. All expenditures from this fund shall be appropriated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 19-1988, 12-13-88, eff. 12-26-88) 
Secs. 19-204-19-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 30-1995, adopted November 28, 1995, effective December 8, 1995, amended the Code by adding §§ 15.5-1-15.5-8. In order to provide for better classification, such new provisions were codified herein as §§ 19-231-19-238 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 19-231. - Legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to prescribe purchasing procedures that the city will follow in the purchase of materials and/or services which are necessary for the operation of the city. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-232. - Competitive bidding-Conditions; exceptions. 
(a)  The director of finance shall call for competitive bids on any public works contract in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a competitive bid process within the last year, if the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed the unit prices in the public agency contract; or 
(2)  The director of finance and city manager determine that it is not practical and advantageous to call for a competitive bid. For purposes of this article, the term "public works contract" means a contract to construct public improvements, including, without limitation, streets, alleys, sidewalks, water or wastewater facilities, flood control facilities, traffic control devices, street lighting, parks, public structures and landscaping. 
(b)  The director of finance shall call for competitive bids for the purchase of tangible property if the contract amount is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a competitive bid process within the last year, and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the public agency contract; or 
(2)  The director of finance determines that it is not practical and advantageous to call for a competitive bid. 
(c)  The director of finance shall call for competitive bids for the purchase of insurance policies for which annual premiums total five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a competitive bid process within the last year, and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the prior public agency contract; or 
(2)  The director of finance determines that it is not practical and advantageous to do so. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-233. - Same-Bid requirements. 
(a)  Each bid submitted to the city shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  A bid is signed, enclosed in a sealed envelope, and filed as stated in the advertisement for the bid. 
(2)  Each bid for a contract over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be accompanied by a check or bid bond equal to five (5) percent of the bid, to be forfeited to the city if a bid is accepted and the bidder fails to sign a contract within fifteen (15) days of acceptance. [For] each bid for a contract under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), it shall be at the discretion of the city manager as to whether or not a check or bid bond is required, pursuant to this paragraph. 
(b)  The director of finance may require that no bid be withdrawn for up to forty-five (45) days after the date and time set for opening of bids, but a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty-four (24) hours prior to the expiration of the deadline for submitted bids. 
(c)  The city manager may waive technical irregularities in the bid requirements in this article or in the advertisement for bids, if the city manager finds that such waiver does not compromise the integrity of the bidding process. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-234. - Same-Procedure. 
(a)  The director of finance shall publish a notice of call for bids at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city containing: 
(1)  A description of the work to be performed or the product to be purchased. 
(2)  The location where copies of plans, specifications, and other contract documents may be examined. 
(3)  The time and place where bids will be received and time and place where bids will be opened. 
(4)  A statement that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and to waive any informalities or irregularities therein. 
(5)  A statement that the director of finance may require that no bidder may withdraw a bid for a period of up to forty-five (45) days after the date and hour set for opening bids, but that a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty-four (24) hours prior to expiration of the deadline for submitted bids. 
(6)  A statement setting forth requirements for bid bonds and performance, labor, materials, bonds, product liability coverage warranty, and worker's compensation. 
(b)  Bids not submitted by the required deadline are ineligible for consideration and will not be opened, but the finance director may waive the deadline. 
(c)  Bids shall be opened by the director of finance and recorded at the time and place provided in the advertisement for bids, in the presence of the bidders and the city manager or a representative. 
(d)  Bidders may inspect the bids after they are opened in accordance with provisions of the Colorado Public Records Act. 
(e)  Confidential data, if identified as such, will be held confidential upon request, if the request is made as part of the bid and if the city attorney determines that the data meet the requirements of the Colorado Public Records Act. 
(f)  The city clerk shall preserve all bids, proposals, advertisements, circulars, and correspondence relating to the purchase of supplies for at least three (3) years as matters of public record. 
(g)  The director of finance is not required to maintain a bid list. The only formal notice of a call for bids is that published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city as prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. When the director of finance determines that it is necessary, additional publication may be made in such magazines, journals, or newspapers which may be necessary to guarantee the most broad exposure to the providers of the goods and services so desired. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-235. - Same-Selection of bids. 
(a)  The director of finance, after consultation with the city manager, may reject any and all bids and need not accept the lowest bid. For purposes of this article, the definition of lowest bid will include consideration of initial cost and, when applicable, life-cycle cost over the normal lifetime of the product and energy efficiency in consumption of nonrenewable fuels. 
(b)  The director of finance shall determine if a bidder satisfies the minimum bid requirements and the responsibility criteria prescribed by subsection (c) of this section. If the director of finance determines that the lowest bidder does not meet the minimum bid requirements, the director of finance may reject the bid. If the director of finance determines that the lowest bidder does not meet the responsibility criteria, the director of finance shall refer the bid to the city council to determine whether to accept other than the lowest bid. 
(c)  In determining whether to accept a bid, the city manager and the city council, on a referral from the director of finance, shall consider the following responsibility criteria: The bidder's financial responsibility, skill, expertise, and ability to complete the contract promptly and satisfactorily; whether the bidder maintains a permanent place of business; whether the bidder has adequate plant, equipment, and support services to perform the contract; whether the bidder has previously performed similar work satisfactorily; and whether the bidder is likely to be engaged in work that may impair the ability to finance the work covered by the bid or provide equipment for its proper execution; and whether there are any claims raising a substantial question about the bidder's ability to perform the contract. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-236. - Selection of consultants. 
(a)  The director of finance shall call for proposals for consulting services on any consulting contract in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless the city manager determines that it is not practical and advantageous to do so. 
(b)  The director of finance shall publish notice of intent to seek consulting services and request for proposals at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. When the director of finance determines that it is necessary, additional publication may be made in such magazines, journals, or newspapers which may be necessary to guarantee the most broad exposure to the providers of the goods and services so desired. Such notice shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the project to be performed; 
(2)  The location where copies of plans, specifications, and other documents may be examined; 
(3)  Time and budget limitations, if applicable; 
(4)  The time and place where proposals will be received; 
(5)  A statement that: 
a.  After the city has selected its first preference, it will negotiate with that consultant; 
b.  If negotiations prove unsuccessful, the consultant will be notified that the negotiations are terminated; 
c.  Negotiations will then be commenced with the next preference; and 
d.  The negotiating process will be continued until mutually satisfactory arrangement are made; 
(6)  A statement that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids or proposals and waive any informalities or irregularities therein or any portion thereof; 
(7)  A statement that the director of finance may require that no consultant may withdraw a proposal for a period of up to forty-five (45) days after the deadline for submitted proposals but that a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty-four (24) hours prior to expiration of the deadline for submitted proposals; and 
(8)  A statement that the proposal is prepared at the consultant's expense and becomes city property and therefore a public record. 
(c)  In determining whether to accept a proposal, the applicable department head shall determine whether the consultant: 
(1)  Possesses adequate technical and financial resources to perform the project or the ability to obtain the resources required for performance; 
(2)  Possesses necessary experience, organization, and technical skill in the project field or the ability to obtain them, including, without limitation, arrangements with subcontractors; 
(3)  Proposes a reasonable approach to achieve the project objectives; 
(4)  Has a satisfactory record of performance in developing and implementing similar projects in other jurisdictions; and 
(5)  Will perform the project at a reasonable cost, compared with the level of effort to be expanded. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-237. - Contract requirements. 
(a)  All contracts shall be executed pursuant to the City Charter, for and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  All contracts shall be approved by the city attorney before they are executed by the proper authority pursuant to the City Charter, unless the city attorney determines that it is not practical and advantageous to do so. 
(c)  The city manager shall require a performance bond and a labor and material bond or equal security on all public works contracts over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and may require such bonds or security on public works contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(d)  The last payment on a public works contract in an amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more will not be made until at least ten (10) days after a notice of intention to pay is published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and after the city has received a release of liens. Claims against the contract payment shall be filed as prescribed by state law. 
(e)  The contract shall include provisions for retainage of contract sums as prescribed by state law, and may include provisions for retainage in contracts not covered by state law. 
(f)  The city may, by contract, require the contractor to waive, release or extinguish its rights to recover costs or damages, or obtain an equitable adjustment, for delays in performing such contract, if such delay is caused, in whole or in part, by acts or omissions of the city or its agents, if the contract provides that an extension of time for completion of the work is the contractor's remedy for such delay. Such a clause is valid and enforceable, and provision of state law to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
Sec. 19-238. - Adoption of rules by city manager for interpretation and enforcement. 
    The city manager may adopt rules to interpret and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 30-1995, 11-28-95, eff. 12-8-95) 
ARTICLE VII. - HOTEL TAX 

Sec. 19-239. - Title and intent. 
    This article shall be known as and referred to as the "City of Sterling Hotel Tax," and the intent of this article is to impose a tax upon the lodging price paid for the short-term (less than thirty (30) consecutive days) leasing, rental or furnishing of any specified lodging services in the city, and to impose the obligation to collect the tax contemplated by this article upon any person who furnishes lodging services for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-240. - Purpose and use of tax revenues. 
    The purpose of this article is to impose a tax which will be borne by transient persons using lodging services within the city for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. The tax will provide revenues to promote tourism, conventions, and community beautification within the city. A portion of the revenue derived from the tax imposed by this article, as provided herein, may also be allocated for administrative and clerical expenses. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-241. - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms, words and phrases as used in this article have the following meanings: 
    Finance department means the department of finance and records of the city. 
    Finance director means the director of finance of the city. 
    Hotel tax means an excise tax payable by the purchaser of lodging services or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a lodging provider during the period for which such person is required to report the collections of hotel tax as herein specified. 
    Hotel tax fund means the special fund of the city established pursuant to section 19-245 into which a portion of the revenues generated by the hotel tax shall be deposited. 
    Lodging accommodation means any room in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, fractional fee club, time share, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, or any such similar place. 
    Lodging customer means any person who, through a taxable lodging transaction, acquires lodging services from a lodging provider. 
    Lodging price means the gross price paid, exclusive of other taxes paid or value given by the lodging customer for the lodging services. 
    Lodging provider means any person furnishing lodging services or such provider's authorized agent. 
    Lodging services means the furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Lodging transaction means the furnishing of lodging services to any person who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any lodging accommodation under any concession permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-242. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    On and after January 1, 2012, there is levied and shall be paid and collected a tax of five (5) percent on the price paid for the leasing or rental, for less than thirty (30) consecutive days, of any lodging accommodation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-243. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  When due and payable. Every person providing lodging services taxable by this article shall collect the tax from each lodging customer and shall remit such tax and make a return to the finance director on or before the twentieth day of each month, on account of lodging services provided in the preceding month. Said return shall contain such information and be in such form as the city may prescribe. For purposes of this subsection, all such returns and remittance shall be considered made to the finance director on or before the twentieth day of each month if they are sent via the United States mail and are postmarked on or before the twentieth day of each month. If the twentieth day of any month falls on a weekend or holiday, said return and remittance may be postmarked the following business day. Such returns of the taxpayer or duly authorized agent shall be furnished by the finance department. 
(b)  Payments negotiable. If the accounting methods regularly employed by the lodging provider in the transaction of such business or other conditions are such that the returns of lodging transactions made on a calendar month basis shall impose unnecessary hardship, the finance director, upon written request of the vendor, may accept returns at such intervals as shall, in his/her opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer, and shall not jeopardize the collection of the tax. The finance director may permit such taxpayers to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than six (6) months. 
(c)  Allowable grace period. The finance director may extend the date for making a return and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed therefor. 
(d)  Proof of exemption by taxpayer. The burden of proving that any person is exempt from paying the tax imposed by this article shall be on the person asserting such claim for exemption under such reasonable requirements of proof as the finance director may prescribe. 
(e)  Payment precedes exemption ruling. If a dispute arises between the lodging customer and lodging provider as to whether or not any lodging transaction is exempt from taxation pursuant to this article, the lodging provider shall nevertheless collect and the lodging customer shall pay such tax, and the lodging provider shall thereupon issue to the lodging customer a receipt or certification, on forms furnished by the finance department, showing the names of the lodging customer and lodging provider, the lodging accommodation furnished, the date, the price, the amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The lodging customer may thereafter apply to the finance director for a refund of such taxes and may request a hearing pursuant to this article. It is the duty of the finance director to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts as provided herein. It shall be a violation of this article for any lodging provider to fail to collect, or any lodging customer to fail to pay, a tax levied by this article under circumstances in which an exemption is disputed. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-244. - Transactions exempt from tax. 
    The following lodging transactions shall be exempt from taxation under this article: 
(1)  All lodging services provided to the United States government and to the State of Colorado, its departments and institutions and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only, including the city and any department thereof. 
(2)  All lodging services provided to religious and exempt organizations, as defined under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (or the corresponding provision of any future United States Internal Revenue Law), in the conduct of their regular religious and exempt organization functions and activities only. Exempt organizations shall provide to the lodging provider written proof that they have current 501(c)(3) status at the time that the lodging is provided. The lodging provider shall maintain a copy of said 501(c)(3) status for a period of one (1) year after said lodging is provided. 
(3)  All lodging services provided to persons whom the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution, laws of the United States, the state, or the City's Charter. 
(4)  All lodging services provided to any person for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-245. - Allocation and expenditure of tax revenues. 
(a)  All revenues derived from the City of Sterling Hotel Tax, less costs of collection and administration, shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  Thirty-eight (38) percent of such revenues shall be remitted to Logan County in order for the county to continue advertising and marketing local tourism, including the continued operation and maintenance of the tourism center. Said remittance shall be made no more frequent than once a month. 
(2)  Sixty-two (62) percent of such revenues shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the City of Sterling Hotel Tax Fund, which shall be kept separate and distinct from the general fund. All interest derived from the investment of revenues within the hotel tax fund shall be retained in the hotel tax fund. 
(b)  Amounts on deposit in the hotel tax fund shall be spent only for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and community beautification. To facilitate the expenditure of such amounts, the council will appoint an advisory board to make recommendations to the council concerning the specific use of tax revenues consistent with this purpose. 
(c)  All expenditures of revenue derived from the imposition of the hotel tax shall be for purposes designated in this article and shall be in accordance with budgetary limitations and specific proposals submitted to and approved by the city council, as the same may occur from time to time. Approval of such fund expenditures shall be accomplished through adoption of a resolution or resolutions by the city council detailing the purpose and extent of such expenditures. 
(d)  There may be budgeted from the monies received from the imposition of the tax an amount necessary to reimburse the city for administrative and clerical expenses incurred in the administration and collection of the tax authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-246. - Advertisement of assumption or absorption of tax prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person providing lodging services to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the lodging provider or that it shall not be added to the lodging price of the property sold or the services tendered, or if added, that it or any part thereof shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-247. - Confidential nature of returns. 
(a)  Right of privacy protected. Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise required by this article, the Colorado Open Records Act or any other law, the city manager, the finance director, and their agents, clerks, and employees shall not divulge any information gained from any return filed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Limited disclosure required. The city officials charged with the custody of returns filed pursuant to this article shall not be required to produce such returns or evidence of any matters contained therein in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the finance director in an action under the provisions of this article to which the finance director is a party, or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article or to punish a violator thereof or pursuant to any judicial order in which event the court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so much of such returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. 
(c)  Access to information. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or to such person's duly authorized representative of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his/her tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the information contained therein, nor to prohibit the inspection by the city attorney or any other legal representative of the city of the report or return of any taxpayer who shall bring an action to set aside or review the tax based thereon or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under this article. 
(d)  Authorized disclosure; liability. The provisions of this section shall not preclude the city manager, the finance director, and their agents, clerks, and employees from divulging any information gained from any return or audit to the federal government, the state, the department of revenue, the city or any other municipality, the city attorney, the city manager, the finance director; nor shall the city manager, the finance director, and their agents, clerks, or employees be liable to any person, firm or corporation for such disclosure made for the purpose of computing or collecting the tax due and owing from any person, firm or corporation, or for the purpose of verifying compliance with this article or for the purpose of investigating any criminal or illegal activity. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-248. - Maintenance and preservation of tax returns, reports, and records. 
(a)  The city may require any person to make such return, render such statement, or keep and furnish such records as the city may deem sufficient and reasonable to demonstrate whether or not the person is liable under this article for payment or collection of the tax imposed herein. 
(b)  Any person required to make a return or file a report under this article shall preserve those reports for three years. 
(c)  The city shall maintain all reports and returns of taxes required for three years, plus current year. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-249. - Failure to pay or make return; enforcement. 
(a)  Lodging provider collects, holds tax monies. All sums of money paid by any lodging customer for lodging services as taxes imposed by this article shall be and remain public money, the property of the city, in the hands of such lodging provider, and he/she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the finance director, and for failure to so pay to the finance director, such lodging provider shall be punished as provided herein. 
(b)  Failure to make return; penalty. 
(1)  If a taxpayer neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the tax as required by this article, then the finance director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten (10) percent thereof, whichever is greater, together with interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or portion of a month, from the time the return was due. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added to the above sum an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount deficiency and in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable twenty (20) days after written notice and demand by the finance director. 
(2)  Promptly thereafter, the finance director shall give to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice of assessment shall be personally served or sent by certified mail directed to the last address of such person on file with the finance department. Such estimate shall thereupon become a notice of deficiency. 
(3)  If payments are not made by the vendor or person furnishing lodging services within ten (10) days after the furnishing of such written notice or the personal service of notice as provided in this section, the finance director shall cause the city attorney to bring in action in law or equity for collection of all taxes due, including, without limitation, and in addition thereto, any and all penalties and interest assessed thereon, the cost of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection therewith. 
(c)  Lien on personal property. The tax imposed by this article is a first and prior lien on tangible personal property in which the lodging provider responsible to collect and remit the tax has an ownership interest, subject only to valid mortgages or other liens of record at the time of and prior to the recording of a notice of lien. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-250. - Excess tax; remittance. 
    If any lodging provider, during any reporting period, collects as a tax an amount in excess of that imposed by this article, then such vendor shall remit to the finance director the full net amount of the tax imposed in this article and also such excess amount. The retention by the lodging provider of any excess amount of tax collections over the amount imposed by this article or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the finance director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article is declared to be a violation of this article and shall be recovered, together with interest, penalties and costs as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-251. - Tax additional. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-252. - Administration. 
    The finance director may adopt rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the proper administration and enforcement of this article. The administration of this article is vested in and shall be exercised by the finance director. The city manager shall assist the finance director in the administration of this article to the extent provided herein and of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-253. - Refunds. 
(a)  Claim of exemption. A refund shall be made, or credit allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any person who claims an exemption as provided by this article. Such refund shall be made by the finance director after compliance with the following conditions precedent in this section. 
(b)  Applications for refund. Application for refund shall be made within sixty (60) days after the lodging transaction on which the exemption is claimed and must be supported by the affidavit of the person, accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the lodging provider and shall be made upon such forms as the finance director shall prescribe therefor. 
(c)  Decision; hearing. Upon receipt of an application, the finance director shall examine the same with due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of the finance director's decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within twenty (20) days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the finance director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in this article. The right of any person to a refund under this article shall not be assignable and such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the lodging services and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof. Any applicant for a refund under the provisions of this subsection or any other person who makes any false statements in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes is guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished in the manner provided by state law. 
(d)  Refund applied to tax deficiencies. Claims for tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of purchase of the lodging services for which the refund is claimed and shall be processed for refund in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed above, except that the proceeds of any such claim for a refund shall first be applied by the finance department to any tax deficiencies or liabilities existing against the claimant before allowance of such claim by the finance department, and further, except that if such excess payment of tax monies in any period is discovered as a result of an audit by the finance department, and deficiencies are discovered and assessed against the taxpayer as a result of such audit, then such excess monies shall be first applied against any deficiencies outstanding to the date of the assessment but shall not be applied to any future tax liabilities. 
(e)  Recovery of refund received erroneously. If any person is convicted under the provisions of this section, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully, and the finance director is empowered to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refunds. A brief summary statement of the above described penalties shall be printed on each form for recovery of a refund. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-254. - Hearings by finance director. 
(a)  Appeal assessed tax amount. An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a lodging provider for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. The finance director shall review such submission, conduct such hearings as the finance director, in consultation with the city attorney, shall deem appropriate and issue a final decision regarding the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days. 
(b)  Appeal denial of refund. An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the finance director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal by the lodging provider or taxpayer. The finance director shall review such submission, conduct such hearings as the finance director, in consultation with the city attorney, shall deem appropriate and issue a final decision regarding the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-255. - Review by district court. 
(a)  Authority. If the petitioner or if an applicant for a refund is aggrieved at the final decision of the finance director, then he/she may proceed to have same reviewed by the district court. The procedure of review shall be in accordance with Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  Bond required. Within fifteen days after filing a notice of appeal as provided in this section, the taxpayer shall file with the district court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, and other charges stated in the final decision by the finance director that are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at such taxpayer's option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. 11-35-101(l), equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated in the final decision by the finance director. The taxpayer may, at his/her option, deposit the disputed amount with the finance director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the supreme court or the court of appeals of the state or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the district court, either retained by the finance director and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or part to the taxpayer. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the finance director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the district court. 
(c)  Writ issuance. The district court shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the finance director in administering the provisions of this article by writ under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any writ issued pursuant to this subsection shall be issued by the clerk of the district court upon a verified petition of the taxpayer filed within twenty (20) days after notice of the decision of the finance director in any such matter. Such writ shall be served within five (5) days after its issuance and shall be returnable at such time as the district court may determine, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date of issuance of such writ. The finance director shall certify the record of his/her proceedings to the district court. 
(d)  Appeal of court decision. The decision of the district court may be reviewed in the supreme court of the state upon writ of error by any party thereto. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 19-256. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the general penalties imposed for violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-2011, 12-27-11) 
Chapter 20 - TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; general standards for manufactured homes regarding anchoring and flood hazard reduction, § 8-66; specific standards in all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, § 8-67; parking of trailers or other equipment on streets prohibited, § 10-46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILER PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Trailer coach means any vehicle, other than a railroad car, used for living or sleeping purposes, which is equipped with wheels for the purpose of transporting such vehicle from place to place, either by its own power or by some other attached to it. 
    Trailer coach lot means any unit of land provided by any person for the purpose of placing thereon a trailer coach which is used or intended to be used for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Trailer park means any premises where one (1) or more trailer coaches are parked for living or sleeping purposes, or any premises used or set apart for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for one (1) or more trailer coaches for living or sleeping purposes, including any building, structure, vehicle and enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such trailer park. 
(Code 1961, § 25-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 20-27. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of public works, with the assistance of the police, fire and health departments, to cause regular semiannual inspections to be made of each trailer park in the city. 
(Code 1961, § 25-13) 
Sec. 20-28. - Responsibility for maintenance of facilities. 
    Owners, operators and attendants of trailer parks shall be responsible for maintaining the safety and sanitary facilities required by this article. 
(Code 1961, § 25-39) 
Sec. 20-29. - Attendants. 
    The owner or operator of any trailer park shall have one (1) or more attendants present on the premises at all reasonable times to manage and supervise the park and to enforce or cause compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 25-14) 
Sec. 20-30. - Registration of guests. 
(a)  Each person occupying or purporting to occupy a trailer coach on any trailer coach lot in any trailer park shall be required to give the following information in writing: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and occupants of the trailer. 
(2)  The license number, make and model of the tow car and the trailer coach. 
(3)  The location at which the trailer coach was last parked, the date of moving from such place, and the place to which the occupants are moving. 
(b)  All such registrations shall be signed by the occupant of the trailer coach on the date of arrival, and such date and the date of departure shall be filled in by the operator of the trailer park. 
(c)  Any person furnishing false information in connection with such registration shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the trailer park operator to furnish registration forms and make them readily available for inspection by properly constituted authorities. 
(Code 1961, § 25-43) 
Sec. 20-31. - Ejection of certain persons. 
    The owner, operator or attendant of a trailer park shall eject any person willfully damaging any facility required by this article or refusing to comply with provisions of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 24-40) 
Sec. 20-32. - Report of contagious diseases. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner, operator or attendant of a trailer park to report promptly to the health department the full name, age and address of every person who is affected or suspected of being affected with any contagious or communicable diseases. 
(Code 1961, § 25-38) 
Sec. 20-33. - Compliance with building code, zoning ordinance. 
    All buildings and structures at trailer parks other than trailer coaches shall be in full conformity with the building code and in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1961, § 25-41) 
Sec. 20-34. - Removal of wheels from trailers; placement of foundations. 
    The removal of the wheels from any house trailer located at a trailer park is hereby prohibited, except temporarily for the purpose of repairs. Posts, piers, foundations and any other thing that will prevent the ready removal of the trailer from the premises are also prohibited. The owner, operator or attendant of the trailer park shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 25-42) 
Secs. 20-35-20-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 20-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or offer to operate a trailer park within the corporate limits of the city without first securing a written trailer park permit from the director of public works. 
(Code 1961, § 25-2) 
Sec. 20-52. - Application generally. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the building inspector, shall be accompanied by payment of an investigation fee of five dollars ($5.00), and shall state the name and address of the applicant and a description of the property. 
(Code 1961, § 25-3) 
Sec. 20-53. - Submission of plans. 
    Each application for a permit required by this division shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed trailer park drawn to scale and showing, in addition to such detailed information as may be required by the director of public works, the following: 
(1)  That the park is located on a well-drained site, has a well-marked entrance and exit, has surfaced roads of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, adequately lighted at night and easily accessible to all trailer coaches and fire apparatus, and has surfaced walkways to the various buildings of such park. 
(2)  That a trailer coach lot having an area of not less than nine hundred (900) square feet and a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, with boundaries clearly indicated by corner markers, is provided for each trailer coach. 
(3)  That coach lots are to be arranged in rows, each abutting or facing upon one (1) or more public or private roads, and that each trailer coach or tow car is to be located at least two (2) feet from the boundary line of each lot. 
(4)  That space is provided as follows: 
a.  For clothes drying and laundry facilities, not less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
b.  For burning and incineration of rubbish, not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest coach lot line. 
c.  An adequate play area for children, set aside and used for no other purpose. 
(5)  The extent and conformation of the premises. 
(6)  The location of driveways, entrances, exits and the like. 
(7)  The number and location of coach lots. 
(8)  The number and location of all structures and conveniences. 
(9)  The method of sewage disposal. 
(10)  The method of garbage storage and removal. 
(11)  The plan of the water supply system. 
(12)  The plan of the electric wiring system. 
(13)  The location of the incinerator and burning space. 
(14)  The location of children's play and recreation areas. 
(Code 1961, § 25-4) 
Sec. 20-54. - Investigation of applicant and proposed site. 
    When an application for a permit required by this division has been filed, the director of public works, with the assistance of the fire, police and health departments, shall cause an investigation to be made of the character and fitness of the applicant and the conformity of the site of the proposed trailer park with the requirements of this article, section 20-51, and the rules and regulations of the fire and health departments. 
(Code 1961, § 25-5) 
Sec. 20-55. - Standards for issuance. 
    No permit required by this division shall be issued unless the proposed site for the trailer park complies with all requirements of this article and the rules and regulations of the fire and health departments, nor shall such permit be issued if the applicant therefor has ever been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1961, § 25-6) 
Sec. 20-56. - Display. 
    A trailer park permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises used or proposed to be used as a trailer park. 
(Code 1961, § 25-7) 
Secs. 20-57-20-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 20-76. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a trailer park within the city without first securing a license therefor. Such license is in addition to the permit required by this article. 
(Code 1961, § 25-8) 
Sec. 20-77. - Fee. 
    For each trailer park license issued there shall be paid to the director of finance an annual fee based upon the number of trailer coach lots permitted for such trailer park. The minimum fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first ten (10) or less trailer coach lots and one dollar ($1.00) for each additional trailer coach lot in excess of ten (10). 
(Code 1961, § 25-9) 
Sec. 20-78. - Term; renewal. 
    A license for a trailer park shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued. Such license shall be renewable upon written application therefor prior to December 31 of any year and upon payment of the fee prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1961, § 25-10) 
Sec. 20-79. - Transfer. 
    A trailer park license may be transferred upon application therefor being made to the director of finance and approved by the director of public works, after investigation, and upon payment of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1961, § 25-11) 
Sec. 20-80. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  When it appears to the director of public works, the chief of the fire department, the chief of the police department or the health department that any person holding a license under this division has or may have violated any of the provisions of this division or any health regulation of the city, a written notice shall be served on such licensee in person or by registered mail specifying wherein it is believed he violated or may have violated this division or any health regulation and requiring him to appear before the city manager at a time specified therein not less than ten (10) days after such service and show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked. At such time, the licensee and the health, fire, police and building officials of the city may produce such evidence as may be relevant to determine whether the violation contained in the charge has been committed. If the city manager finds that such violation has not been committed, he shall so advise the licensee and the licensee shall be permitted to continue operation, but if the city manager finds from the evidence that such violation has been committed he shall so advise the licensee and may suspend or revoke the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has been revoked or suspended to operate, continue to operate or offer to operate any trailer park after the date of such revocation or during the term of such suspension, as the case may be. 
(Code 1961, § 25-12) 
Secs. 20-81-20-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SAFETY AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 20-96. - Entrance and exit signs. 
    Each trailer park in the city shall be equipped with lighted entrance and exit signs. 
(Code 1961, § 25-15) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 20-97. - Storage of liquid fuel. 
    Storage tanks for liquid fuel at a trailer park shall be located so as to require filling or draining on the outside of the trailer coach. Tanks for liquefied petroleum gases shall be located outside of the trailer coach. If tanks are installed in closed compartments, the compartments shall be ventilated at the bottom. 
(Code 1961, § 25-16) 
Sec. 20-98. - Incinerator. 
    No incinerator shall be used at any trailer park unless the incinerator has been approved by the fire department. 
(Code 1961, § 25-17) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 20-99. - Rubbish containers. 
    There shall be provided at each trailer park a sufficient number of rubbish containers placed at such locations as may be designated by the director of public works. Such containers shall be of metal and shall be equipped with metal self-closing tops. 
(Code 1961, § 25-18) 
Sec. 20-100. - Open fires prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to light or maintain or allow to be lit or maintained any open fire in a trailer park. 
(Code 1961, § 25-19) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 20-101. - Fire alarm box or telephone facilities. 
    Each trailer park shall have available at all times a fire alarm box or public telephone facilities. 
(Code 1961, § 25-20) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 20-102. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Each trailer park shall be equipped with such number of fire extinguishers as may be required by the fire department. Each trailer coach located in a trailer park shall be equipped with at least one (1) fire extinguisher suitable for suppressing oil and gasoline fires. 
(Code 1961, § 25-21) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 20-103. - Parking in driveways and walkways. 
    No tow car, trailer or other vehicle shall be parked in any driveway or over any walkway in a trailer park. 
(Code 1961, § 25-22) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 20-104. - Electrical equipment and lighting. 
    Each trailer park located in the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each lot must have an electric outlet in weatherproof housing with a fuse or circuit breaker not to exceed twenty (20) amps for each circuit. Overhead feeder wires shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the ground and outlet boxes shall be at least six (6) feet from the ground on substantial poles placed on the lot line. 
(2)  Utility and toilet buildings shall be adequately lighted, with a sixty-watt bulb over each entrance. 
(3)  Outside lighting shall consist of at least one (1) twenty-five-watt light at fifteen (15) feet for every one hundred (100) feet on driveways and walkways. 
(4)  All park lights shall burn from one-half hour after sundown to one-half hour before sunrise. 
(5)  All wiring shall comply with the state electrical code. 
(Code 1961, § 25-23) 
Sec. 20-105. - Water supply. 
    The city water supply shall be made available at each trailer park, and each such park shall have at least one (1) water outlet within one hundred (100) feet of each lot. No physical connection shall be made between the approved water supply and any unsafe water supply. 
(Code 1961, § 25-24) 
Sec. 20-106. - Use of common drinking cups prohibited. 
    The use of common drinking cups at trailer parks is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1961, § 25-25) 
Sec. 20-107. - Plumbing generally. 
    All plumbing in every trailer park shall comply with the city building code and state plumbing code and all ordinances pertaining to plumbing and to the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1961, § 25-26) 
Sec. 20-108. - Toilet facilities. 
(a)  Separate toilet facilities for males and females shall be provided at every trailer park. 
(b)  One (1) water closet for males and one (1) for females shall be provided for each fifteen (15) trailers or less and at least one (1) urinal shall be provided in each toilet room for males. Only approved water-flush urinals and toilets shall be used and each water closet shall be located in a separate compartment at least three (3) feet wide. 
(c)  Trailer coaches equipped with toilet facilities shall not be considered in computing the number of water closets required by this section. 
(Code 1961, § 25-27) 
Sec. 20-109. - Laundry facilities. 
    Each trailer park shall have a laundry building or room with hot and cold running water and at least one (1) double laundry tray for every thirty (30) trailer lots. No laundry tray shall be located in a toilet or shower room. 
(Code 1961, § 25-28) 
Sec. 20-110. - Showers. 
    Each trailer park shall provide separate shower bath accommodations for males and females with an adequate supply of hot and cold running water at all reasonable hours. There shall be a minimum of one (1) approved shower head and stall for every twenty (20) persons or major fraction thereof. A dressing compartment at least two and one-half (21/2) by three (3) feet in size shall be provided in combination with each shower stall, protected by a waterproof partition or shower curtain. The floor of such compartment shall be waterproof and elevated three (3) inches above the shower stall floor. 
(Code 1961, § 25-29) 
Sec. 20-111. - Lavatories. 
    Each trailer park shall be equipped with one (1) lavatory for every two (2) water closets for females and two (2) lavatories for every three (3) water closets for males. 
(Code 1961, § 25-30) 
Sec. 20-112. - Construction, cleaning of buildings housing sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities at a trailer park shall be located in a well-constructed and properly lighted and drained building, with a cement floor or the equivalent. Such facilities shall not be located in a basement in which more than half the height of the basement is below ground level. Such buildings shall have concrete curbings extending at least six (6) inches above the floor. 
(b)  All toilet, shower, lavatory and laundry building floors shall be cleaned daily with strong soap or detergent and then rinsed down. 
(c)  All windows, doors and other openings of such buildings shall be properly screened with wire cloth screening not coarser than sixteen (16) mesh. Screen doors shall swing outward and be self-closing. 
(Code 1961, § 25-31) 
Sec. 20-113. - Lots to be located near toilet and shower facilities. 
    No trailer coach lot at a trailer park shall be located more than two hundred (200) feet in walking distance away from toilet and shower facilities. 
(Code 1961, § 25-32) 
Sec. 20-114. - Sewers. 
    All sewage and other water-carried wastes produced at a trailer park shall be disposed of through the city sanitary sewer system when possible; otherwise, they shall be disposed of through a system approved by the health department. Each lot shall be provided with a sewer trapped below the frost line and there shall be a watertight connection from the trailer coach sewer outlet to the sewer line and all trailer coaches shall be connected. The sewer line shall be tightly closed when not in use. 
(Code 1961, § 25-33) 
Cross reference- Sewer system, § 21-116 et seq. 
Sec. 20-115. - Place for cleaning garbage cans. 
    Each trailer park shall have an accessible place for cleaning slop and garbage cans and water under pressure shall be provided at such place. Such a place shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of each trailer lot. 
(Code 1961, § 25-34) 
Sec. 20-116. - Community kitchens and dining rooms. 
    Community kitchens or dining rooms located at trailer parks shall be maintained and operated in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and other city ordinances. 
(Code 1961, § 25-35) 
Sec. 20-117. - Slop-creating practices to be limited to designated areas. 
    No animal or car washing or other slop-creating practices shall be carried on in any place at a trailer park not designed for such purposes. 
(Code 1961, § 25-36) 
Sec. 20-118. - Animals not to run at large. 
    No person shall allow any domestic animal or house pet to run at large within limits of a trailer park. 
(Code 1961, § 25-36) 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, §§ 4-6, 8-1; public works board, § 8-4; public utilities, § 14-1 et seq.; franchises, § 14-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, § 14-9 et seq. 
Cross reference- Standards for areas of special flood hazards regarding utilities, § 8-66(3); specific standards in all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, § 8-67; public improvements, planning, construction, assessments and collection procedures, Ch. 15; excavations for utilities in streets, sidewalks and other public places, § 17-41 et seq.; drainage and storm sewer specification and design requirements in subdivisions, § 18-103; occupation tax on telephone utility companies, § 19-76 et seq.; finance, § 19-181 et seq.; trailer park regulations, § 20-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; BILLING AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES FOR SERVICES 

Sec. 21-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer means a person who is either a legal owner of real property or such legal owner's authorized agent for which utility services are furnished. 
    Utility charges means all charges applicable to water, sewer and sanitation collection services and all charges applicable to such other city services as are designated by this Code as utility charges. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-3, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-27. - Purpose of article. 
    The city council finds and declares that the provisions of this article are enacted for the following reasons: 
(1)  To ensure timely and complete payment of all utility charges arising from utility services supplied to city customers and arising from charges assessed under this article. 
(2)  To regulate termination of utility services to customers for nonpayment of utility charges. 
(3)  To provide full and adequate notice to a customer of a termination of utility service to that customer and of the procedure to follow to avoid termination. 
(4)  To provide customers with a fair and reasonable opportunity, prior to termination, to dispute the correctness of utility charges. 
(5)  To standardize the contents of the utility bill, the notice of termination and other notices sent to customers. 
(6)  To regulate termination of utility services to customers for nonpayment of utility charges during inclement weather. 
(7)  To require utility services furnished to specific real property to be in the name of the legal or equitable titled owner of that specific real property. 
(8)  To provide customers [with] adequate notice of termination of utility services. 
(9)  To provide for liens for utility charges, notice of lien filing and certification of lien for collection as other taxes. 
(10)  To enforce by penalties the requirements of persons receiving or requesting city utility services. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-1, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-28. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to utility services supplied to customers' real properties as utility charges against real properties. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-2, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-29. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    The finance director or his designee is authorized to develop all written rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this article, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-15, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-30. - Service application and agreement-Required. 
    Any person who is a legal owner of real property to which the city may agree to provide utilities and who desires utility services at the specific real property shall complete and submit to the city a utility service application and agreement, together with an application fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00), which fee amount may be changed by resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, §§ 25C-3(a)(3), 25C-5(a), 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95; Ord. No. 3-2008, 2-26-08, eff. 3-7-08) 
Sec. 21-31. - Service application and agreement-Contents. 
    The utility service application and agreement shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and signature of the applicant, who is the legal owner. 
(2)  The street address and the legal description of the property to be supplied utility services. 
(3)  The legal owner's telephone number and address to which utility billings and notices are to be mailed, if the address is different from the address to which utility services are requested to be furnished; 
(4)  The number on the legal owner's driver's license or valid government issued identification card, containing a photograph of the applicant; 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number of the person to whom utility billings are being mailed, if the name is different from the applicant; 
(6)  The utility services that are being requested, whether water, sewer, sanitation collection or other services; 
(7)  A statement that full and complete payment of a utility bill must be made no later than the payment date stated on the monthly utility bill, which payment date shall be at least twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the utility bill; 
(8)  A statement that failure to pay timely and completely by the due date the total amount stated in a utility bill shall result in: 
a.  Addition of a penalty late charge of an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount of the utility bill; and/or 
b.  Termination of utility service; 
(9)  Written acknowledgment by the prospective customer that, as the customer, the customer is responsible for the timely and complete payment of all utility charges arising from utility service supplied to the property identified in the utility service application and agreement form; 
(10)  Customer shall receive a copy of this article; 
(11)  Acknowledgment that the customer understands the customer's rights in the event of receipt of a notice of rejection or notice of termination, and acknowledgment of the obligation of the customer to inform the city, in writing, of a change of the customer's billing address, a change in the service provided or requested, and other such changes affecting services provided or to be provided; and 
(12)  Acknowledgment by the prospective customer that the information supplied by the prospective customer is factual, and that if improper, less-than-accurate, false or misleading information is given by the prospective customer, the city may, upon ascertainment of the true facts, bill as utility charges for any and all amounts which should have been charged and as are proper and appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-5(b), 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95; Ord. No. 10-2009, 3-24-09, eff. 4-3-09) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction for computation of time, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-32. - Same-To be signed by person requesting service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any qualified person requesting city utility services not to sign a utility services application and agreement. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-12, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-33. - Same-Misrepresentation of ownership of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not a legal owner of a specific real property, receiving or requesting city utility services for such real property, to represent upon a utility services application and agreement that such person is a legal owner of the real property receiving or requesting city utility services. Violation of this section shall be considered a violation of section 12-2 of the City Code, and shall be prosecuted as such. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-14, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-34. - Notice of rejection. 
    If utility services will not be supplied to the property for which requested, a notice of rejection shall be sent to the prospective customer at the billing address provided in the utility service application and agreement. Such notice shall state the specific reasons why services will not be supplied. Utility services shall not be supplied to any prospective customer if that customer has any outstanding and unpaid utility charges relative to the real property for which utility services are being requested. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-5(c), 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 5-1990, 6-12-90, eff. 6-15-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-35. - Billing; payment of bill; penalty charges. 
(a)  A utility bill shall be mailed monthly for utility services supplied. 
(b)  Total payment of a utility bill must be made at the city by 5:00 p.m. of the due date on the utility bill. The due date shall be at least twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the utility bill. 
(c)  Failure to pay a utility bill timely and completely shall result in a penalty late charge of an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount of the utility bill added to the utility bill as a utility charge. 
(d)  Each utility bill shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The reading date of utility service covered by the utility bill; 
(2)  The utility charges, and miscellaneous charges where applicable; 
(3)  The date of the utility bill; 
(4)  The date when complete payment is due at the city, which shall be at least twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the utility bill; 
(5)  Notice whether the utility bill is based on an actual or an estimated measurement of the amount of utility service supplied; 
(6)  Notice that failure to pay, timely and completely by the due date, the total amount shown on the utility bill shall result in: 
a.  Addition of a penalty late charge of an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount of the utility bill; and/or 
b.  Termination of utility service; 
(7)  Notice that the customer may call an information center telephone number during business hours which shall be listed on the utility bill, in order to: 
a.  Dispute the amount of the utility charges and/or penalty late charge; 
b.  Avoid the termination of utility service for nonpayment of the total amount shown on the utility bill; 
c.  Request the restoration of utility service; 
d.  Request answers to any other questions regarding utility services; and 
(8)  Notice that a notice of lien may be recorded by the city clerk after five (5) days following the day utility charges are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-6, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction for computation of time, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-36. - Customer information. 
    The information center provided for in this article shall provide information on the following: 
(1)  The procedure to dispute a utility charge or a penalty late charge; 
(2)  The procedure to avoid termination of utility service due to nonpayment of utility charges or penalty late charges; 
(3)  The procedure for tenants to avoid termination of utility service due to their landlord's nonpayment of utility charges and penalties; and 
(4)  The procedure to obtain reinstatement of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-7, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-37. - Disputes. 
(a)  Prior to five (5) days before the date of termination of utility service for nonpayment of the amount shown on a utility bill or on a notice of termination issued under section 21-41, a customer may dispute the correctness of all or part of the amount shown in accordance with the provisions of this article. A customer shall not be entitled to dispute the correctness of all or part of the amount if all or part of the amount was the subject of a previous dispute under this section. 
(b)  The procedure for customer dispute shall be as follows: 
(1)  Prior to five (5) days before the date of termination, the customer shall notify the finance director, in writing, that the customer disputes all or part of the amount shown on the utility bill or a notice of termination, stating as completely as possible the basis for the dispute. 
(2)  If the finance director determines that the present dispute is untimely or that the customer previously disputed the correctness of all or part of the amount shown, the finance director shall mail to the customer a notice of rejection stating that the present dispute is untimely or invalid. The city shall then proceed as if the customer had not notified the city of the present dispute. 
(3)  If the city determines that the present dispute is not untimely or invalid under this section, the city, within five (5) business days after receipt of the customer's notice, shall arrange a formal hearing before the city manager or his designee (the hearing official). 
(4)  The formal hearing before the hearing official shall be held within ten (10) days of the city's receipt of the customer's written request. 
(5)  At the hearing, the city and the customer shall be entitled to present all evidence that is, in the hearing official's view, relevant and material to the dispute, and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. A tape-recorded or, at the option of the city, a stenographic record of the hearing shall be maintained. 
(6)  Based on the record established at the hearing, the hearing official, within five (5) days of completion of the hearing, shall issue a written decision formally resolving the dispute. Such decision shall be final and binding upon the city and the customer. 
(c)  Utilization of this dispute procedure shall not relieve a customer of his obligation to pay, timely and completely, all other undisputed utility charges and penalty late charges and the undisputed portion of the amount which is the subject of the present dispute. Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, failure to pay, timely and completely, all such undisputed amounts shall subject the customer to termination of utility service in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Until the date of the city official's decision, the city shall not terminate the utility service of the customer and shall not issue a notice of termination to the customer solely for nonpayment of the disputed amount. If it is determined that the customer must pay some or all of the disputed amount, the city shall promptly mail to the customer and the customer's known units, from information furnished by the customer, a notice of termination, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The amount to be paid. 
(2)  The date of the notice of termination. 
(3)  The date of termination, which shall be at least ten (10) days after the date of the notice of termination. 
(4)  Notice that, unless the city receives complete payment of the amount shown prior to the date of termination, utility services shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-9, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-38. - Charges to constitute lien; authority to terminate service. 
    All utility charges shall constitute a lien upon the property benefited by utility services provided, and if such utility charges are not paid in full as billed and when due, utility services to the property may be disconnected in conformance with the provisions of this article. Once the lien has been filed with the county clerk and recorder, there will be a one-hundred-dollar service charge which will be required to be paid in addition to full payment of the bill, such service charge being for the purpose of filing expenses and labor incurred in the production of the paperwork required for such lien. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-8(a), 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-39. - Notice of lien. 
(a)  Notice of lien shall be prepared and filed by the city clerk with the clerk and recorder of the county after five (5) days following the day utility charges were due and not paid. 
(b)  Such notice of lien shall include the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the property; 
(2)  A legal description of the property as tax assessed by the county assessor, and the number and street address of the property to which the notice of lien is applicable; 
(3)  The nature of the lien; and 
(4)  A statement that notice of lien is given pursuant to this section. 
(c)  The city clerk shall mail a copy of such notice of lien to the billing address of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-8(b)-(d), 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-40. - Collection of lien. 
    All utility charges and assessments shall constitute a lien upon the property benefitted by services, wherever referred to in this Code as utility charges. If such utility charges are not paid in full as billed when due, the director of finance may certify the utility charges or assessments to the county treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year to be collected in the manner as other taxes are collected. All laws of the state for the assessment and collection of general taxes shall apply, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and redemption of property. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-4, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-41. - Service termination procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection 21-37(d), the provisions of this section shall govern all terminations of utility service for nonpayment of utility charges. 
(b)  If, by the payment due date shown on a utility bill or within ten (10) days of mailing by the city of a notice of rejection as provided in section 21-34, the city has not received complete payment of the total amount shown on the utility bill or the notice of rejection, the city shall mail to the owner a notice of termination at least three (3) days after the payment due date shown on the utility bill. 
(c)  The notice of termination shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner; 
(2)  The address of the owner which the owner has designated as the billing address; 
(3)  The names, addresses, apartment or unit numbers as furnished by the owner; 
(4)  The amount to be paid; 
(5)  The date of the notice of termination; 
(6)  The date of termination, which shall be at least ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of termination; 
(7)  Notice that, unless the city receives complete payment of the amount shown prior to the date of termination, utility service shall be terminated as provided for in this section; 
(8)  Notice that, in lieu of paying the entire amount shown, a customer, prior to the date of termination, may notify the city that the customer disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown, if all or part of the amount shown was not the subject of a previous dispute under section 21-37; and 
(9)  Notice of the information available at the office of the finance director and described in section 21-36. 
(d)  If, prior to the date of termination: 
(1)  The city has not received complete payment of the amount shown on the notice of termination; or 
(2)  The customer has not notified the city that the customer disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown on the notice of termination; 
then the city shall terminate utility service provided to the customer on the date of termination. 
(e)  If the city receives payment of the entire amount shown on the notice of termination prior to the date of termination, such payment shall be considered a timely and complete payment for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-10, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-42. - Limitations on termination of service. 
(a)  The city shall terminate utility service for nonpayment of utility charges only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday. No terminations shall be permitted on a legal holiday or on the day before a legal holiday. 
(b)  The city shall not terminate utility service for nonpayment of amounts less than twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-11, 12- 27-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. 34-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 21-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 34-1995, adopted December 12, 1995, effective December 22, 1995, deleted § 21-43 in its entirety. Formerly, § 21-43 pertained to unlawful receipt of service by tenants after expiration of tenancy and derived from Ord. No. 20-1989, § 25C-13, adopted December 27, 1989, effective January 1, 1990. 
Secs. 21-44-21-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Water utility, § 14-10. 
Cross reference- Water facilities requirements in subdivisions, § 18-104. 
State Law reference- Authority of cities relative to water service generally, C.R.S. 31-12-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City's water system includes wells, pumping stations, transmission lines, taps and other related appurtenances owned or operated by the city. 
    Private water system means any arrangement providing water from a source other than the city's water system or providing water from the city's water system without the city's permission pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
    Public water service means the providing of water from the city's water system. 
    Tap may be used interchangeably with the terms "metered tap," "water service connection," "service tap," "service" and other similar terms. These terms refer to the location or structure where water supplied by the city enters on individual private property. 
    Utility charges means and includes tapping charges, water service charges, permit fees relating to this article, restoration of water service fee, water plant investment fee, and such other fees that are set pursuant to this article, plus such other costs assessed by the city to recover the actual cost of any occurrence which violates the requirements of this article. 
    Water service means the receipt of water from the city's water system on private property. 
(Code 1961, § 26-1; Ord. No. 20-1989, § 26-1, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-62. - Applicability of article to government-owned lands. 
    In order to obtain water service, any government or governmental agency owning property located within the corporate boundaries of the city or eligible for immediate annexation shall comply with all applicable sections of this article, unless specifically prevented from doing so by state law, in which case the city may modify the requirements to the extent of the state law which is effective. Any private owner or developer who buys or receives land from any government or governmental agency, whether eligible for annexation or not, shall meet the requirements of this article before water service will be initiated or continued on the property. 
(Code 1961, § 26-13) 
Sec. 21-63. - Violation of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-17, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 21-64. - Acquisition of water rights by city. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that, in order to provide an orderly growth of the city and to ensure the city an adequate water supply and to provide the necessary water and water rights for the continuing expansion and water right protection of its municipal supply, it has become necessary for the city to acquire all water and water rights with lands annexed to the city or from lands being initially provided with water service, or, if insufficient, to receive a monetary equivalent therefor. Direct flow mutual ditch company stock and interests in area reservoirs would provide water and water rights assisting the city in meeting and anticipating the present and future requirement for the protection of its municipal water supply system. It is deemed by the city council to be to the best interest of the city, its citizens and its future citizens to establish a policy of requiring, as a prerequisite to annexation or as a prerequisite to initiation of water service to their land, that petitioners requesting annexation of or initiation of water service to their land tender and be prepared to convey all water and water rights appurtenant to and historically used on or associated with the land, or, if not sufficient, pay a monetary equivalent therefor. 
(b)  Conveyance and transfer of water rights or cash payments in connection with requests for annexation or water service. In order to assure an adequate water supply for land to be annexed to and provided with water service by the city, all petitioners requesting annexation of land, or initiation of water service to land proposed for annexation, shall, at no cost to the city, as a prerequisite to receiving the approval of city council, be required, at the election of the city, to: 
(1)  Convey and transfer to the city: 
a.  All water and water rights, ditches and ditch rights, reservoirs and reservoir rights, wells and well rights and all other water rights or rights to use water appurtenant to, located on or used in connection with said land; and 
b.  All easements, rights of way, equipment or structures necessary for or associated with the diversion, storage, transmission and/or use of such water rights and rights to use water; or 
(2)  Pay to the city in cash an amount of money sufficient for the city to acquire, or to offset the city's previous acquisition of, at applicable fair market values at the time of the petition for annexation or water service, and to obtain necessary approvals for the city's use of, water rights or rights to use water which will provide an adequate water supply for the annexed land. 
The city's election of whether to accept water rights and rights to use water or cash payments shall be made as soon as possible after a request for annexation or water service is received by the city, and shall be included as a term of the annexation agreement. 
Adequate water supply for annexed areas: required approvals. If the city elects to require conveyance or transfer of water rights and rights to use water, any such rights shall provide an adequate water supply for the land to be annexed and provided with water service. Such water rights and rights to use water shall be deemed to be an adequate water supply only if they are able to supply at least 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water on a firm annual yield basis for each acre of land to be annexed after all approvals necessary to insure legal and physical availability of the water for city uses have been finally obtained, including, but not limited to, any approvals required from ditch, reservoir or irrigation companies or districts, any approvals required from the water court or any other court or any administrative approvals. City uses shall include all municipal uses, irrigation, augmentation, exchange, replacement and substitution and any other uses deemed by the city to be in the interest of the city. If approval of a ditch, reservoir or irrigation company or district is, or may be, required to allow use of the water rights and rights to use water for city uses, the petitioner shall be responsible, at no cost to the city, for obtaining such approvals, or determinations that no approval is necessary, before the city will approve annexation of or water service to such land. All such approvals or determinations shall be presented by petitioner to the city in final written form sufficient to show the company's or district's approval of city use of the water to be conveyed or transferred and to allow the city to determine the amount of water which will be annually available for city uses. Subject to cash payments which may be required under this section (b), the city shall be responsible, at its cost, for obtaining approvals required of the water court or other court or administrative approvals needed to make the water available for city uses. 
Amount of cash payment. If the city elects to require a cash payment, any cash payments made to the city shall be sufficient for the city to: 
(1)  Acquire, at applicable fair market values at the time the petition for annexation or water service is made, water rights or rights to use water which provide an adequate water supply for the land to be annexed or served in the amount of at least 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water on a firm annual yield basis for each acre of land to be annexed after all approvals described in this section (b) which are necessary to insure legal and physical availability of such water for city uses have been finally obtained; and/or 
(2)  Offset the city's previous acquisition of water rights or rights to use water which may be used by the city to provide an adequate water supply in the amount of at least 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water on a firm annual yield basis for each acre of land to be annexed. 
In addition, such cash payment shall also be sufficient to allow the city to obtain all court, administrative, company, district or other approvals which may be necessary to use the water rights and rights to use water for city uses, or to offset the cost of previously obtained approvals of water rights or rights to use water which may be used to provide water to the annexed or served lands. The city shall determine the amount of said cash payment in connection with each annexation, provided that the amount of money to be paid shall be not less than $1,616.00 per acre of land to be annexed. 
Determination of adequate water supply. For planning purposes only, the firm consumptive amount of water which shall be deemed to be available annually for city uses from certain ditch and reservoir companies in the Sterling area will be as specified in the following table: 
Water right (ditch) Annual CU per share (ac-ft) City CU annual requirement per acre (ac-ft) Fractional share needed to fully supply one acre annually Number of acres supplied with one share Sterling No. 1 7.6 1.26 0.17 6 Farmers Pawnee 19.1 1.23 0.07 15.2 Springdale 2.6 1.26 0.48 2.1 Morgan Prewit CU per share after conveyance loss 9.35 1.23 0.13 7.4  
In connection with a specific request for annexation or water service, however, the city shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether any and all water tendered to the city will provide an adequate water supply for the land annexed. Based on the size of or projected water demand associated with a specific annexation request, or other relevant factors, the city may require the petitioner, as a term of the annexation agreement, to provide for the city's review an analysis, and all background information used to prepare the analysis, by a competent water rights engineering firm which projects the average and firm annual water requirements for the annexed area and the amount of water which will be available for city uses from water rights or rights to use water to be conveyed or transferred to the city. The petitioner shall pay any and all costs associated with the analysis and subsequent review by the city. 
City's options if tendered water rights do not provide an adequate supply. If, based on its review of the analysis, and such other information on which the city may choose to rely, the city determines that the amount of water tendered will supply less than 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water annually per acre annexed for any reason, including, but not limited to, that adequate court, administrative, company or district approvals cannot be obtained, if the land proposed for annexation or water service is dry land with which no water rights or rights to use water are tendered to the city, or if there are material defects in the title to the water rights proposed to be conveyed or transferred, determined as set forth in this section (b), the city may, in its sole discretion, exercise any of the following options separately or in combination: 
(1)  The city may require the petitioner to furnish water rights or rights to use water sufficient on their own, or, if the city agrees, in combination with any water rights or rights to use water previously tendered, to supply for city uses not less than 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water annually per acre annexed; 
(2)  The city may require the petitioner to make cash payments to the city on the basis and in an amount determined as set forth in this section (b) sufficient for the city to acquire and obtain approvals of, or offset its previous acquisition and approvals of, water rights or rights to use water which are adequate on their own, or, if the city agrees, in combination with any water rights or rights to use water previously tendered, to supply for city uses not less than 1.26 consumptive acre-feet of water annually per acre to be annexed; 
(3)  The city may, in its sole discretion, refuse the annexation or service request. 
All decisions regarding the choice and application of these options to any specific request for annexation or service shall be in the sole discretion of the city. 
Payment for change of water rights conveyed or transferred to city. In addition to any transfer and conveyance of water rights or rights to use water, whether in full or partial satisfaction of the requirements of this section (b), the petitioner shall also make a cash payment to the city to offset the city's cost of obtaining necessary court approvals. The amount of said payment shall be determined by the city for each annexation or water service request, but shall not be less than $300.00 for each acre-foot of water which may be available for city uses under the water rights or rights to use water after any final approvals required from ditch, reservoir or irrigation companies or districts have been obtained by the petitioner. 
Title to water rights to be conveyed or transferred to city. As part of the annexation agreement, the city may also require the petitioner to provide for the city's review a report, and all background information used to prepare the report, prepared by a competent attorney or other competent professional experienced in determining water right ownership which demonstrates that the petitioner is the owner of and vested with marketable title to the water rights or rights to use water which are proposed to be conveyed or transferred to the city. The petitioner shall pay any and all costs associated with the report and subsequent review by the city. If, based on its review of the report, or other information on which the city may choose to rely, the city, in its sole discretion, determines that there are material defects in the title to the water rights which will prevent conveyance or transfer of marketable title to the city, the city may request the petitioner to cure such defects. If, due to the existence of uncured title defects, the city elects not accept water rights or rights to use water in satisfaction of the petitioner's obligations under this ordinance, the city may, at its sole discretion, attempt to complete the annexation by the exercise any of the dedication or cash payments options described above in this section (b). 
Determination of water requirements in specified zoned areas. The annual consumptive use water requirements, the number of shares or fractional shares needed to supply such requirements and the number of acres which may be supplied with each water share which are set forth in the foregoing table shall apply to requests for annexation or water service in all areas to be annexed to the city except those areas to be zoned R-3, L-1 or H-1, for which water requirements are expected to differ from those in the table. In those zoning areas, the city shall require that an analysis by a competent water rights engineering firm be provided, along with all background information used to prepare the analysis, by the petitioner for the city's review that projects the average and firm annual water requirements of lands proposed for annexation or water service in those areas. The petitioner shall pay any and all costs associated with the analysis and subsequent review by the city. As set forth above in this section (b), the city may also require an analysis of the amount of water which will be available for city uses from water rights or rights to use water to be conveyed or transferred to the city as part of the annexation agreement. Based on its review of the analyses, and such other information on which the city may choose to rely, the city shall, in its sole discretion, determine the water requirements for such areas. Any water rights or rights to use water tendered to meet the water requirements for a development in R-3, L-1 or H-1, or any cash payments which supplement or are in lieu of the tender and conveyance or transfer of water rights, shall then be governed by and shall meet all conveyance and transfer or cash payment requirements of this section (b) which the city elects to apply. 
Schedule: requirements for completion of approvals. The city and the petitioner shall agree upon a schedule for completion of the requirements of this section (b) in the annexation agreement, which schedule may be extended in writing by the city manager or director of public works, on their own or at the request of the petitioner, if appropriate to accommodate changed or unanticipated circumstances. In no event, however, shall the city finally accept the conveyance or transfer of any water rights or rights to use water under this section (b) until all approvals required of any ditch, reservoir or irrigation companies or districts, all required court approvals and all required administrative approvals have been completed by the petitioner or the city, title to the water rights has been demonstrated to the city's satisfaction and the city has agreed to accept such water rights and rights to use water in full or partial satisfaction of the requirements of this section (b), provided that the city may agree to and require conveyance or transfer of such rights before company or district approvals are finally obtained if, in the judgment of the city manager or director of public works, doing so is necessary to enhance the city's ability to obtain court approvals of its right to use the water for city uses. Any cash payments which may be required under this section (b) shall be completed before the city will approve any request for annexation or water service. 
Requirements for conveyance and transfers of water rights. All conveyances or transfers of water rights or rights to use water to the city under this section (b) shall comply with all legal requirements applicable to such conveyances and transfers. It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner, at his cost, to obtain any authority to complete, and to complete, any necessary transfers of shares of ditch or reservoir companies on the records of such companies, to complete any assignments of shares or contract rights to use water to the city and to complete all other legal requirements applicable to the conveyance or transfer. All instruments of conveyance or transfer shall be recordable and in a form satisfactory to the city in its sole discretion. 
City council's final authority. The responsibility for all final elections and decisions under this section (b) shall be vested in the city council. Petitioners shall present written requests for annexation or water service to the city manager in a form acceptable to the city manager, and shall work with the city manager and other city staff to comply timely with the requirements of this section (b). 
(Code 1961, § 26-12; Ord. No. 15-2000, 4-25-00, eff. 5-5-00) 
Sec. 21-65. - Prerequisites for service to property outside city. 
    Prior to connection to the city's water system, each owner of property which is not within the corporate limits of the city shall: 
(1)  Begin and pursue to completion the annexation of the property to the city, if the property is eligible for immediate annexation. 
(2)  If the property is not eligible for immediate annexation: 
a.  Agree in writing to annex all of the property served with water by the city when the property becomes eligible for annexation and to sign any petitions and do all things which the property owner may do or must do under the requirements of the state constitution to effect the annexation. The agreement shall be made a covenant running with the land. 
b.  Furnish to the city, at no cost, the necessary easements and rights-of-way to provide water service to the property. 
c.  Agree in writing that no water pressures outside the city limits can be guaranteed and that any booster pump or system is to be installed and maintained at no cost to the city. The agreement shall be made a covenant running with the land. 
(Code 1961, § 26-10) 
Sec. 21-66. - Same-Public improvements requirements. 
(a)  Prior to receiving water service, the owner of a single residential property located outside the city limits and not presently eligible for annexation must comply with the following: 
(1)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district formed to provide water service, facilities, lines or related services in which the property is eligible to be included at such time as the eligibility occurs. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(2)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district formed to provide curb, gutter, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewer, sanitary sewer and other public improvements and not to oppose the formation of the districts, and that the installation of the improvements will be provided at no cost to the city according to city specifications when the property has been annexed to the city. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(b)  Prior to receiving water service, the owner, subdivider or developer of a subdivision of two (2) or more lots located within the corporate limits of the city or which is eligible for immediate annexation must comply with the following: 
(1)  Install, at no cost to the city, all curbs, gutters, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and other public improvements according to city specifications and in accordance with the requirements of chapter 18, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(2)  Install all water lines and taps per city specifications, at no cost to the city, with no repayment provisions. 
If it is not physically possible or practical, as determined in the sole discretion of the director of public works, to make the installations required at the time of first receiving water service, the owner shall agree in writing to install them as soon as the installation becomes possible. The agreement shall be made a covenant running with the land. 
(c)  Prior to receiving water service, the owners of property located outside the corporate limits of the city and not eligible for immediate annexation, in existing platted subdivisions which are wholly or partially developed and where more than one (1) owner is involved, shall be furnished water service only on a special district basis and must comply with the following: 
(1)  Satisfy all city subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Furnish to the city, at no cost, the necessary rights-of-way, dedicated streets and alleys for the installation of the water system. 
(3)  Install all the water lines and taps per city specifications at the district's expense with no repayment provisions. 
(4)  Comply with any then-existing requirements of the city for inspections of the work, including paying an inspector qualified and approved by the director of public works, if this condition is required by the director of public works. 
(5)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district which is formed to provide curb, gutter, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewer, sanitary sewer and other public improvements and not to oppose the formation of the districts, and that the installation of the improvements will be provided at no cost to the city according to city specifications when the property has been annexed to the city. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(6)  Comply with Appendix A. Zoning of the City Code. 
(7)  Comply with all codes set forth in Chapters 5 and 7 of the City Code. 
(d)  Prior to receiving water service, the owner of property located in a newly developed and platted subdivision wholly owned by one (1) individual, a partnership, joint venture or corporation which is not eligible for immediate annexation shall comply with the requirements of subsections (c) (1) through (7) of this section, but will not be required to include the property in a special improvement district formed to provide water service, facilities, lines and other related services. 
(Ord. No. 24-2004, 9-28-04, eff. 10-8-04) 
Sec. 21-67. - Installations on annexed land to become city property. 
    Upon annexation of property by the city, all water installations covered by this article shall become the property of the city without any repayment therefor. No liability or obligation for the maintenance thereof or responsibility therefor by the city shall accrue until that time. 
(Code 1961, § 26-14) 
Sec. 21-68. - Disconnection from private systems. 
    Whenever the city is capable of providing water service to any property within the city limits, then, at such time and thereafter, no person shall provide water to any such property by any private water system or any other water system other than the water system made available by the city. Any private water system previously serving the property shall be physically disconnected from the residence, building or structure, and no private water may be piped to the residence, building or structure thereafter. Noncompliance with this requirement shall be a violation of this section. This physical disconnection must be accomplished by a complete separation of the line between the residence, building or structure and the private water source. No valving system between a private water source and the city's water system shall be allowed. The installation, operation or maintenance of such a connection or valving system shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 26-2) 
Sec. 21-69. - Application for service. 
    Any person desiring water service from the city's water system or who is required to be connected to the city's water system by section 21-68 or under other applicable law shall make application to the director of public works as provided in article II of this chapter, as a part of the utility service application and agreement. 
(Code 1961, § 26-3; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-3, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89; Ord. No. 23-1989, § 26-3, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-70. - Number of taps required. 
(a)  Each single-family residence shall have a separate tap as a minimum. 
(b)  Multiple-family residences shall have at least one (1) separate tap for each building. 
(c)  Property zoned for commercial or industrial use may use a single tap for each lot regardless of the number of buildings, provided that if the lot is subdivided or any building without its own water tap is sold separately, then the owner of the building without a water tap must apply for a separate tap and pay the plant investment fee. 
(Code 1961, § 26-5) 
Sec. 21-71. - Superintendent to supervise connections, disconnections. 
    The water superintendent shall supervise the connection of any water service to or disconnection of any water service from the city's water supply. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to turn on, cause to be turned on or connected, turn off, or cause to be turned off or disconnected any water service from the mains of the city water supply at any service tap or connection. Any person who violates this section may additionally lose any contractor's license issued by the city, through the cancellation of the license by the director of finance or by an order of the municipal court, after a conviction for a violation of this section. 
(Code 1961, § 26-15) 
Secs. 21-72-21-79. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-80. - Water supply emergencies. 
    The city council may, should conditions merit, declare a water emergency. In the event a water emergency is declared by city council, council shall direct staff to prepare a plan to alleviate said emergency, which shall require council approval. Any plan, after approved by council and while in effect, may be amended to meet changing circumstances. Any amendment shall require council approval. Any such emergency plan, or its amendment, as adopted by council, shall remain in effect until council declares an end to the water emergency. Any violation of any of the provisions of an emergency water plan shall be a violation committed pursuant to section 21-63 of the Code, and punishable pursuant to section 1-15 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 8-2003, 4-22-03, eff. 5-2-03) 
Secs. 21-81-21-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 21-91. - Water enterprise fund. 
    An existing water fund shall be designated as a water enterprise fund. Revenues from all rates, charges, fees and the like set forth in this article, and other related appropriate revenues, shall be deposited in the water enterprise fund. The water enterprise fund shall be self-sufficient, and the various charges, rates and fees shall be set by city council resolution to generate funds to offset the cost of operation of the city's water system, the cost of capital improvements to the system that are needed or required, and reserves as determined necessary to cover contingencies and capital improvements of such system. The city council shall make an annual review of the water enterprise fund, taking into account the self-sufficiency purpose of the fund, so that the fund does not run a deficit at any time. 
(Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-16, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Cross reference- Funds, § 19-201 et seq. 
Sec. 21-92. - Payment of charges. 
    All water service charges and other charges set by the city council pursuant to this article shall be considered utility charges. All utility charges established pursuant to this article shall be billed pursuant to the procedure in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1961, § 26-7; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-7, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89; Ord. No. 23-1989, § 26-7, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Cross reference- Finance, § 19-181 et seq. 
Sec. 21-93. - Plant investment fee. 
    Prior to connection to the city's water system, at the time a water tap is applied for, and at the time of each new construction, if an increased demand is placed on the city's system by new building, each property to be connected to the city's water system shall be assessed and the owner shall pay a plant investment fee representing that property's share of the capital expense of providing the pumping facilities and transmission lines of the city. The plant investment fee shall be set by city council resolution and shall be reviewed annually. The city council may adjust the plant investment fee following the review, by resolution. The owner shall also pay all other charges, fees and assessments provided for in this article and by general law relating to water usage at the location of the property for which service is requested. 
(Code 1961, § 26-9; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-9, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 21-94. - Tapping fee. 
    Any person desiring water service from the city shall pay a tapping fee for the installation of a water tap and meter. The fee shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. The city council may make adjustments to the fee following the review, by resolution. 
(Code 1961, § 26-4; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-4, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 21-95. - Rates generally. 
(a)  Every person having an account with the city for water service supplied by the city and received through a metered water tap shall pay for the water at the rate as set by the city council by resolution. The rate shall be reviewed annually and the city council may make adjustments to the rate following review, by resolution. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum monthly charge for each and every metered water tap regardless of the amount of water actually received. This minimum monthly charge shall be set by city council resolution and shall be reviewed annually. The city council may make adjustments to this charge following the review, by resolution. All water charges shall be computed, charged and paid for to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons actually received at the water tap. 
(Code 1961, § 26-6; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-6, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Sec. 21-96. - Charge for restoring water service. 
    A service charge shall be charged for restoring any water service to any property. The service charge shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. Adjustments may be made in the charge following the review, by city council resolution. No service charge will be required when the water is turned off for the convenience of the city or other utility. No service charge shall be charged for initial service. 
(Code 1961, § 26-8; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-8, 9-26-89, eff. 9-26-89; Ord. No. 23-1989, § 26-8, 12-27-89, eff. 1-1-90) 
Sec. 21-97. - Rates for service outside city. 
    The city may, at its sole discretion, extend the use of its water system beyond the corporate limits of the city. In such cases, the rates for such service shall be set by city council resolution and shall be reviewed annually thereafter. The city council may make adjustments to these rates following review, by resolution. 
(Code 1961, § 26-6; Ord. No. 7-1989, § 26-6, 9-26-89, eff. 9-29-89) 
Secs. 21-98-21-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 9-1991, adopted Sep. 24, 1991, with an effective date of Sep. 27, 1991, repealed Art. IV in its entirety. Formerly, Art. IV consisted of Div. 1, §§ 21-116-21-131, Div. 2, §§ 21-151-21-165, Div. 3, §§ 21-181-21-186, and Div. 4, §§ 21-206-21-223, all of which pertained to the sewer system and derived from §§ 23-1-23-64 of the 1961 Code; §§ 23-1, 23-17, 23-23, 23-28, 23-29, 23-34, and 23-62-23-65 of Ord. No. 15-1989, adopted Sep. 26, 1989, with an effective date of Sep. 29, 1989; and §§ 23-6 and 23-23 of Ord. No. 22-1989, adopted Dec. 27, 1989, with an effective date of Jan. 1, 1990. Ord. No. 9-1991 enacted new provisions regarding the sewer system; such provisions are herein set out as §§ 21-116-21-141 and §§ 21-161-21-175. See also §§ 21-201-21-222 herein this chapter. 
Cross reference- Sanitary sewer facility requirements in subdivisions, § 18-105; sewer requirements in trailer parks, § 20-114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-116. - Definitions. 
    In addition to definitions and abbreviations in section 21-202, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called the house connection. 
    City means the City of Sterling. 
    Director means the director of public works for the city, who heads the department of public works under article 8 of the Charter, or his or her designated representative. 
    Domestic sewage means wastewater from residential sources including, but not limited to, wastewater from kitchen, bath, and laundry facilities; or wastewater from the personal sanitary conveniences (toilets, showers, bathtubs, fountains, noncommercial sinks and similar structures) of commercial, industrial or institutional buildings, provided that the wastewater exhibits characteristics that are similar to those of wastewater from normal residential activities and not otherwise regulated by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right held by the city for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Existing platted subdivision means a subdivision, the plat of which has been properly recorded in the real estate records of the clerk and recorder of the county in conformity with the city ordinances and state statutes in effect at the time of filing. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Person is any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, society, corporation, group, government, governmental agency or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The definition includes all federal, state and local government entities. 
    Public sewer means a sanitary sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. This definition shall also include, but not be limited to, the terms public sewer, sewer system, sewer and collection line. 
    Sanitary sewer service means a customer's connection to and use of the city's wastewater facilities for disposal of waste. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer plant investment fee means a pro rata investment in the city's wastewater facilities. 
    Single residential property means a lot, tract or parcel of land which is held in separate ownership from adjoining lots, parcels or tracts and which is designed, zoned and used for residential purposes. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean every pipe, culvert, flume, ditch, gutter, storm sewer, cistern, tank, drain, lake, pond, stream, ravine, gully or other facility or natural feature, that contains, holds, transports, diverts, channels, impounds, or drains water, into which any naturally occurring stormwater runoff within the city may seep, percolate or flow; and every street, sidewalk, alley, gutter, roof, parking lot, yard, field, driveway, patio and other surface within the city across which any naturally occurring stormwater runoff may seep, percolate or flow. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Subdivision means two (2) or more contiguous platted lots or tracts lawfully subdivided pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the city and statutes of the state. 
    Tapping charge means a fee to pay for labor and materials needed to tap into the city's wastewater facilities to serve a customer. 
    User means any person using or connected to the city's POTW. 
    Utility charges means and includes tapping charges, wastewater service charges, permit fees relating to this article, reinstatement of wastewater service fee, restoration of water service fee, debt service assessment, sewer plant investment fee, and such other and further fees that are set pursuant to this article, plus such other costs assessed by the director to recover the actual cost of any occurrence which violates the requirements of this article. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    Wastewater service charge means the regular periodic use charges for use of the city's wastewater facilities. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge and is sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant. The city's wastewater treatment works is a POTW treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-117. - Applicability of article to government-owned lands. 
    In order to obtain sanitary sewer service, any government or governmental agency owning property located within the corporate boundaries of the city or eligible for immediate annexation shall comply with all applicable sections of this article, unless specifically prevented from doing so by state law, in which case the director may modify the requirements to the extent of the state law which is effective. Any private owner or developer who buys or receives land from any government or governmental agency, whether eligible for annexation or not, shall meet the requirements of this article before sanitary sewer service will be initiated or continued on the property. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-118. - Administration of article. 
    The director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The director shall be responsible to see that all of the requirements of this article are met and all things required by this article are done in a timely fashion. In furtherance of these duties, the director is authorized to adopt policy, ordinances or resolutions to implement procedures, reporting requirements and other matters specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-119. - Measurements, tests and sampling methods. 
    All measurements, sampling, testing and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastewaters to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of 40 CFR Part 136. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-120. - Prerequisites for service-Property outside city. 
    Prior to connection to the city's wastewater facilities, each owner of property which is not within the corporate limits of the city shall: 
(a)  Begin and pursue to completion the annexation of the property to the city, if the property is eligible for immediate annexation. 
(b)  If the property is not eligible for immediate annexation: 
(1)  Agree in writing to annex all of the property served with the city's wastewater facilities when the property becomes eligible for annexation and to sign any petition and do all things which the property owner may do or must do under the requirements of the state constitution to effect the annexation. The agreement shall be made a covenant running with the land. 
(2)  Furnish the city, at no cost, the necessary easements and rights-of-way to provide sewer service to the property. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-121. - Same-Public improvement requirements. 
(a)  Prior to receiving sewer service, the owner of a single residential property located outside the city limits and not presently eligible for annexation must comply with the following: 
(1)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district formed to provide sanitary sewer service, facilities, lines or related services in which the property is eligible to be included at such time as the eligibility occurs. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(2)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district formed to provide curb, gutter, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, water service and other public improvements and not to oppose the formation of the districts; and that the installation of the improvements will be provided at no cost to the city, according to city specifications, when the property has been annexed to the city. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(b)  Prior to receiving sanitary sewer service, the owner, subdivider or developer of a subdivision of two (2) or more lots located within the corporate limits of the city or which is eligible for immediate annexation must comply with the following: 
(1)  Install, at no cost to the city, all curbs, gutters, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewers, water lines and taps and other public improvements according to city specifications and in accordance with the requirements of chapter 18, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(2)  Install all sanitary sewer lines and taps per city specifications at no cost to the city, with no repayment provisions. 
If it is not physically possible or practicable, as determined in the sole discretion of the director, to make the installations required at the time of first receiving sanitary sewer service, the owner shall agree in writing to install them as soon as the installation becomes possible. The agreement shall be made a covenant running with the land. 
(c)  Prior to receiving sanitary sewer service, the owners of property located outside the corporate limits of the city and not eligible for immediate annexation, in existing platted subdivisions which are wholly or partially developed and where more than one (1) owner is involved, shall be furnished sanitary sewer service only on a special district or home owners association basis and must comply with the following: 
(1)  Satisfy all county subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Install all of the sanitary sewer lines and taps per city specifications at the district's or association's expense with no repayment provision. 
(3)  Comply with any then-existing requirements of the city for inspections of the work, including paying a qualified city inspector if this condition is required by the director. 
(4)  Agree in writing to include the property in any special improvement district which is formed to provide curb, gutter, paved streets, sidewalks, storm sewer, water service and other public improvements and not to oppose the formation of the districts; and that the installation of the improvements will be provided at no cost to the city, according to city specifications, when the property has been annexed to the city. The agreement is to be made a covenant running with the land. 
(d)  Prior to receiving sanitary sewer service, the owner of property located in a newly developed and platted subdivision wholly owned by one (1) individual, a partnership, joint venture or corporation which is not eligible for immediate annexation shall comply with the requirements of subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section, but will not be required to include the property in a special improvement district formed to provide sanitary sewer service, facilities, lines and other related services. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-122. - Installations on annexed land to become city property. 
    Upon annexation of property by the city, all sanitary sewer installations covered by this article shall become the property of the city without any repayment therefor. No liability or obligation for the maintenance thereof or responsibility therefor by the city shall accrue before that time. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-123. - Toilet facilities and connection with public sewer required for certain properties. 
(a)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within four hundred (400) feet of the lot line. No property shall be rented or occupied until the requirements of this section are met. 
(b)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall, by the acceptance of the connection permit, agree to indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-124. - Private sewer systems. 
    Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of section 21-123, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of C.R.S. Title 25, Article 10, and all subsequent legislation of the state controlling the same or similar subject matter. No property shall be rented or occupied until the requirements of this section are met. Except as provided in this section, no person except the city shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-125. - Construction standards for sanitary sewers. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of all sanitary sewers, including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and of the state. 
(b)  The materials and procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(c)  Where there is conflict between the codes, rules, regulations and specifications described in this section, the more stringent shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-126. - Application for service; connection permit. 
    Any person desiring sanitary sewer service from the wastewater facilities operated by the city shall make application to the director as provided in article II of this chapter as a part of the utility service application and agreement. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, disturb or disconnect any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written sewer service connection permit from the director. Sewer service connection permits will not be required for city personnel acting under the direction of the director. If any person who violates this section has a contractor's license issued by the city, such license may be revoked by the director or by the municipal court, in addition to any other penalty imposed. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-127. - Separate building sewer required for each building. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except as may be approved by the director due to unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-128. - Installation of building sewer. 
(a)  Connection to public sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes of the city and state or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and state, and the procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, whichever is more stringent. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by such testing as may be required by the director. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(b)  Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by means approved by the director and discharged to the building sewer. 
(c)  Excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director, and all of the provisions of chapter 17, article III, regarding street excavation shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-129. - Inspection of building sewer; supervision of connection. 
    The applicant for the sewer service connection permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the director. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-130. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers or drains may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of the ordinances of the city. The director may require the owner, developer, contractor, subcontractor, lessee or other person responsible for using an old building sewer or drain in connection with a new building to provide a statement certified by a professional engineer registered by the state and qualified to determine that the old building sewer or drain meets the requirements of the ordinances of the city, stating that the ordinances are complied with by the old building sewer or drain, if a person of similar qualifications is not employed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-131. - Connection of sources of surface water or groundwater to building sewer. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer, unless such connection is approved or required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed former § 21-132 which pertained to grease, oil and sand interceptions, and derived from Ord. No. 9-1991, adopted Sept. 24, 1991. 
Sec. 21-133. - Discharge of stormwater. 
    All stormwater shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers by the director, or to a natural outlet if approved by the director and the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 21-133 from "Discharge of unpolluted waters" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 21-134. - Deposit of objectionable waste; discharge of pollution to natural outlet. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property any human or animal excrement, garbage, wastewater, sewage, floatable oil, weeds, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater or other waters containing pollution to any natural outlet unless a permit is obtained from the CDPHE, and written approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 21-134 from "Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 21-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed former § 21-135 which pertained to compliance with state requirements, and derived from Ord. No. 9-1991, adopted Sept. 24, 1991. 
Sec. 21-136. - Recovery of costs. 
    The director shall assess and recover the actual cost of any occurrence which violates the requirements of this article, including but not limited to the cost to disconnect or reconnect service, cost of any harm to the wastewater facilities, cleanup, extra treatment, testing and analysis, legal expenses, and the director and his staff's time. Failure to pay any costs assessed pursuant to this section shall be a violation of this Code. Such costs shall be considered utility charges and may be billed pursuant to the procedure in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-137. - Violation of article, generally. 
    A failure to comply with the requirements of any section of this article or with a suspension or revocation order as provided for in this article shall be a violation of this Code punishable as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. The director may obtain the issuance of a summons or complaint for a violation of this article, a temporary restraining order, a preliminary or permanent injunction, or any other remedy available at law or equity. None of these remedies shall be exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-138. - Penalty for falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or in a city permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-139. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed former § 21-139 which pertained to deposit of objectionable waste; discharge of pollution to natural outlet, and derived from Ord. No. 9-1991, adopted Sept. 24, 1991. 
Sec. 21-140. - Damaging or tampering with facilities of wastewater system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-141. - Discharge of wastewater generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any wastewater or any substance regulated by this article or article 5, to: 
(a)  Any natural outlet within the city. 
(b)  Any natural outlet in any area within the jurisdiction of the city or owned by the city. 
(c)  The wastewater collection system and treatment works owned by the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Users discharging domestic wastes who have received a city service connection permit; and 
(2)  Industrial users who are in compliance with the requirements of article V. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Secs. 21-142-21-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 21-161. - Sewer enterprise fund. 
    The funds received from the collection of the charges, assessments or fees authorized by this article shall be deposited, kept, paid out, used and applied only in the manner and form as provided by the laws of the state and by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. For this purpose, a fund known, designated and created as the sewer fund of the city is hereby designated as the sewer enterprise fund of the city, and when appropriated by the city council shall be available for the payment of the cost and expense of the management, maintenance and repair of the wastewater facilities. Any surplus in such fund shall be used for the payment of the city's portion of the cost of constructing, enlarging or replacing the wastewater facilities or part thereof, except that no part thereof shall be used for the extension of such wastewater facilities into unsewered areas; and provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to in any way prevent or prohibit the city council from applying and crediting to such fund moneys derived from taxation or other sources. Any surplus in such fund may also be used for the payment of the interest on sewer bonds issued and outstanding, or to retire such bonds issued and outstanding when they mature. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Cross reference- Funds, § 19-201. 
Sec. 21-162. - Charges to be set by resolution. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this article for the director to set utility charges, all such utility charges shall be recommended by the director to the city council and shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. Adjustments may be made in such utility charges following the review, by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Cross reference- Finance, § 19-181 et seq. 
Sec. 21-163. - Payment of charges. 
    All utility charges established pursuant to this article shall be billed pursuant to article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-164. - Plant investment fee. 
(a)  Prior to connection to the city's wastewater facilities, at the time a sewer tap is applied for, and at the time of each new construction, if an increased demand is placed on the city's wastewater facilities by new building, each property to be connected to the city's wastewater facilities shall be assessed, and the owner shall pay, a plant investment fee representing that property's share of the capital expense of providing the transmission lines and wastewater treatment works of the city. Additional conditions are as follows: 
(1)  For each platted lot or tract which is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, MH or PUD or used for multiple-family residential units, the owner shall pay a fee for each dwelling unit which shall be set by city council resolution and reviewed annually. Adjustments may be made in the charges following the review, by city council resolution. 
(2)  For each platted lot or tract which is zoned for business, commercial or industrial purposes, or which is to be used for other than residential purposes, such as schools, colleges, hospitals, nursing homes and other nonresidential uses, the owner shall pay a fee to be based on the demand and burdens such service will place on the water system, as recommended by the director to the city council, but in no event shall the fee be less than the amount for each platted lot or tract which is zoned R-1. 
(b)  Sewer plant investment fees shall apply as of the time that the service is begun. Prepayment of the fees to avoid an increase at the time that service is begun shall not be allowed. 
(c)  The sewer plant investment fee shall be set by city council resolution and shall be reviewed annually. The city council may adjust the sewer plant investment fee following the review, by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-165. - Tapping fee. 
    Any person desiring to connect to the wastewater facilities operated by the city shall pay a tapping fee for an alley connection or a tapping fee for a street connection, the amounts for which shall be recommended to city council by the director, set by city council resolution, and reviewed annually thereafter. The city council may make adjustments to the fees following the review, by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-166. - Purpose of user charge. 
    The purpose of the user charge is to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater facilities. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater facilities in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the wastewater treatment works. Factors such as strength (five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or BOD 5 , and suspended solids), volume and delivery flow rate characteristics, and overload of other components shall be considered and included as the basis for the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user or user class. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-167. - Determination of total annual cost of operation and maintenance. 
    The director shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the wastewater facilities which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the wastewater treatment works, for which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-168. - Determination of wastewater contribution of individual users. 
(a)  The director shall determine each user's average daily volume of wastewater which has been discharged to the wastewater facilities, which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharged to the wastewater facilities to determine each user's volume contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow. 
(b)  The director shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five-day, twenty-degree centigrade BOD 5 which has been discharged to the wastewater facilities, which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all five-day BOD 5 discharged to the wastewater facilities to determine each user's BOD 5 contribution percentage. 
(c)  The director shall determine each user's average daily suspended solids poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater facilities, which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids discharged to the wastewater facilities to determine each user's suspended solids contribution percentage. 
(d)  Each user's volume contribution percentage, BOD 5 contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow, of the total five-day, twenty-degree centigrade BOD 5 and of the total suspended solids, respectively, to determine the proper charges to each user. 
(e)  In determining the amounts described in this section, the director may use averages for each user class. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-169. - Surcharge for users with excess BOD and SS. 
    Normal domestic strength wastewater is considered to be two hundred (200) mg/L BOD 5 and two hundred fifty (250) mg/L suspended solids. The director will assess a surcharge for nonresidential users that discharge wastewater with significant loadings of BOD 5 and suspended solids that are greater than the stated normal domestic strength wastewater to cover the actual costs of treating such user's above-normal-strength wastes. The surcharge rate structure shall be kept by the director and the city's finance office and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 21-169 from "Surcharge for users with excess BOD and SS" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 21-170. - Determination of wastewater service charge. 
    Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contributions as determined in sections 21-168 and 21-169 shall be added together to determine such user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users are considered to be one (1) class of user and an equitable service charge will be determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user. For purposes of the service charge, the director may treat non-domestic users as residential users, provided that the wastewater discharged is at or below the normal domestic strength wastewater specified in section 21-169. Each user's wastewater treatment cost contribution will be assessed in accordance with the rate schedule, to be determined according to actual costs, which shall be kept by the director and shall be available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-171. - Review of wastewater service charges. 
    The director shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, as well as each user's or sector's wastewater contribution percentage, not less often than every two (2) years, and shall revise the system as necessary to ensure equity of the service charge system established in this division and to ensure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works. If an industrial user has completed in-plant modification which would change that user's wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present to the director such factual information, and the director shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The director shall notify the user of the findings as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-172. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed former § 21-172 which pertained to debt service assessment, and derived from Ord. No. 9-1991, adopted Sept. 24, 1991. 
Sec. 21-173. - Notification to user of billing rate and total charge. 
    Each user shall be notified by the director of finance, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate at which the user is being billed for wastewater treatment services and of the portion of the monthly bill for city services which are attributable to wastewater treatment. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-174. - Fees for restoring of water and wastewater service. 
    A fee will be charged for reinstatement of wastewater service if it is terminated pursuant to article II of this chapter. A fee will be charged for restoration of water service if it is severed pursuant to article II of this chapter. The amount of the fees for both of these charges shall be reviewed by the director, set by city council resolution, and reviewed annually thereafter. The city council may make adjustments to the fees following the review, by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91) 
Sec. 21-175. - Charges for service outside city. 
    The city may, in its sole discretion, extend the use of its wastewater facilities beyond the corporate limits of the city, and in such cases the rates and charges for service shall be proposed by the director to the city council, who by resolution may make adjustments to such rates and charges, and set such rates and charges, by resolution, following review. The city council shall review the rates and charges annually and make adjustments to the rates and charges, following review, by resolution. If the user is a significant industrial user as defined in section 21-202 or an industrial user that the city determines needs additional specific controls, the city may enter into a contract with the industrial user that requires the user to comply with articles IV and V of this chapter, including compliance with all permitting, inspection, treatment and enforcement provisions specified in article V. 
(Ord. No. 9-1991, 9-24-91, eff. 9-27-91; Ord. No. 9-2014, 10-14-14) 
Secs. 21-176-21-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-2014, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed former Art. V in its entirety, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 21-201-21-222 pertained to sewer system pretreatment program and derived from Ord. No. 2-1995, adopted March 28, 1995; Ord. No. 31-1995, adopted Nov. 28, 1995; Ord. No. 19-2002, adopted May 28, 2002; Ord. No. 18-2006, adopted Aug. 8, 2006. 

Sec. 21-201. - Applicability, objectives and responsibility of the city. 
(a)  Applicability. This article sets forth uniform requirements for all industrial users that discharge directly or indirectly into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and enables the city to comply with all applicable state laws and federal laws under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (40 CFR Part 403). 
(b)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the wastewater facilities, inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To provide for and promote the general health, safety and welfare of both the general public and the POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment; 
(4)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and 
(6)  Enable the city to comply with its Colorado Pollutant Discharge System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws or regulations to which the POTW is subject. 
(c)  Non-domestic industrial users. No industrial user shall discharge non-domestic wastewater to the POTW unless done so in compliance with the provisions of article IV and article V. 
(d)  Owner/tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to a person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Authority of director. Except as otherwise provided, the director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel. 
(f)  Notification to industrial users. The director shall attempt to notify in writing any industrial user whom the city has reason to believe is subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or other applicable requirements promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of Section 204(b) or 405 of the Act, or under the provisions of sections 3001, 3004, or 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act. Failure of the city to so notify industrial users shall not relieve said industrial users from the responsibility of complying with applicable requirements. It is the responsibility of significant industrial users to apply for and receive a permit prior to discharge, whether or not the industrial user has been identified and formally requested to do so. 
(g)  Discharge by industrial users. If wastewaters containing any pollutant, including excess flow, or as otherwise defined in this article, are discharged, have the potential to discharge in the opinion of the director or proposed to be discharged to the POTW, the director may take any action necessary to: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; 
(2)  Require an industrial user to demonstrate that in-plant facility modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this article; 
(3)  Require treatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the potential for a discharge to violate this article; 
(4)  Require the industrial user making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the city for handling, treating, disposing or remediation costs as a result of wastes discharged to the wastewater treatment system; 
(5)  Require the industrial user to apply for and obtain a permit, including a zero discharge permit; 
(6)  Require timely and factual reports from the industrial user; or 
(7)  Take such other action as may be necessary to meet the objectives of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-202. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Definitions. In addition to definitions in section 21-116, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the regional administrator of EPA Region 8 or, upon authorization of the pretreatment program to the State of Colorado, the director of the Water Quality Control Division of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Authorized representative or duly authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: A district or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (i) through (iii), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is made in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or a position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the general and specific prohibitions listed in section 21-203 of this article. BMPs may also include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. BMPs shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of this article and Section 307(d) of the Act as specified at 40 CFR Section 403.5(c)(4). 
    Biochemical oxygen demand - five-day (BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees) Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
    Categorical industrial user means an industrial user who is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard refers to any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) as amended, which apply to a specific category of industrial users and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    City means the City of Sterling. 
    Colorado Pollutant Discharge System (CPDS). The State of Colorado program for issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into waters of the state implemented by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act. 
    Composite sample is a representative flow-proportioned sample generally collected within a twenty-four-hour period and combined according to flow. Time-proportional sampling may be approved or used by the city where time-proportional samples are believed representative of the discharge. 
    Cooling water means: 
(1)  Contact. Water used for cooling purposes which comes in contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
(2)  Noncontact. Water used for cooling purposes which does not comes in contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product and the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum discharge limit is the maximum allowable concentration of a pollutant(s) that may be discharged during a twenty-four-hour period or as specified in a wastewater discharge permit. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the discharge is the total mass discharged over the sampling period. 
    Director means the director of public works of the city. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Fats, oil and grease (FOG) means non-petroleum organic polar compounds derived from animal or plant sources such as fats, non-hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, and oils that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Grease interceptor is an in-ground tank containing at least one (1) baffle in which solids, greases and oils are separated from wastewater, located outside the industrial user's building and made accessible by at least two (2) manhole covers. 
    Grease trap is a small device hooked directly to the outgoing drains of sinks located inside a commercial food preparation facility that allows for the separation of fats, oils and grease of a non-petroleum nature from wastewater prior to being discharged into the POTW. 
    Hazardous waste is any waste designated as hazardous under the provisions of 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Holding tank waste refers to any wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, sealed vaults, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), including holding tank waste from a non-domestic user discharged into the POTW. 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge, a user that has the potential to discharge non-domestic wastewater to the POTW or an industrial user that has a sewer connection for domestic wastewater discharge only. 
    Instantaneous discharge limit means the maximum or minimum concentration or measurement for a pollutant or pollutant property allowed to be discharged at any time for any length of time and is determined by use of a grab sample or a direct measurement. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the city's CDPS permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limits are any regulation containing pollution discharge limits promulgated by the city in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.5(c) and (d), which are deemed to be pretreatment standards and contained in subsection 21-203(c) of this article. 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's CPDS permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    pH means the intensity of acid or base condition of the solution expressed as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution and reported as standard units (SU). 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, explosives, munitions, medical waste, chemical wastes, corrosive substance, biological material, biological nutrient, toxic substance, radioactive materials, heat, malodorous substance, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, slurry, cellar dirt, untreatable waste, or industrial, domestic, or agricultural wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS turbidity, color, BOD 5 , COD, toxicity or odor) discharged into or with water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical process, biological process, or by other process or means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(e). 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standard, National Pretreatment Standard or standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits, local limits and best management practices that are established by the city. In cases of differing standards, the more stringent shall apply. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) is a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any sewers, pipes or other conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant. The term also means the municipality having jurisdiction over the industrial user discharges to and the discharges from the treatment works. 
    Sand/oil separator is a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept sand (or other aggregate) and petroleum-based oil and grease from a wastewater discharge and are designed considering retention times, volumes in gallons calculated for each facility, and gravity separation; such interceptors include baffle(s) and a minimum of two (2) compartments. See section 21-216 of this article. 
    Sector control program is a program designed to control specific pollutants from industrial users with similar operations, waste generation or treatment through the implementation of pretreatment standards and requirements, including best management practices. These sector control program requirements may be found at section 21-216 of this article. 
    Shall and will are mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means: 
(1)  A categorical industrial user; 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges greater than five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; 
b.  Discharges more than an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding noncontact cooling, sanitary, and boiler blow down); or 
c.  Is designated as such by the director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The city, at its sole discretion, may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per day of total wastewater subject to categorical pretreatment standards (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met; 
a.  The industrial user, prior to the city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement as found in 40 CFR 403.12(g), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon finding by the director that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, the director may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the specific prohibitions in section 21-203. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, or a discharge which exceeds the hydraulic or design of an industrial user's treatment system or any part of the treatment unit including a discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through or in any other way violate an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement or a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
    Total suspended solids means the solids that float on the surface of, or are suspended in the water, sewage, or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures approved in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under Section 307(a) of the Act or as otherwise listed in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix D. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any infiltrating groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged to or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means and shall refer to a permit issued by the city to an industrial user that allows, limits and/or prohibits the discharge or pollutants to flow to the POTW as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP Best management practice BOD 5 Biochemical oxygen demand ºC degrees Celsius CDPHE Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment CDPS Colorado Discharge Permit System CFR Code of Federal Regulations CWA Clean Water Act EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency FOG Fats, oils and grease mg/L milligrams per liter O&M Operation and maintenance POTW Publicly owned treatment works SIC Standard industrial classification SIU Significant industrial user SNC Significant noncompliance § Section TSS Total suspended solids U.S.C. United States Code  
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14; Ord. No. 2-2016, 3-8-16, eff. 3-18-16) 
Sec. 21-203. - Wastewater discharge prohibitions and limitations. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No industrial user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in paragraph (b) apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not the industrial users are subject to other pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No industrial user shall contribute the following pollutants into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater facilities, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than sixty (60) degrees Celsius or one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Section 261.21. The director may require industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable, combustible or explosive substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter or explosion hazard meter. No two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge shall be more than five (5) percent, nor any one (1) reading more than ten (10) percent, of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, grease; garbage with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension; animal guts or tissues; paunch manure; bones; hair; hides or meshings; entrails; whole blood; feathers; ashes; cinders; sand; spent lime; stone or marble dust; metal; glass; straw; shavings; grass clippings; rags; spent grains; spent hops; wastepaper; wood; plastics; gas; tar, asphalt residues; residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil; waxes, mud; or glass grinding or polishing wastes, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or produces of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 12.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater facilities. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds forty (40) degrees Celsius or one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit unless the EPA, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits; 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems or pollutants which singly or cumulatively or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent or interfere with entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director; 
(9)  Stormwater drainage from ground resulting in infiltration and inflow (I&I) through the industrial user's service line(s) or surface, roof drains, catch basins, unroofed area drains (e.g. commercial car washing facilities) or any other source unless otherwise approved by the director. Specifically prohibited is the connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the POTW. No industrial user shall connect or discharge water from underground drains, sump pump discharges, natural springs and seeps, water accumulated in excavation or grading or any other water associated with construction activities to the POTW. 
(10)  Any substance which may cause the wastewater facilities' effluent, or any other product of the wastewater facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(11)  Any substance which will cause the city to violate its CDPS permit or the water quality standards for segment one (1) of the South Platte River or applicable groundwater standards. 
(12)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(13)  A slug discharge as defined in section 21-202. 
(14)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director or other regulations set forth by the State of Colorado or that violates any applicable state or federal regulations. 
(15)  Bulk, expired, outdated or concentrated prescription or nonprescription drugs. 
(16)  Wastewater or pollutants discharged directly into a manhole or other opening to the POTW unless specifically authorized by the director or as otherwise permitted under this article. Prohibited is the opening of a manhole or discharging into any opening in violation of this article. 
(17)  No chemicals, materials, or substances, including but not limited to, paints, solvents, boiler or water treatment chemicals, sludges, chemicals, or wastes shall be stored in proximity to a floor drain or other sewer openings. Containers shall be clearly labeled and stored in a place where the chemicals, materials, substances or wastes, in case of leakage or rupture of the container, cannot enter the wastewater collection system. The storage of any chemicals, materials, substances or wastes that leak or have potential to leak or discharge into the wastewater collection system which may create an explosion hazard or in any way have a deleterious effect to the POTW or constitute a nuisance or a hazard to POTW personnel, the general public, the environment, or the receiving stream shall be prohibited. 
(18)  Wastewater contaminated as a result of discharge from aboveground and/or underground gasoline, diesel fuels, fuel oil, kerosene, and jet fuel tanks, tank accessories, and/or pipelines without applying for and obtaining a permit prior to discharge. 
(19)  Liquid wastes from chemical toilets, and trailers, campers or other recreational vehicles which have been collected and/or held in tanks or other containers shall not be discharged into the POTW except at locations authorized by the city to collect such wastes. 
(20)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(21)  Medical wastes that cause or contribute to pass through or interference. 
(22)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(23)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or cause or contribute to pass through or interference. 
(24)  Discharge of Nonylphenol from the use of bulk or concentrated Nonylphenol containing detergents as employed by some industrial or commercial laundries, car washes or asphalt manufacturers or other industrial users. 
(25)  Wastewater which contains grease or oil or any other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit (0° Celsius) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65.5° Celsius). 
(26)  Wastewater containing free or floating oil and grease, or any discharge containing animal fat or grease by-product in excess of two hundred (200) milligrams per liter except where a food service establishment has installed and is properly operating and maintaining a grease interceptor and implementing all required BMPs. 
(27)  Wastewater generated as a result of wastes pumped from grease interceptors, grease traps, sand-oil separators or other treatment units back into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, without approval of the director. 
(28)  Discharge of any wastewater containing perchloroethylene (PCE) (also known as Tetrachloroethene and Tetrachloroethylene) from any industrial user involved in the dry cleaning business. 
(c)  Specific discharge limitations. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater that exceeds the following limits: 
Pollutant(a) Daily Maximum Discharge Limit (mg/L) Arsenic 0.031 Cadmium 0.03 Chromium 4.08 Copper 0.38 Lead 0.17 Mercury 0.0011 Molybdenum 0.06 Nickel 0.50 Selenium 0.12 Silver 0.32 Zinc 2.17 BOD 5 , lbs/day(b) 10,119 TSS, lbs/day(b) 7,119 Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 0.27 Chloride(c) 466 Total dissolved solids (TDS)(d) 400  
a.  All pollutants as total and in mg/L unless otherwise specified. 
b.  These limits are the total mass in pounds per day (lbs/day) that are available to allocate to all permitted industrial users. Allocations are at the sole discretion of the city. 
c.  If a significant industrial user (SIU) exceeds 466 mg/L Chloride, the SIU shall be required to sample and identify source(s) of Chloride in its wastestream. 
d.  If a significant industrial user (SIU) exceeds 400 mg/L TDS, the SIU shall be required to sample and identify source(s) of TDS in its wastestream. 
(2)  The city may, at its sole discretion, implement local limits through allocation of the maximum allowable industrial load (MAIL) to significant industrial users and correspond to the uniform concentration local limits shown in the table above. The MAILs that correspond to the daily maximum discharge limits are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(3)  The following limits shall apply to wastewaters that are discharged from the groundwater cleanup of petroleum or gasoline underground storage tanks or other remediation wastewaters containing these pollutants or where these pollutants are appropriate surrogates. It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge or cause to be discharged any waste or wastewater that exceeds the following limits, as applicable. 
Pollutant(c) Daily Maximum Limit (mg/L) Benzene(a) 0.050 BTEX(b) 0.750  
a.  All pollutants shown in the table are total. 
b.  BTEX shall be measured as the sum of Benzene, Ethylbenzene, Toluene and Xylenes. 
c.  These limits are based upon installation of air stripping technology as described in the EPA document: "Model NPDES Permit for Discharges Resulting from the Cleanup of Gasoline Released from Underground Storage Tanks, June 1989." 
(d)  The director may establish more stringent pollutant limits, additional site-specific pollutant limits, best management practices, or additional pretreatment requirements when, in the judgment of the director, such limitations are necessary to implement the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for treatment and shall be a violation of this article. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(f)  State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal pretreatment standards and requirements or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-204. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the categorical standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall supersede the limitations imposed by this article in the timeframe specified in the categorical standard. All affected industrial users shall report to the city as required by section 21-215 and 40 CFR Section 403.12. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N are hereby incorporated by reference. Limitations shall be applied in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6. 
(b)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(c)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(d)  An industrial user may seek a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.13. 
(e)  A categorical industrial user may seek a net-gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-205. - Pretreatment and monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Treatment required. An industrial user shall provide necessary wastewater treatment at the industrial user's expense as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards and requirements within the time limitations specified by the EPA or the city, whichever is more stringent. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review and shall be acceptable before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  [Operation and maintenance.] The industrial user shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the industrial user. This provision requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar systems which are installed by an industrial user when the operation is necessary to achieve or assure compliance with conditions of the permit. 
(c)  Monitoring facilities. The city may require an industrial user to install at the industrial user's expense, suitable monitoring facilities or equipment that allows for the representative sampling and accurate observation of wastewater discharges. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Monitoring equipment and structures shall be maintained in proper working order, calibrated as required by manufacturer's recommendations and kept safe and accessible at all times to city personnel. The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the industrial user's premises outside of the building unless otherwise approved by the city. When such a location would be impractical, the city may allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or easement area, with the approval of the agency having jurisdiction over such street or easement, and located so that it will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles. No industrial user shall cover any manhole, sewer cleanout, or other openings in the wastewater collection system with earth, paving, or otherwise render it inaccessible. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge control. The city may require an industrial user to restrict discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specified sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and demonstrate the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(e)  Flow equalization. The city may require any industrial user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(f)  Multitenant buildings. When more than one (1) industrial user is able to discharge into a common service line, the city may require installation of separate monitoring equipment or structures for each industrial user. 
(g)  Flow, pH, LEL and other meters and equipment. If the city determines that an industrial user needs to measure and report wastewater flow, discharge process wastewaters necessitating continuous pH measurement or discharge wastewater that may contain flammable substances or other pollutants or pollutant properties of concern, the city may require the industrial user install and maintain, at the industrial user's expense, approved meters and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-206. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Permits required. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to, or discharge into, any part of the wastewater system shall apply for and obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit prior to commencing discharge to the POTW. A separate permit may be required for each industrial user, building or complex of buildings. Such significant industrial users shall immediately contact the city and obtain a wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  New industrial users: Applying for a wastewater discharge permit. Any industrial user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must apply for and obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. The industrial user shall file a permit application on forms provided by the city containing the information specified in subsection (f) below. The completed application for the wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. The city may issue a permit at any time after receipt of the completed permit application. 
(c)  Existing industrial users: Applying for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance. An industrial user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a new permit by submitting a complete permit application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing discharge permit. The industrial user shall file a permit application on forms provided by the city containing the information specified in subsection (f) below. An industrial user with an existing permit that has filed a complete and timely application may continue to discharge, as approved in writing by the city, through an administrative extension of the existing permit if the delay in permit issuance is not due to any act or failure to act on the industrial user's part. 
(d)  Other industrial users. The city may require other industrial users to apply for and obtain wastewater discharge permits or similar control mechanisms necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. The city may issue a wastewater discharge permit or zero discharge permit to prohibit the discharge of some or all non-domestic process wastewater from an industrial user. 
(e)  Enforceability. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit, failure to apply for a permit as required, or discharging without a required permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the industrial user to enforcement by the city. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all state and federal pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(f)  Permit application contents. In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name of business, address of the facility, location of the discharge if different from the facility address, and contact information for the owner, operator and the authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. 
a.  A brief description of the nature, average and maximum rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production); 
b.  The standard industrial classification(s) of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user; 
c.  A schematic process diagram, which indicates all process tanks, process lines, treatment systems, drains, and points of discharge to the POTW from each regulated process and source of non-domestic wastewater; 
d.  A listing of all non-domestic process streams and the type(s) of wastes generated from each process; 
e.  A list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility; 
f.  Number of employees; and 
g.  Hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharges including the date the industrial user first began discharge or plans to discharge to the POTW. 
(5)  The location for sampling the wastewater discharges from the industrial user. 
(6)  Flow measurement. Information showing the average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR Section 403.6(e). For new sources and new permittees not currently discharging, an estimate of flows may be used for meeting the requirements of the baseline monitoring report required in subsection 21-215(b). 
(7)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process where required by the standard or by the city; 
c.  Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported; 
d.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be collected in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-213. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standard to determine compliance with the standard; and 
e.  Analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-213. 
(8)  A list of hazardous waste(s) generated and a description of the storage area and procedures for handling and disposal of the wastes. 
(9)  Slug discharge control plan for significant industrial users as described in subsection 21-215(e) shall be submitted and as required by the director for other industrial users. 
(10)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance (O&M) will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g. Hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). No such increment shall exceed nine (9) months. 
b.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(11)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(12)  Signatory certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and certification statements must be signed by the authorized representative of the industrial user and contain the applicable certification statement(s) in subsection 21-215(h). 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than five (5) years at the city's discretion or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(2)  Where the city is issuing a permit containing a permit specific pretreatment standard or requirement not otherwise contained in this article, the pretreatment standard or requirement shall be noticed for public comment for thirty (30) days in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice or processed through the city council approval process. 
(3)  The city shall issue a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant if the city finds that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The applicant has provided a timely and complete permit application to the city; 
b.  The proposed discharge by the applicant is in compliance with the pretreatment standards and requirements established in this article; 
c.  The proposed operation and discharge of the applicant would permit the normal and efficient operation of the POTW; and 
d.  The proposed discharge by the applicant would not result in a violation by the city of the terms and conditions of its CDPS permit or cause pass through or interference. 
(4)  If the city finds that the condition set out in subsection (3)b. of this section is not met, the city may, at their discretion, issue a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant if the conditions set out in subsections (3)a., (3)c. and (3)d. of this section have been met and if the applicant submits, and the city approves, a compliance schedule setting out the measures to be taken by the applicant and the dates that such measures will be implemented to insure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. At no time shall a discharge be allowed to cause a violation of any general or specific prohibition established in section 21-203 nor shall the final compliance date for a categorical pretreatment standard be extended. 
(5)  Any industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of the permit issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. If the city does not act on such appeal within sixty (60) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Thirteenth Judicial District Court of the State of Colorado. 
(h)  Denial by city to issue a wastewater discharge permit. 
(1)  In the event the city denies an industrial user's request for a permit to discharge, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial. Such notification shall state the grounds for such denial with that degree of specificity which will inform the applicant of the measures or actions which must be taken by the applicant prior to issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Upon receipt of notification of denial of permit issuance, the applicant may request and shall be granted a hearing to be held by the city manager, provided the request is submitted in writing to the city manager within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the director's original notification. At such hearing the applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the conditions set out in paragraph (g) of this section have been met and that a permit should be issued. The city manager may conduct the hearing or may designate a representative to: 
a.  Issue, in the name of the city manager, subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved; 
b.  Take evidence; 
c.  Transmit a report of the hearing, including transcripts and other evidence presented to the city manager, together with recommendations for action. 
(3)  Testimony taken at any hearing shall be under oath and recorded. 
(4)  Upon review of the evidence by the city manager, the city manager shall make written findings of facts. Thereupon, the city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit, or may direct that such permit shall not be issued, or give such other or further orders and directives as necessary and appropriate. 
(i)  Transferability. A wastewater discharge permit is issued to a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the prior written approval of the city. Any succeeding owner shall comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit until a new permit is issued. The permittee shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days prior to any change of ownership. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer and discharge of wastewater prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-207. - Wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. 
(a)  Permits shall contain the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the permit's issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(2)  A statement on permit transferability; 
(3)  Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, effluent limits, including best management practices, based upon applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements including, but not limited to, identification of the pollutants or BMPs to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, based on federal, state and local law; 
(5)  Statements of applicable administrative, civil and criminal penalties for the violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, the permit, this article, and any applicable compliance schedule; 
(6)  Requirements to control and report any slug discharges and notify the city immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a spill or slug discharge and to notify the POTW immediately in the event of a slug discharge, spill or accidental discharge to the POTW; 
(b)  Permits may also include, as appropriate: 
(1)  Applicable schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged into a public sewer; 
(2)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow; 
(3)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(4)  Best management practices (BMPs) to control specific pollutants as necessary to meet the objectives of this article; 
(5)  Compliance schedules; 
(6)  Requirements to reapply for a new permit prior to expiration of the existing permit; 
(7)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(8)  Closure requirements for permitted facilities undergoing partial or complete closure activities to ensure closure activities are completed and wastes have been properly disposed and remaining access to sanitary and storm sewers are protected; 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with all applicable local, state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-208. - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
    The notification of a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements or to reflect changes in applicable state or federal standards; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(i)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not result in a violation of any applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-209. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
    A violation of the conditions of a permit or of this article or of applicable state or federal regulations shall be reason for revocation of such permit by the city. Upon revocation of the permit, any wastewater discharge from the affected industrial user shall be considered prohibited and discharge of such wastewater in violation of this article. Grounds for revocation of a permit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Failure of an industrial user to accurately disclose or report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of any discharge; 
(b)  Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics as required; 
(c)  Refusal of access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(d)  Falsification of records, reports or monitoring results; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(g)  Failure to pay fines or penalties; 
(h)  Failure to pay sewer charges, surcharges, or pretreatment programs fees; 
(i)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(j)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility. 
(k)  Failure to provide required reports, including but not limited to, a wastewater survey, baseline monitoring report, ninety-day compliance report, permit application, self-monitoring report or other permit required reports or notifications within the timeframe required by the city; or 
(l)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-210. - Special agreements and contracts. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting special written agreements between the city and any industrial user allowing industrial waste or wastewater of unusual strength or character to be discharged to the POTW, provided said industrial user compensates the city for any additional costs of treatment. Such agreement, however, shall not allow or cause: 
(a)  Any adverse effect to the POTW; 
(b)  A violation of the POTW CPDS permit; 
(c)  A violation of a general or specific prohibition; 
(d)  A maximum allowable industrial load (MAIL) to be exceeded; 
(e)  A violation of state or federal law or regulation; or 
(f)  Provide any waiver to applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-211. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  All industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records, reports, monitoring or other data, applications, permits and all other information and documentation required by this article including documentation associated with best management practices. 
(b)  Industrial users shall retain such records and shall keep such records available for inspection for at least three (3) years. This recordkeeping period shall be extended automatically for the duration of any litigation concerning the industrial user's compliance with any provision of this article, or when the industrial user has been specifically and expressly notified of a longer records retention period by the director. 
(c)  Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report by the city shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-212. - Confidentiality information. 
(a)  All records, reports, data or other information supplied by any person or industrial user as a result of any disclosure required by this article or information and data from inspections shall be available for public inspection except as otherwise provided in this section, 40 CFR Section 403.14 and the Colorado Open Records Act (C.R.S. 24-72-201 et seq.). 
(b)  These provisions shall not be applicable to any information designated as a trade secret by the person supplying such information. Materials designated as a trade secret may include, but shall not be limited to, processes, operations, style of work or apparatus or confidential commercial or statistical data. Any information and data submitted by the industrial user which is desired to be considered a trade secret shall have the words, "Confidential Business Information," stamped on each page containing such information. The industrial user must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
(c)  Information designated as a trade secret pursuant to this section shall remain confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. Such information shall be available only to officers, employees or authorized representatives of the city charged with implementing and enforcing the provisions of this article and properly identified representatives of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(d)  Effluent data from any industrial user whether obtained by self-monitoring, monitoring by the city or monitoring by any state or federal agency, shall not be considered a trade secret or otherwise confidential. All such effluent data shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-213. - Sample collection and analytical methods. 
(a)  Sample collection. Compliance determinations with respect to prohibitions and limitations in this article may be made on the basis of either grab or composite samples of wastewater as specified by the city. Such samples shall be taken at a point or points which the city determines to be suitable for obtaining a representative sample of the discharge. Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four-hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined by the city to meet specific circumstances. 
(b)  Sample type. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, and based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subparagraphs (2) and (3) below, the industrial user must collect representative wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is required by the city. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the permitted discharge. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composited samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous local limits, including pH. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required in subsections 21-215(b) and (c), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical representative sampling data do not exist. Where historical data are available, the city may authorize a lower minimum. The industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(c)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analysis, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of an wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other analyses required under this article shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties approved by the EPA. 
(d)  Records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; 
(2)  The date(s) and time analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name of the person performing the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used, including method detection limits and QA/QC sample results; 
(5)  All chain-of-custody records; and 
(6)  The results of such analyses. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-214. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of this article, the city may enter upon any industrial user's facility, property, or premises subject to this article for the purposes of: 
(1)  Performing all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by industrial users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by an industrial user. Compliance monitoring and inspection shall be conducted at a frequency as determined by the city and may be announced or unannounced; 
(2)  Examining and copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of this article or of any other local, state or federal regulation; 
(3)  The city may use a camera to photograph any areas of the facility as deemed necessary for carrying out the duties of the industrial pretreatment program including, but not limited to, documentation of the industrial user's compliance status and for reinforcement of required written reports. The industrial user shall be allowed to review copies of photographs for confidentiality claims; 
(4)  Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method, pretreatment system equipment and/or operation; 
(5)  Sampling any discharge of wastewater into POTW; and/or 
(6)  Inspecting any production, manufacturing, fabricating or storage area where pollutants, regulated under this article, could originate, be stored, or be discharged to the POTW. 
(b)  The occupant of such property or premises shall render all proper assistance in such activities. Where an industrial user has security measures in place which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that authorized representatives of the city will be permitted to enter without delay to perform their specified functions. 
(c)  The director and other duly authorized agents and employees of the city are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city or any connecting jurisdiction holds an easement. 
(d)  Failure to allow entry or unreasonable delays: In the event the city or other duly authorized representative of the city is refused admission or unreasonably delayed is a violation and may result in enforcement action as allowed for under this article including revocation of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(f)  Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Sterling Municipal Court or another court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  The director, or any employee of the city responsible for the implementation and enforcement of this article, while acting for the city, shall not be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages accruing to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties required under this article. The director or any employee of the city shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceedings that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this article, and the director or any employee of the city acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-215. - Reporting and notification requirements. 
(a)  Periodic compliance reports-All significant industrial users. 
(1)  Any significant industrial user or other industrial user required by the city, subject to a federal, state, or city pretreatment standard or requirement must submit reports, at a frequency determined by the city but no less than once per six (6) months, indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practices (BMPs) or pollution prevention alternatives, the industrial user must submit documentation required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine compliance status of the industrial user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (h). 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that the sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If an industrial user monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the city, using the methods and procedures prescribed in section 21-213, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(4)  The sampling and analyses required for the reporting outlined above may be performed by the city in lieu of the permittee. Where the city itself makes arrangements with the industrial user to collect all the information required for the report, the industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(b)  Baseline monitoring reports (BMR)-Categorical industrial users. 
(1)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR Section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged from regulated process streams and other non-process streams. 
(2)  Industrial users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  All information required in subsection 21-206(f). 
b.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The industrial user shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
2.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the industrial user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 Section CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city. 
3.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with section 21-213. 
4.  The city may allow the submission of a BMR which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
5.  The BMR shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
6.  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed in accordance with subsection (h) and signed by an authorized representative as defined in subsection 21-202(a). 
(c)  Ninety-day compliance reports-Categorical industrial users. 
(1)  New sources: All new sources subject to existing categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the city within ninety (90) days from the date of first discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and continuing compliance with those standards. 
(2)  Existing sources: All existing sources required to comply with newly promulgated categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the city within ninety (90) days of the date on which compliance is required with those standards demonstrating that actual and continuing compliance with such standards has been achieved. 
(3)  Such ninety-day compliance report shall contain at a minimum the information required in subsection 21-206(f) subsections (6), (7), (10), (11), (12) and (13). 
(d)  Twenty-four-hour notice and thirty-day re-sampling. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of this article, the industrial user shall notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the following occurs: 
(1)  The city performs sampling at the industrial user's facility at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  The city performs sampling at the industrial user's facility between the time when the industrial user performs its initial sampling and the time when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. It is the sole responsibility of the industrial user to verify if the city has performed this sampling. 
(e)  Slug and spill discharges-Notification and plan development. 
(1)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from spills and slug discharges of pollutants regulated under this article. Facilities to prevent the discharge of spills or slug discharges shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. 
(2)  Each permitted industrial user shall report all spills to the city that occurs within the boundaries of the user's facility whether or not the spill results in a discharge to the POTW. 
(3)  The city shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a slug/spill discharge control plan or other action to control spills and slug discharges. The city may require an industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a slug/spill discharge control plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control spills and slug discharges. 
(4)  A slug/spill discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Detailed plans (schematics) showing facility layout and plumbing representative of operating procedures; 
b.  Description of contents and volumes of any process tanks; 
c.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
d.  Listing of stored chemicals, including location and volumes; 
e.  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any spill or slug discharge. It is the responsibility of the industrial user to comply with the reporting requirements in subsection (f); 
f.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; and 
g.  Any other information as required by the city. 
(5)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who work in any area where an accidental or slug discharge may occur or originate are advised of the emergency notification procedures. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems-Slug discharges. 
(1)  In the case of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge as defined in subsection 21-202(a), the industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include: 
a.  Name of the facility. 
b.  Location of the facility. 
c.  Name of the caller. 
d.  Date and time of discharge. 
e.  Date and time discharge was halted. 
f.  Location of the discharge. 
g.  Estimated volume of discharge. 
h.  Estimated concentration of pollutants in discharge. 
i.  Corrective actions taken to halt the discharge. 
j.  Method of disposal if applicable. 
(2)  Within five (5) working days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report that includes all of the information contained in [subsection] (f)(1)a.-j. above and any other information describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(g)  Reports for non-significant industrial users. If the city deems it necessary to assure compliance with provisions of this article, any industrial user of the POTW may be required to submit a wastewater discharge permit application, questionnaire or other reports and notifications in a format and timeframe as specified by the city. 
(h)  Signatory certification. All reports and other submittals required to be submitted to the city shall include the following statement and signatory requirements. 
(1)  The authorized representative of the industrial user signing any application, questionnaire, any report or other information required to be submitted to the city must sign and attach the following certification statement with each such report or information submitted to the city. 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or the persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  If the authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section and meeting the definition in subsection 21-202(a) must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(i)  Compliance schedules. Should any schedule of compliance be established in accordance with the requirements of this article, the compliance schedule shall be as specified in subsection 21-206(f)(10). 
(j)  Change in discharge or operations. 
(1)  Every permitted industrial user shall file a notification with the city a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to any planned significant change in operations or wastewater characteristics. A significant change shall be a change equal to or greater than twenty (20) percent in the mass of a pollutant or volume of flow discharged to the POTW. In addition, this notification shall include changes to: 
a.  Adding or removing processing, manufacturing or other production operations. 
b.  New pollutants used which may be discharged. 
c.  Changes in the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which the industrial user has submitted or is required to submit information to the city under this article and 40 CFR Section 403.12(p) as amended. 
(2)  Known or anticipated facility closure. The industrial user is required to notify the city at least thirty (30) days prior to facility shutdown or closure which might alter the character, nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater. 
(k)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any industrial user shall notify the city, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification to the city shall be made within the appropriate time frames specified in subsections (d), (f) and (j) or within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the discharge, whichever is shorter. Such notification must include: 
a.  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth at 40 CFR Part 261; 
b.  The EPA hazardous waste number; 
c.  The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other); 
d.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
e.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; 
f.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months; 
g.  Certification that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical; and 
h.  Signatory certification as required by subsection (h). 
(2)  Any industrial user shall notify the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Manager, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of the discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 and meets the reporting criteria specified at 40 CFR 403.12(p). Notification to the state and EPA is the responsibility of the industrial user and shall be made as required under 40 CFR Section 403.12(p). The industrial user shall copy the city on all notifications made to the state and EPA. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise allowed to be discharged by this article, a permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(l)  Requests for information. 
(1)  A permittee shall furnish to the city, within the timeframe set by the director, any information which the city may request to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking, and reissuing, or terminating a wastewater discharge permit, or to determine compliance with the wastewater discharge permit or this article. A permittee shall also, upon request, provide to the city, within the timeframe required by the director, copies of any records that are required by the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(2)  When requested by the city, any industrial user shall submit information to the director regarding industrial processes, nature and characteristics of wastes and wastewaters generated at the industrial facility, method of disposal of wastes, or other information required by the director to meet the responsibilities under this article, state law, and 40 CFR Part 403. Failure to provide information within the timeframe specified shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-216. - Sector control programs. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Authority. The city may establish specific sector control programs for industrial users to control specific pollutants as necessary to meet the objectives of this article. Pollutants subject to these sector control programs shall generally be controlled using best management practices (BMPs). 
(2)  Facility identification and compliance. The city shall implement procedures to identify industrial users for inclusion into applicable sector control programs. Once identified and included into one (1) or more sector control program, the facility shall be required to comply with the applicable sector control program requirements. 
(3)  Notification to the city by the industrial user and management review. The city shall review new construction and existing facilities undergoing any physical change, change in ownership, change in operations, or other change that could change the nature, properties, or volume of wastewater discharge, to ensure that current sector control program requirements are incorporated and implemented. 
The industrial user shall inform the city prior to: 
a.  Sale or transfer of ownership of the business; or 
b.  Change in the trade name under which the business is operated; or 
c.  Change in the nature of the services provided that affect the potential to discharge sector control program pollutants; or 
d.  Remodeling of the facility that may result in an increase in flow or pollutant loading or that otherwise requires the facility to submit plans or specifications for approval through a building or zoning department, or any other formal approval process of a city, county, or other jurisdiction. 
(4)  Inspections. 
a.  The city may conduct inspections of any facility with or without notice for the purpose of determining applicability and/or compliance with sector control program requirements. 
b.  If any inspection reveals non-compliance with any provision of a sector control program requirement, corrective action shall be required pursuant to the applicable sector control program. 
c.  Inspection results will be provided in writing to the facility. 
(5)  Closure. The city may require closure of plumbing, treatment devices, storage components, containments, or other such physical structures that are no longer required for their intended purpose. Closure may include the removal of equipment, the filling in and/or cementing, capping, plugging, etc. 
(6)  Enforcement and compliance. 
a.  These requirements form a part of this article. Enforcement of this regulation is governed by the express terms herein and the enforcement provisions of section 21-217. 
b.  Any extraordinary costs incurred by the city due to interference, damage, pass through, or maintenance necessary in the treatment and/or collection system shall be paid by the industrial user to the city. The direct costs of all labor, equipment and materials incurred in rectifying the interference or damage, including reasonable attorney's fees, shall be billed directly to the owner or the industrial user by the city, and such costs shall become part of the total charges due and owing to the city and shall constitute a lien on the industrial user until paid in full. 
(b)  Fats, oil and grease (FOG) and sand/oil separator best management practices. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, under this article they are determined to be necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in this article or sand or other harmful substances which are removed by such treatment. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for removal and proper disposal of the collected material and shall maintain such records as are required by this article. 
(c)  Mercury best management practices. 
(1)  Definitions. 
    Amalgam or dental amalgam means any mixture or blending of mercury with another metal or with an alloy used in dental applications. 
    Amalgam separator means a type of wastewater treatment equipment that is designed to remove solids, including amalgam associated solids, from the wastewater discharged by a dental facility. 
    Amalgam waste means any waste containing mercury or residues from the preparation, use or removal of amalgam. This includes, but is not limited to, any mercury waste generated or collected by chair-side traps, screens, filters, vacuum systems filters, amalgam separators, elemental mercury, amalgam capsules and autoclaves or other equipment that come in contact with mercury. 
    Dental facility means any facility used for the practice of dentistry or dental hygiene that discharges wastewater to the POTW containing amalgam. This includes facilities that place or remove amalgam. 
    Exempt dental practice means any dental facility in which no amalgam is placed or removed nor is amalgam used at any time in the dental practice. 
(2)  Regulation and discharge to the city. 
a.  The city may control through permit, authorization to discharge, letter or other means, discharged to the POTW by a dental facility. 
b.  New dental facilities: BMPs shall be implemented by the dental facility upon discharge to the POTW. Within thirty (30) days after discharge, the dental facility shall report to the city/district that an appropriate amalgam separator has/has not been installed and required BMPs implemented. 
c.  Existing dental facilities: Dental facilities that are already operating and discharging upon the effective date of this article shall install an appropriate amalgam separator and implement required BMPs within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Exempt dental facility. These BMPs are not required for dental facilities meeting the definition of an exempt dental facility. 
(3)  Best management practices (BMPs) for the acceptance of dental amalgam. All dental facilities that discharge wastewater generated from the placement or removal of amalgam to the POTW are required to install an amalgam separator, implement BMPs, and meet specific reporting and certification requirements. 
a.  Amalgam separator. Amalgam separators shall be installed in all dental facilities, except exempt dental practices. All amalgam separators shall be ISO11143 certified and appropriately sized, certified to meet at least a 98.8 percent solids removal, shall allow the dental facility to make direct observations as to the level of solids in the collection container, installed so that all amalgam-contaminated wastewater will pass through the unit before being discharged to the POTW, accessible for cleaning and inspection, 
b.  Each dental practice shall be responsible for inspecting the amalgam separator at least once per week and recording whether or not the level of solids is approaching the level where maintenance is required. The amalgam separator shall be serviced, at a minimum, in accordance with manufacturer's instructions or more frequently if visual inspections indicate that the level of solids is at or over ninety (90) percent of the recommended maximum level. 
c.  Each dental facility shall use disinfecting line cleaners that have a pH in the range of 7-9 and are non-chlorine and non-oxidizing. When cleaning filters, the dental facility shall not rinse filters or traps over sinks or drains that do not discharge through the amalgam separator. 
d.  Each dental facility shall implement dental BMPs as specified by the American Dental Association. 
(4)  Recordkeeping. All records shall be kept on site for a minimum of three (3) years and shall be made available to the city on request as required by section 21-211 of this article. Each dental facility shall maintain records of: 
a.  Name of manufacturer, model and date of installation for each amalgam separator. 
b.  Amalgam disposal. Records shall include the date, name and address of the facility to which any waste amalgam is shipped and the amount shipped. 
c.  Weekly visual inspections: Records (logs) shall include at a minimum, the date and time of the visual inspection, initials of person conducting the inspection and whether or not the level of solids is such that the unit needs to have maintenance or other problems are identified (e.g. leaks). 
d.  Amalgam waste: Records of all maintenance and service completed on the amalgam separator. 
(5)  Reporting. The dental facility shall submit the information required in paragraph (c)(4) of this section by the city by January 28 of each year. 
Such report shall contain the following signatory certification shall be signed by the authorized representative (see sections 21-203 and 21-215(h) of this article): 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Reports shall be mailed to: Director of Public Works, P.O. Box 4000, Sterling, CO 80751-0400 
Or, if hand delivered, to: Director of Public Works, 421 N. 4th Street, Sterling, CO 80751-0400 
(6)  The dental facility shall inform the city prior to: 
a.  Sale or transfer of ownership of the business; 
b.  Change in the trade name under which the business is operated; 
c.  Change in the nature of the services provided that affect the potential to discharge amalgam; or 
d.  Remodeling of the facility that may result in an increase in flow or pollutant loading or that otherwise requires the facility to submit plans or specifications for approval through a building or zoning department or any other formal approval process by the jurisdiction in which the dental facility is located. 
(7)  Inspections and data collection. 
a.  The city may conduct inspections or require written waste surveys for any dental facility. Inspection may be conducted with or without notice for the purpose of determining applicability and/or compliance with these dental facility BMPs. 
b.  If any inspection reveals non-compliance with any provision of this dental facility BMPs, corrective action shall be required. 
(8)  Closure. The city may require the dental facility and/or facility owner to take specific action in the case of closure of the dental facility. This may include special handling of potentially contaminated plumbing, treatment devices or storage components. 
(9)  Enforcement and compliance. 
a.  The dental facility shall not cause or contribute to pass through, interference, violate a specific prohibition or cause the city to exercise its emergency authority specified in subsection 21-217(c)(7) of this article. 
b.  These dental facility BMPs form a part of this article of the City Code. Enforcement is governed by the express terms herein and the compliance and enforcement provisions specified in section 21-217 of this article. 
c.  Any extraordinary costs incurred by the city due to discharge from the dental facility shall be paid by the dental facility to the city and such costs shall become part of the total charges due and owing to the city. 
(d)  Hauled waste. 
(1)  All trucked and hauled waste shall be discharged only at locations designated by the director and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate and general or specific prohibitions as specified in section 21-203 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. 
(2)  Waste haulers that pick up and transport industrial or non-domestic waste to the POTW for disposal shall apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit unless such requirement is waived, in writing, by the director. If a hauler of non-domestic waste does not have a permit, the hauler shall notify the director a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours prior to the anticipated discharge at the POTW and provide specific information on the volume, type and origin of the waste and any other information required by the director. The director may require residential septic tank waste haulers to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or provide any other information as may be required. 
(3)  No hauled waste may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may prohibit the disposal of any non-domestic waste. 
(4)  The director may collect samples of any trucked or hauled wastewater that is to be discharged to the POTW to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any hauled waste prior to discharge. 
(5)  All waste to be discharged to the POTW shall be documented on a waste manifest or tracking form. This form shall include the name and address of the waste hauler owner, name of truck driver, permit number if waste hauler has a permit and truck identification. The form shall also include the following information for each load of waste picked up and intended to be discharged: name and address or generator of the waste, type of waste, date and time of waste pick up, volume of waste picked up and size of tank that was pumped. If the waste was industrial or commercial waste, the form shall document, known or suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes based directly upon the information the waste hauler has obtained from the generator of the waste. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-217. - Compliance and enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement response plan. The city may adopt policies and procedures as set forth in the city's enforcement response plan for carrying out the provisions of this article, provided that such policies and procedures are not in conflict with this article or any applicable state or federal law or regulation. 
(b)  Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. The city shall publish annually, in the Sterling Journal-Advocate, a list of the significant industrial users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. In addition, any industrial user found to be in significant noncompliance with paragraphs (3), (4), or (8) shall also be published in the newspaper. The following criteria shall be used to define significant noncompliance: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines may adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(c)  Administrative enforcement actions. 
(1)  Notice of violation (NOV). Whenever the director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon such industrial user a written notice of violation. Within five (5) working days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and prevention of further violations shall be submitted to the director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the industrial user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(2)  Compliance order. When the city finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that the industrial user come into compliance within a specific time. If the industrial user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the industrial user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the industrial user. 
(3)  Consent order. The city may enter into a consent order, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any industrial user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific actions to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. A consent order may include penalties, supplemental environmental projects, or other conditions and requirements as agreed to by the city and the industrial user. A consent order shall have the same force and effect as a compliance order and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(4)  Show cause hearing. The director may order an industrial user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(5)  Cease and desist order. When the director finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the industrial user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue a cease and desist order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the industrial user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the industrial user. 
(6)  Administrative fines. 
a.  When the director finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may fine such industrial user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
b.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one (1) percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
c.  Industrial users desiring to appeal such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Such notice or appeal shall set forth the nature of the order or determination being appealed, the date of such order or determination, the reason for the appeal, and request a hearing pursuant. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the industrial user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user. The director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
d.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the industrial user. 
(7)  Suspension of service. 
a.  Endangerment to health or welfare of the community: The city, through other than a formal notice to the affected industrial user, may immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into any natural waterway, surface drainage within the city, any area under jurisdiction of the city, the POTW of the city or any wastewater system tributary thereto, by any means available to them, including physical disconnection from the wastewater system, whenever it reasonably appears that such discharge presents an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of the community. 
b.  Endangerment to environment or treatment works: The city, after written notice to the discharger may halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into any natural waterway, surface drainage within the city, any area under jurisdiction of the city, the POTW, wastewater system tributary thereto, by any means available to them, including physical disconnection from the wastewater system, whenever such discharge presents or may present an endangerment to the environment or threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW. 
c.  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to individuals or the environment. The city may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
d.  A detailed written statement submitted by the industrial user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measure taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be provided to the city within five (5) days of the date of occurrence. Suspension of service shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the industrial user. 
(8)  Revocation of wastewater discharge permit. Pursuant to section 21-206, a violation of the conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or of this article or of applicable state or federal regulations shall be reason for revocation of such permit by the city. Upon revocation of the permit, any wastewater discharge from the affected industrial user shall be considered prohibited and discharge of such wastewater in violation of this article. 
(d)  Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. When the city finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the Sterling Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of an industrial user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the industrial user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against an industrial user. 
(2)  Civil penalties. 
a.  An industrial user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day per violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation. 
b.  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
c.  Actions for civil penalties shall be civil actions brought in the name of the city. The city must prove alleged violations by a preponderance of the evidence. 
d.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against an industrial user. 
(3)  Civil/administrative fine pass through. In the event that an industrial user discharges such pollutants which cause the city to violate any condition of its CPDS permit and the city is fined by the EPA or the state for such violation, then such industrial user shall be fully liable for the total amount of the fine assessed against the city by the EPA and/or the state. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. 
a.  An industrial user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any orders or a wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation and/or by imprisonment up to ninety (90) days. 
b.  Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation and/or by imprisonment up to ninety (90) days. 
c.  The city may refer violations that may warrant criminal prosecution to the U.S. Attorney General's Office, State Attorney General, EPA Criminal Investigation division or other appropriate agency. This referral shall not preclude the city from taking a parallel administrative or civil enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-218. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under the provisions of Colorado law. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant industrial user. Enforcement of violations under this article will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city may take any other action against any industrial user when the circumstances warrant and may take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-219. - Outside contributing jurisdictions. 
    Outside jurisdictions and intergovernmental agreements (IGAs). 
(a)  In order for the city to effectively implement and enforce pretreatment standards and requirements for all industrial users discharging to the POTW and as required by 40 CFR Section 403.8(f), the city shall enter into pretreatment intergovernmental agreements (IGA) with contributing jurisdictions. Prior agreements shall be unaffected by these requirements until such time as the city determines that modifications are necessary. 
(b)  Each connecting jurisdiction shall enact an ordinance, rule or resolution that provides notice of the delegation of pretreatment responsibilities to the city. At a minimum, the ordinance, rule or resolution shall incorporate this article V by reference. Other conditions and requirements will be established on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Prior to entering into an IGA, the city shall be provided the following information from the contributing jurisdiction: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing jurisdiction; 
(2)  An inventory of all sources of indirect discharge located within the contributing jurisdiction that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  A requirement that the contributing jurisdiction submit an updated user inventory on at least an annual basis if such jurisdiction has non-domestic users; 
(4)  A requirement that the contributing jurisdiction provide the city with access to all information that the contributing jurisdiction obtains regarding effluent quantity and quality from non-domestic users; and 
(5)  Other requirements as necessary for the city guarantee the effective administration and enforcement of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-220. - Program cost recovery. 
    The city may, by resolution of city council, adopt charges and fees which recover the costs incurred by implementing the pretreatment program established by this article and adopt charges and fees, including, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and implementing article V; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspecting, and surveillance procedures; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing required reports and notifications; 
(d)  Fees for reviewing permit applications and issuing permits; 
(e)  Fees for filing appeals and other legal expenses; 
(f)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
    These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-221. - Performance bonds and liability insurance. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any industrial user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a current or previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to protect the city's interests and achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any industrial user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a current or previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW that may be caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-222. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the industrial user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-223. - Contractor listing. 
    Industrial users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by an industrial user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-224. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control (decrease) production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the specific prohibitions in subsections 21-203(2),(4), (5), (6), or (7) of this article where the industrial user can demonstrate that: 
(1)  It did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and: 
a.  A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be was developed for each pollutant in the industrial user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the industrial user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
b.  If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass through or interference, the industrial user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's CDPS permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this subsection: 
a.  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this section but are reportable under subsections 21-215(a), (d), (f), (j) and (k). 
(3)  Notice. 
a.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
b.  An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Sec. 21-225. - Severability; effective date. 
(a)  If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the article; the city council hereby declares that it would have passed the article in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one (1) or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(b)  In the opinion of the city council, this article is for the immediate preservation of the public health and safety; therefore, this article shall be in full force necessary for and effect immediately upon the final passage of Ordinance No. 10, Series of 2014, which enacted this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, 10-14-14) 
Secs. 21-226-21-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WASTEWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 21-1997, adopted April 22, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1-5 of said ordinance as §§ 21-231-21-235 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 21-231. - Declaration; creation. 
    The council hereby finds and determines that it will provide wastewater service by means of the city's wastewater utility enterprise in conformity with all applicable state laws. The council further recognizes and confirms that the enterprise in an "enterprise" within the meaning of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution ("the amendment"), and declares its intent that the enterprise be operated and maintained so as to exclude its activities from the application of the amendment. Therefore, the council hereby creates the City of Sterling Wastewater Utility Enterprise. The city shall take all actions on behalf of the enterprise as hereinafter further provided. 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 1, 4-22-97) 
Sec. 21-232. - Governing board. 
    The city council shall constitute the governing board of the enterprise ("governing board"). The governing board shall conduct the business of the enterprise in the same manner and follow the same procedures as the city council. All official business of the enterprise shall be conducted at regularly scheduled or special meetings of the city council. The record of the proceedings of the governing board may be incorporated in the minutes of the city and shall not be required to be recorded separately. No additional oath of office, qualification, or procedure shall apply with respect to service as a member of the governing board. All business and actions of the governing board shall be governed by and made subject to all requirements, privileges, immunities, protections, limitations, and other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 2, 4-22-97) 
Sec. 21-233. - Powers. 
    The enterprise shall exercise the powers of an enterprise under the amendment, including, without limitation, the power to issue or reissue bonds, notes, or other obligations, payable from the revenues derived or to be derived from its provision of services. The enterprise shall also be entitled to exercise such powers as are set forth in any applicable state law, including the power to set rates, fees and charges for services provided by the enterprise; provided, however, in no event shall the enterprise have the authority to levy or collect taxes, whether sales taxes, use taxes or ad valorem taxes, nor shall the enterprise have the power to direct the city to exercise its taxing power on behalf of the enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 3, 4-22-97) 
Sec. 21-234. - Assets. 
    Assets to be operated and maintained by the enterprise shall either remain in the ownership of the city or be owned by the enterprise, as the council determines. The city hereby assigns the use and management of all assets owned by the city, whether real or personal, to the enterprise. The enterprise shall hold title to assets it owns in the name of the "City of Sterling acting by and through its wastewater utility enterprise." 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 4, 4-22-97) 
Sec. 21-235. - Fund. 
    The city shall continue to account for enterprise revenues and expenditures in its sewer fund. The enterprise shall prepare an annual budget which may be included in the budget prepared for the city. All budgets, reports, audits, and financial operations of the enterprise shall conform to, and be prepared in accordance with, generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and other requirements of law. 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 5, 4-22-97) 
Chapter 22 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Weeds, brush and accumulations of refuse prohibited, § 11-26 et seq.; injuring trees or flowers prohibited, § 12-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND OTHER PLANTINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License required for tree service businesses, § 9-141 et seq.; posting of handbills on property including trees prohibited, § 12-17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the parks, library and recreation board. 
    Department means the parks, library and recreation department. 
    Division means the forestry division of the department of parks, library and recreation. 
    Tree means any woody plant having a dominant stem or trunk which is normally greater than fifteen (15) feet in height at maturity. 
    Tree service business means the planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, or other treatment of trees, shrubs or vines or any parts thereof, for hire. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 3, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-27. - Right of city to collect costs, assess penalties. 
    The prosecution of violations of this article shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the city to assess any penalties or collect costs for required work which is performed at the direction of the forestry superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 17, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-28. - Sale, planting of certain trees prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or import into the city or to plant or cause to be planted within the city limits any seed-bearing cottonwood tree (Genus populus) or any other specifically designated tree as set forth in the rules and regulations as approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 5(a), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-29. - Planting of certain trees on right-of-way prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant or cause to be planted any species of tree on the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city which by its habits or growth would obstruct, restrict or conflict with necessary and safe use of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 5(b), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-30. - Line of sight clearance at intersections. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain a tree, shrub or other vegetation growth over thirty-six (36) inches high on the public right-of-way or on private property as follows: 
(1)  Where there are curbs and gutters, in the triangular area formed by the lines extending from the intersection point of the projections of the outer curblines at the gutter to a point thirty (30) feet back, and the diagonal connecting such lines. 
(2)  Where there are no curbs or gutters, in the triangular area formed by the lines extending from the point of intersection of the projections of the outer paved portion of the roadway to a point thirty (30) feet back, and the diagonal connecting such lines. 
(3)  Where any tree, shrub or other vegetation growth is planted on private property where such growth would interfere with a line of sight across the diagonal described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, so as to interfere with approach from either direction to the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 8(c)(4), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-31. - Distance of plantings from fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain any tree on the public right-of-way or on private property within a ten-foot radius of any fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain any shrub or other growth on the public right-of-way or private property within a five-foot radius of any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 8(c)(5), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-32. - Distance of plantings from water meters. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain any tree, shrub or other vegetation growth on the public right-of-way or on private property within a five-foot radius of any water meter. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 8(c)(6), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-33. - Right of owners of adjacent property to care for plantings on public property. 
    A private property owner shall have the right, in accordance with this article, to maintain and care for trees and shrubs on public property which is adjacent to the owner's private property. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 9, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-34. - Trees on public property-Permit for removal. 
(a)  Any person desiring to remove any tree in or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city shall first make application for a permit at the office of the department upon forms furnished by the city. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person doing the work; 
(3)  The species of tree to be removed; 
(4)  The location of the tree to be removed; and 
(5)  Such information as the forestry superintendent shall require. 
(b)  The forestry superintendent shall inspect the location for the permit. If, in his opinion, it is desirable that such tree be removed, he shall issue a permit. 
(c)  Such permit shall set forth the name of the person who will perform the work, the location at which the tree is to be removed, and any conditions or requirements made by the forestry superintendent in connection therewith. The permit shall provide that the permittee, by signing the permit, agrees to save and hold harmless the city from all claims, actions and suits arising under such permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or for another, to remove any tree in or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city without having first obtained a written permit from the forestry superintendent. If the forestry superintendent denies the issuance of a removal permit, the forestry superintendent shall, within ten (10) days of receiving the permit application, deliver to the applicant, via U.S. mail, written notice containing the basis for the denial. The applicant may, within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of denial, appeal the denial to the city manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for anyone who has been issued a permit to fail to comply with the requirements of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 8(a), (b), (c)(2), (3), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88; Ord. No. 17-2007, 10-9-07, eff. 10-19-07) 
Sec. 22-35. - Same-Improper pruning or other injury. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or for another, to improperly prune, top, deface or in any way injure any tree in or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 8(c)(1), 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-36. - Same-Attachment of handbills, signs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach in any manner or cause the attachment of any bill, notice, announcement or advertisement of any type or to post, paste, paint, mark, nail or otherwise fasten or append any item of personal property to any tree on city property, on a city right-of-way, or on any public real or personal property. The attachment of any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind contrary to this section shall be prima facie evidence that it was attached by the person or entity named therein or the business or entity advertised thereby. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 7, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Secs. 22-37-22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-56. - Removal of dangerous trees or limbs. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any private property to remove any dead or dying trees or dead or dying limbs dangerous to life, limb or property, when located on the premises of such owner, whenever required to do so by notice given by the forestry superintendent served upon the owner of such property in accordance with this article. Such work shall be performed within such reasonable time as may be specified in such notice. This section shall be construed as requiring the owner of private property to trim or remove any tree or shrub when such trimming or removing is required so as to provide for safe use of streets or sidewalks, or because of utility lines or traffic-control devices or signs, or generally endangers the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 6, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88; Ord. No. 39-1996, 12-10-96, eff. 12-20-96) 
Sec. 22-57. - Control of disease or insect infestation. 
    Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of trees or plants in the city or which is capable of causing an epidemic spread of communicable disease or insect infestation such as Dutch elm disease, the forestry superintendent shall at once cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which such diseased tree is situated. The notice shall require such property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition within a reasonable time to be specified in such notice. Trees or shrubs or parts thereof of the genus ulmus in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for the smaller European elm bark beetle (Scolytus multistriatus) are hereby declared to be a threat and hazard to all elm trees in the city unless all bark has been completely removed or the wood has otherwise been treated in a manner approved by the forestry superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 13, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-58. - Service of notices. 
    Any notice authorized in this division may be served by delivering a copy of such notice to the recorded owner of such property or by leaving a copy of such notice at such owner's usual place of residence with some member of his family over the age of eighteen (18) years. In case there is more than one (1) owner of property, service upon any one (1) owner shall be adequate service upon all co-owners. If the owner of any property cannot be found in the city, service may be made by mailing a copy of the notice to such owner, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address, and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises involved. Service by mail shall be completed five (5) days after the date that the notice is deposited in the mail and posted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 16, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-59. - Compliance with notice required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of any notice given pursuant to this division within the time specified in such notice. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 14, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-60. - Appeals from orders of superintendent. 
    Any notice given by the forestry superintendent pursuant to this division shall allow at least ten (10) days for the property owner to perform the work required after the time the notice is served on the property owner. During such period, the property owner shall have the right to appeal the order of the forestry superintendent to the city manager or his designee, by filing with the city manager or his designee a notice that the property owner desires to appeal from such order. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city manager or his designee within ten (10) days from the date of service of the order, and the city manager or his designee shall give notice to the property owner of the date for a hearing not less than ten (10) days after the date of mailing of the hearing notice. The city manager or his designee shall hold the hearing to determine whether or not the property owner shall or shall not be required to perform the work required as provided in the notice. The property owner shall have further right of appeal to the public works board. An appeal to the public works board must be submitted in writing, addressed to the public works board, within ten (10) days following the order of the city manager or his designee. Such appeal from the order of the city manager or his designee shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of the public works board and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the public works board. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 15, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
Sec. 22-61. - Performance of work by city. 
    Any notice given pursuant to this article shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified, the city will cause the work to be done at the expense of the property owner. If any work required under this division is not accomplished within the time specified in the notice, the forestry superintendent shall cause the work to be done. Upon completion of the required work, the forestry superintendent shall submit the cost thereof to the director. Such work shall be billed in accordance with and be subject to all provisions of section 21-26 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 9-1988, § 18, 5-24-88, eff. 6-6-88) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city Ordinance Number 1-1989 adopted March 28, 1989. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 
Charter reference- Planning commission, § 8-3. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-86 et seq.; planning commission shall recommend zoning provisions to the city council, § 2-96; community development department, § 2-151 et seq.; the community development department shall be responsible for advising the city council, planning commission, etc., regarding all matters relating to planning and zoning, § 2-153; comprehensive planning, § 2-296 et seq.; nuisance restrictions applicable to uses authorized by the zoning ordinance, § 11-1 et seq.; trailer park regulations, § 20-26 et seq. 

CHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101. - Title. 
    An Ordinance and map establishing zoning districts in Sterling, Colorado, regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of lots, courts and other open space; the density and distribution of population; and the location and use of land for residential, trade, industrial, recreational or other purposes. 
Sec. 102. - Short title. 
    For the purpose of brevity, this Ordinance and map shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Sterling and may be so cited and pleaded. 
Sec. 103. - Statement of purpose. 
    This Ordinance is necessary, designed, and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Sterling, Colorado, by lessening congestion in the streets and roads; securing safety from fire and other damages; providing adequate light and air; preventing the over-crowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; fostering the City's industries; and protecting urban and rural development. 
Sec. 104. - Authority. 
    The City of Sterling Zoning Ordinance is authorized by Article 23, Chapter 31, of the Colorado Revised Statutes, and Article 8, Section 8-3 of the Charter of the City of Sterling, Colorado, and is hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these Statutes and this Charter. 
Sec. 105. - Scope and jurisdiction. 
    This Ordinance applies within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Sterling as now and hereinafter established, according to the following conditions: 
A.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall be uniformly interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, morals, safety, and general welfare; 
B.  This Ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any building permit, certificate of occupancy, variance, or other lawful permit issued and in full force and effect on the effective date of this Ordinance. Further, this Ordinance shall not affect any lawfully created easement, covenant, or private agreement; 
C.  Any approved site plan and attendant terms, covenants, and conditions applicable to such plans as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall continue to apply and control the use or occupation of such land. However, any proposed change or modification in the use or occupation of such land or in the approved site plan shall be made in accordance with the standards and procedures of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 106. - Application and compliance. 
    Except as provided for in this Ordinance, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is to be located; nor shall a yard, lot, parcel, or open space be reduced in dimensions or area to an amount less than the minimum requirements of the applicable districts herein set forth; 
B.  No part of a lot area, open space, off-street parking area, parcel, or yard required by or in connection with any building, structure, or use for the purposes of complying with this Ordinance may be included in whole or as a part of meeting similar requirements for any other building, structure, or use; 
C.  An approved zoning compliance permit must be presented at the time a building permit is requested in order to verify that the minimum bulk, use, and dimensional requirements of the district in which the building permit is sought are being met. The listing of uses allowed and regulations governing the various districts established herein may be amended by the City Council pursuant to Chapter IV of this Ordinance; 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance. Each day that a violation of the Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be unlawful and punishable as such; 
E.  Legal Action. In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained or used or any land is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any amendment thereof, the City Council of the City of Sterling, the City Attorney in and for the City of Sterling, or any owner of real estate within the City of Sterling, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use. 
Sec. 107. - Conflict. 
    Whenever these requirements are at variance with the requirements of any other legally adopted rules, regulations, statutes, resolutions, or ordinances covering any of the same subject matter, the one which is the most restrictive or which requires higher standards shall apply. 
Sec. 108. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision or provisions which are expressly stated to be invalid. All other provisions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
    If the application of any provision of this Ordinance to any lot, building, other structure or tract of land is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such decision shall be limited to that lot, building, other structure or tract of land immediately involved in the action or proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered. Such decision shall not affect, impair, or nullify this Ordinance or the application of any provision thereof to any other lot, building, other structure or tract of land. 
Sec. 109. - Fees. 
    Any application for an amendment, variance, conditional use, permit, or any other application or certificate within the scope of this Ordinance, shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Public Works Department, and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the costs involved. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 110. - Public inspection of ordinance. 
    This Ordinance, its amendments and regulations, and the Sterling Zoning Map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Department of Public Works. Copies of the above will be available for purchase by the general public at the cost of printing. 
Sec. 111. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or other codes of the City inconsistent herewith to the extent of the inconsistency and no further, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above mentioned ordinances or codes does not revive any other ordinance or code. Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution and punishment of any person for violation of any ordinance or code repealed hereby, for any offense committed prior to the repeal. 
Sec. 112. - Public and written notices of public hearings. 
A.  Public notices. Whenever a published notice of a public hearing is required under any provisions of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling, such publication shall be a legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days before the public hearing, stating the purpose of the public hearing; the name of the applicant; the address of the subject property; and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
B.  Written notices. Whenever, under any provision of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling, written notices of public hearing are required, such notices shall be sent to property owners and occupants of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property; the three hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the closest point of the subject property to, and to include, all properties within such three hundred (300) feet. Such property owners' names and addresses shall be those available first from city utility records and second, if not available from city utility records, those available from other public records. Occupant notices shall be addressed to "occupant" and mailed to addresses available from city utility records. All written notices required under any provision of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing, and shall state the purpose of the public hearing; the name of the applicant; the address of the subject property; and the date, time and place of the hearing. Failure to mail such written notice to every property owner and occupant within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling before the Planning Commission, the Board of Adjustment or City Council. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
CHAPTER II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 201. - General provisions. 
    The location and boundaries of the districts established in this Ordinance are shown upon the Official Zoning Map of Sterling which is incorporated into this Ordinance. The Zoning Map and all subsequent amendments shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth and described herein. 
Sec. 202. - Zoning district boundaries. 
    The district boundary lines on the Zoning Map are intended to follow lot lines or center lines of streets, alleys, railroads or other natural barriers. 
Sec. 203. - Rules of interpretation. 
    Regarding the boundaries of any use district shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center lines; 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to follow such lines; 
C.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the midpoint of the railroad right-of-way; 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following the municipal limits shall be construed as following municipal limits; 
E.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map; 
F.  Where existing physical features conflict with features shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in circumstances not covered in subsections A-E above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the boundaries; 
G.  No zoning district boundary shall be established that will divide one lot into two (2) or more zoning districts. Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary line at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, the zoning may be changed to whatever zoning classification is more appropriate to the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 24-2001, 8-28-01, eff. 9-7-01) 
Sec. 204. - Changes to the zoning map. 
    Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance and shall be reflected on the Official Zoning Map. 
Sec. 205. - Zoning districts established. 
    In order to carry out the intent, purpose, and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of Sterling is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Low Density Residential R-1 Medium Density Residential R-2 High Density Residential R-3 Mobile Home MH Medical Services MS Neighborhood Business NB Community Business CB Central Business District CBD Light Industrial LI Heavy Industrial HI Open Space OS  
(Ord. No. 9-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
Sec. 206. - Purpose of districts. 
    Each of the districts enumerated herein is designed and intended to fulfill the following purposes: 
R-1 Low Density Residential: Areas which are used for single-family dwelling unit residential development. 
R-2 Medium Density Residential: Areas used for single-family detached units and two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
R-3 High Density Residential: Areas which are used for multiple unit development ranging in type from triplexes to apartments. 
MH Mobile Home: Areas which are intended to provide an alternative conventional housing by permitting mobile home development on privately owned lots in subdivisions designed for such development and mobile home development in a park designed for such development under single ownership or control. Additional regulations governing mobile home development are located in Chapter VII of this Ordinance. 
NB Neighborhood Business. Areas which provide for administrative and professional services and limited personal services, and related uses oriented towards and compatible with residential neighborhoods. 
MS Medical Services: Areas which provide for an appropriate grouping of medical service facilities which could include a hospital as a nucleus, related offices, drugstores, restaurants, etc. 
CB Community Business: Areas permitting a wider range of retail, business, and commercial opportunities serving a number of neighborhoods, the community, and/or visitors. 
CBD Central Business District: The area of the central business district which is intended to provide for the development of a concentrated, pedestrian-oriented commercial center. 
LI Light Industrial: Areas which are intended to accommodate industries involved with research, development, and manufacturing, assembly or packaging or previously manufactured goods, precision parts, instruments, and/or tools. All operations within this district, including storage, must be enclosed. Additional regulations governing LI development are located in Chapter VII of this Ordinance. 
HI Heavy Industrial: Areas which are intended to accommodate most industrial enterprises and attendant facilities, including outside storage. Additional regulations governing HI development are located in Chapter VII of this Ordinance. 
OS Open Space: Areas which are intended to preserve the natural, scenic or historic features of the landscape. 
(Ord. No. 9-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
CHAPTER III. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 301. - Rules. 
    The following rules shall apply in interpreting this Ordinance unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
A.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular, and words in the present tense shall include the future. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
C.  The word "may" is discretionary and not mandatory. 
D.  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel." 
E.  The word "building" shall include all structures of every kind. 
F.  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
G.  The word "Council" is the Mayor and the Council. 
H.  The word "Commission" is the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 302. - Definitions. 
    Accessory Structure or Use: A building or use which: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; (2) is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or use served; (3) is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use. Accessory uses or buildings include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Home occupations; 
2.  Household pets; 
3.  Satellite dishes; 
4.  Private swimming pools; 
5.  Greenhouses; 
6.  Storage sheds; 
7.  Garages, automobile parking; 
8.  Storage of trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational vehicles located in rear yard. 
    Addition: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
    Adult Business: A commercial establishment having as a principal activity an adult business. "Principal activity" is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's stock in trade, display space, floor space or movie display time per month for adult activities characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to the following exposed bodily parts: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts. Intended to include massage parlors as defined by State statute. 
    Adult Day Care: Both health and social services provided on a regularly scheduled basis (less than twenty-four (24) hours) in an environment to ensure optimal functioning of the client. Adult Day Care is further defined as follows: 
Maintenance Model: One which provides services in health monitoring and individual and group therapeutic and psychological activities which serve as an alternative to long-term nursing care. 
Restorative Model: One which provides intensive health supportive services prescribed to serve as an alternative to rehabilitation hospitalization. 
    Note: State rules and regulations governing Adult Day Care facilities may be amended from time to time and must be complied with before a facility shall be licensed. 
    Advertising Sign: See Sign. 
    Alley: A minor public way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
    Alteration: See Structural Alteration. 
    Animal Shelter: A facility operated by the city or by a humane society pursuant to contract with the city, for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals. 
    Arcade: A commercial establishment having as a principal activity: electronic games, pinball machines and video games. "Principal Activity" is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's floor space for electronic games, pinball machines and video games. 
    Assisted Living: The combination of housing and personalized care that is designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with the activities of daily living, such as bathing, grooming, and dressing. Services are provided on a twenty-four-hour basis and normally include three (3) meals a day that may be provided in a communal setting. 
    Assisted Living Facility: Individual living units that provide assistance to its tenants on a twenty-four-hour basis. 
    Automobile Service Station: See Gasoline Service Station. 
    Awnings: A structure which may overhang a public or private pedestrian walkway to provide protection from the elements. 
    Block: A piece of land usually bounded on all sides by streets or other transportation routes such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such as water bodies or public open space and not traversed by a through street. 
    Board of Adjustment: A local body created by Charter, whose responsibility is to hear appeals from decisions of the Administration and to consider requests for variances and exceptions permissible under terms of the zoning ordinance. 
    Boarding, Lodging, Rooming, or Tourist Home: A dwelling other than a motel or hotel in which accommodations with or without meals are provided for not more than four (4) guests, exclusive of the occupant's family, for compensation. 
    Brewpub: An eating place which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. No more than thirty (30) percent of the product, either in bottles or kegs, may be sold to off-premises customers. Notwithstanding more restrictive provisions of this chapter, such accessory use may occupy up to twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the eating place. 
    Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building Coverage: The amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by a building usually measured in terms of percentage of lot. 
    Building Height: The vertical distance from the established grade elevation to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deckline of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of the building: 
1.  The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade; 
2.  An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in Item 1 above is more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
    Building, Principal: A building containing the main or principal use of the lot and [which] does not meet the definition of accessory use. 
    Building, Temporary: A building not permanently attached to a foundation during the construction of a permanent structure on the same site for a period not exceeding one (1) year. 
    Bulk: The term used to indicate size, setback, [and] location of buildings with respect to each other on a single zoning lot, including the following specifications: 
1.  Size of buildings; 
2.  Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or other buildings; 
3.  Gross floor area of buildings in relation to a lot area; 
4.  Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit. 
    Camper: A vehicle, eligible to be registered and insured for highway use, designed to be used as a temporary shelter for travel, recreational, and vacation purposes, but not for permanent residence. Includes, but [is] not limited to, equipment commonly called fifth wheels, independent travel trailer, dependent travel trailer, tent trailers, pickup campers, motor homes, and converted buses, but not mobile homes or manufactured homes. 
    Camper Trailer: A wheeled vehicle having an overall length of less than twenty-six feet (26') without motor power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle over the public highways and which is generally and commonly used for temporary living or sleeping accommodations. 
    Certificate of Occupancy: Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Uniform Building Code and all other applicable City Ordinances, and may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted for new construction or for alteration or additions to existing structures. Unless such a certificate is issued, a structure cannot be occupied. 
    Child Care Facility: Generally defined as a facility which provides less than twenty-four (24) hour care on a planned, regular basis to two (2) or more children not related to the caretaker. 
    Note: State rules and regulations governing day care facilities may be amended from time to time and must be complied with before a facility shall be licensed. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, Child Care shall be further defined into the following classes: 
1.  Family Child Care Home: Provides less than twenty-four-hour care for two (2) to six (6) children from infancy to eighteen (18) years. (Plus two (2) additional school age children.) 
Experienced Family Child Care Provider: May have a maximum of nine (9) children. 
2.  Large Family Child Care Home: Provides less than twenty-four (24) hour care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children between the ages of two (2) and eighteen (18) years. 
3.  Child Care Center: A facility, by whatever name known, that is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of five (5) or more children who are eighteen (18) years of age or younger and who are not related to the owner, operator, or manager thereof, whether the facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated educational purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly known as day care centers, school-age child care centers, before and after school programs, nursery schools, kindergartens, preschools, day camps, and summer camps. 
    Clinic: An institution associated with a hospital or medical school that deals mainly with outpatients or a medical institution run by several specialists working cooperatively. 
    Club or Lodge, Private: A nonprofit association of persons, which owns or leases a building, or portion thereof, and uses such structures by members and their guests only. 
    Commercial Zones: Zoning districts designated for commercial uses including NB, CB, and CBD on the Sterling Zoning Map. 
    Common Wall: A wall which physically binds together two (2) or more units or spaces within the same building but which are owned or occupied by separate interests. 
    Comprehensive Master Plan: A document approved by the City Council and which may include, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, parks, playgrounds, airports, and other public spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the extent and layout of the replanning of blighted areas. 
    Conditional Use: The use of land, structure, or both that may be allowed with conditions deemed necessary upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of City Council. 
    Condominium: An individual air space unit together with the interest in the common elements appurtenant to such unit. 
    Construction, New: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Cul-de-Sac: A dead-end street terminating in a vehicular turn-around area. 
    Density: A measure of the number of dwelling units or principal buildings per acre allowed in each zone district. "Gross density" is the maximum allowable density in each zone and is calculated by dividing the total number of dwellings or buildings by the overall site acreage, not including streets or public ways. 
    Development: Any man-made change to improved or to unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings, or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Director of Public Works: Person appointed by the City Manager charged with the administration of the Public Works Department. 
    Drive-in Establishment: A commercial establishment arranged so that traffic circulates on-site, and patrons may remain in their vehicles. 
    Dwelling Types: 
Dwelling: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering human habitation. 
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building used exclusively for one (1) family and containing one (1) dwelling unit. 
Dwelling-Single Family, Live/Work Space: A commercial building with a Single Family Dwelling to be allowed as an additional use in the commercial operation in a single structure. 
Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex): A building used exclusively for two (2) families and containing two (2) separate dwelling units separated by a common wall on a single lot. 
Dwelling, Multiple: A building used exclusively for three (3) or more families living independently in separate dwelling units with common walls but not including motels, hotels, and resorts. 
Dwelling Unit: Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as required by the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
    Easement: A right given by the owner of land to another party for specific limited use of that land. 
    Extension: An increase in the amount of existing use within an existing building or an increase in one area of land occupied or developed to a use. 
    Factory-Built Housing: A factory-built structure designed for long-term residential use. For the purposes of these regulations, factory-built housing shall consist of three (3) types: 
Manufactured Home: A factory-built home manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, transportable in one (1) or more sections, is eight (8) feet of the body or wider, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
Modular Home: Factory-built housing certified as meeting the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. Modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes. 
    Family: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons who are not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Fence: A structure of fencing material and/or living plants used to enclose any lot with the purpose and intent of preventing passage across the lot line. 
    Final Plat: A map or chart of the subdivision, which shows boundaries of said lots, tracts or parcels and original parcel from which they were created, as a result of a monumented land survey. 
    Flea Market: The sale of merchandise by several businesses as part of an open market operation. Approved as a conditional use only. 
    Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waves and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet. 
    Floor Area, Minimum: The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts, courts, basements, and garages, but including additional floors. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
    Garage, Motor Vehicle Repair and Service: A business establishment used for repair, rebuilding, reconstruction, painting, inside storage, and/or servicing of vehicles, including towing and wrecker service but which does not include the storage or dismantling of wrecked motor vehicles, or storage of junk. 
    Garage Sale: A retail sale conducted by the occupant of a single-family residence, or mobile home, or the owner/manager of a multifamily residence. 
    Gasoline Service Station: A building or property on or in which the principal use is the retail sale of gasoline, oil or other fuel for motor vehicles and which may include, as an incidental use, the retail sale and installation of vehicle accessories, the making of minor repairs, and facilities for washing and servicing of not more than three (3) vehicles if completely enclosed in a building. 
    Grade: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building. 
    Group Home: No more than six (6) nonrelated persons living together in a dwelling unit with supervision by a person eighteen years of age or older and residing on the premises. 
    Home Occupation: An activity for gain conducted within a dwelling (or building or structure), carried on by the inhabitants of said dwelling and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. Additional regulations governing Home Occupations are located in Chapter VII of this Ordinance. 
    Hospital: A building used for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human ailments, but not including medical clinics, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and retirement homes. 
    Hotel or Motel: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms designed to be rented for temporary occupancy on a transient basis for compensation but not meeting the definition of "Boarding, Lodging, Rooming or Tourist Home." 
    Indoor Play Area: All interior area, excluding hall, kitchens, bathrooms, and closets. 
    Industrial and Business Classifications: For purposes of further defining industrial and business operations, the following terms have the following meanings: 
1.  Extraction: Removal of physical matter in a solid, liquid, or gaseous state from its naturally occurring location; the initial step in the utilization of a natural resource; 
2.  Processing: Change in the physical state or chemical composition of matter; the second step in the utilization of a natural resource; 
3.  Manufacture/Fabrication: Change in the physical shape of matter; the final step in the utilization of a natural resource; 
4.  Storage: The retention and safekeeping of goods in a warehouse or depository, including open storage; 
5.  Repair: Restoration of a damaged or non-operating object to its original physical shape or operational function; 
6.  Material: The substance or substances out of which a thing is or may be constructed or manufactured. 
    Industrial Zones: Zoning districts designated for industrial uses including LI and HI on the Sterling Zoning Map. 
    Jails: A building for the confinement of people who are awaiting trial or who have been convicted of minor offenses. 
    Junkyard: An area where scrap metal, paper, rags, tires and other waste and/or used materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled or handled, or where machinery or motor vehicles not in running condition, are collected, dismantled, stored, or sold for parts. Any use conducted entirely within an enclosed building is not a junkyard. 
    Kennel: Any building, structure, or open space devoted wholly or partly to the raising, breeding, or harboring of four (4) or more animals that are more than four (4) months old. 
    Loading Berth: A space for truck traffic to maneuver on private property to utilize the loading dock. 
    Lot: Any continuous parcel of land legally defined by survey abutting a dedicated public way, except that a lot in a residential district need not abut a dedicated public way where access is provided by reservation, deed, covenant, or contract. 
    Lot Area: The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. The lot area required for zoning compliance shall be land other than that under any water body or wetland. Lot area shall be calculated on a square footage basis with an acre equaling 43,560 sq. ft. 
    Lot Coverage: The percentage of total lot area covered by structures, roofs, and/or used for vehicular access and storage. 
    Lot Frontage: That portion of a lot fronting upon and providing rights of access to a dedicated street. Lot frontage shall be measured continuously along only one street. 
    Lot Line: The lines bounding a lot as defined below: 
Front Lot Line: The line separating the lot from the street on the narrow side. 
Rear Lot Line: The line opposite the front lot line. 
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Lot of Record: A lot for which a recorded plat or deed shows that it was owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the recording of a lot of such area, depth and width in the same location would not have been prohibited by the Ordinance in effect at that time. 
    Lot, Types of: 
Corner Lot: A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street and where, in either case, the interior angle formed by the intersection of street lines does not exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees (135). 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with one frontage on a street other than the alley. 
Reversed Corner Lot: A corner lot having its side street line substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
Through Lot: A lot which has public streets adjoining both front and back lot lines. 
    Lot Width: The distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines through that part of the building or structure where the lot is narrowest. 
    Manufactured Home, Class A: A manufactured home approved as meeting the following "acceptable similarity" standards: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be new and shall have been manufactured within the previous twelve (12) months. 
2.  The manufactured home shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width and of sufficient length to meet the minimum square footage requirement of the zone district in which it will be located. 
3.  The manufactured home shall be installed on an approved permanent foundation and have a permanent perimeter enclosure constructed in compliance with the currently adopted Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, as amended, and the Uniform Building Code. 
4.  The manufactured home shall have a roof pitch, covering, and a permanent perimeter enclosure similar to the surrounding dwellings or typical to residential construction. 
5.  The manufactured home shall have cosmetically equivalent exterior siding, windows, doors and trim similar to the surrounding dwellings or typical to residential construction. 
    Manufactured Home, Class B: A manufactured home approved and meeting the following "acceptable similarity" standards: 
1.  Homes manufactured more than twelve (12) months ago or previously owned Class A homes defined above. 
2.  The manufactured home shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width and of sufficient length to meet the minimum square footage requirement of the zone district in which it will be located. 
3.  The manufactured home shall be installed on an approved permanent foundation and have a permanent perimeter enclosure constructed in compliance with the currently adopted Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, as amended, and the Uniform Building Code. 
4.  The manufactured home shall have a roof pitch, covering, and have a permanent perimeter enclosure similar to the surrounding dwellings or typical to residential construction. 
5.  The manufactured home shall have cosmetically equivalent exterior siding, windows, doors and trim similar to the surrounding dwellings or typical to residential construction. 
    Mineral extraction: The removal from the premises, by any means possible, of sand, gravel, topsoil, minerals, or other natural resources from a lot or a part thereof. 
    Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land which has been planned, designated and developed for long term residential use and intended for rent or lease exclusively for mobile homes. 
    Mobile Home Park Permit: A permit granted under this Ordinance, by the City Council, after review by the Public Works Department and the Planning Commission; authorizing the operation, establishment, installation, or expansion of a mobile home park. This permit is in addition to and not in lieu of building permits that may be required for construction, alteration or expansion of a mobile home park. 
    Mobile Home, Permanent Addition: Shall mean any structural extension from any portion of a mobile home, not including temporary canvas or aluminum awning. 
    Mobile Home Space: A parcel of ground within a mobile home park designed for accommodation of a mobile home dwelling together with accessory structures. 
    Mobile Home Subdivision: A parcel of land which has been subdivided into lots, designated and developed for long term residential use and intended for sale where the residences are comprised of mobile homes. 
    Motor Home: A vehicle designed to provide temporary living quarters and which is built into, as an integral part of or a permanent attachment to, a motor vehicle chassis or van. 
    Nonconforming Building: Includes any legally existing building which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which such "nonconforming building" is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Ordinance. 
    Nonconforming Lot: A legally created lot not conforming to current lot areas or requirements resulting from subsequent adoption or amendment of such requirements. 
    Nonconforming Use: Includes any legally existing use whether within a building or on a tract of land which does not conform to the use regulations of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which such nonconforming use is located either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Ordinance. 
    Nursing Home; Convalescent Home: An establishment with continuous day and night facilities providing room and board, personal service, and nursing care for the aged or infirm. 
    Occupancy: Is the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used. 
    Off-Street Parking: Any parking area surfaced with gravel, concrete or asphalt located wholly within the limits of one or more lots. 
    Open Space: Land intentionally left free of development for recreation, resource protection, amenities, aesthetics, hazard avoidance, or buffering purposes and that is protected by the provisions of this and/or other ordinances to ensure that such lands remain in such uses. Any development which is necessary to or customarily associated with open space uses shall be permitted only upon compliance with the provisions of this and other governing ordinances. 
    Outdoor Storage: The storage of materials, equipment, or commodities exterior of a walled structure. Such materials, equipment or commodities shall not include operable vehicles such as those stored as part of a new or used car lot or a parking lot. 
    Park: Land retained in an open condition for recreational use which may be improved with facilities associated with outdoor recreational activities. All facilities shall be built and maintained by either a unit of government, by a nonprofit corporation, or by private interest(s) as a part of a larger subdivision or development of land for use by the inhabitants thereof. Ownership of the land may be deeded or reserved to a property owners association or it may be dedicated to the public. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD): A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a clustering of buildings, providing common open space, density increases, and a mix of building types and land uses. It permits the planning of a project and the calculation of densities over the entire development, rather than on an individual lot-by-lot basis. 
    Preliminary Plat: The map of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. 
    Professional Office: An office for professions, such as physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, artists, designers, teachers, musicians, accountants, and others, who through training are qualified to perform services of a professional nature and where no storage or sales of merchandise exists. 
    Projections (into Yards): These are parts of buildings such as architectural features which are exempted to a specified amount, from the "yard" requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. This refers to bay windows, eaves, uncovered porches, and chimneys. 
    Public Building or Use: Any building open to the general use, participation, or enjoyment of the public and used by the municipality, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof. 
    Public Facilities: Those constructed facilities, including, but not limited to, transportation systems or facilities, water treatment facilities and necessary structures, wastewater treatment facilities and necessary structures, storm drainage facilities and necessary structures, and publicly owned buildings or facilities not otherwise listed. 
    Public Notice: A legal notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and/or mailed to property owners and interested parties which informs the public of the date, time, place, items of discussion and their locations, where pertinent, which are to be acted upon in a public hearing. 
    Public Utility: Those facilities customarily utilized by a public utility corporation, municipality, or municipal authority such as substations, pumping stations, reservoirs, and transmission lines. 
    Replat: The platting of a previously platted subdivision where lot lines are adjusted but where easements and public dedicated property lines remain unaltered. 
    Residential Zones: Zoning districts designated for residential uses, including R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH on the Sterling Zoning Map. 
    Retirement Home: An establishment used as a multiple dwelling residence for retired persons in separate dwelling units with limited accessory services such as recreation and other common facilities, but not including nursing or hospital care. 
    Right-of-Way: Land set aside for use as a street, alley, or space for utility lines. 
    Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, satellite dishes, and satellite microwave antennas. 
    Schools, College: A public or private institution of higher learning (beyond grade 12) providing courses as approved by the Colorado Department of Education or licensed by any agency of the State of Colorado. 
    Schools, Commercial: A building or group of buildings where instruction is given to pupils in arts, crafts, or trades, and operated as a commercial enterprise as distinguished from schools endowed and/or supported by taxation. 
    Schools, Public, Private, and Parochial: A school for any grades between kindergarten and twelfth teaching accredited courses of instruction as approved by the Colorado Department of Education. 
    Setbacks: The distance between any property line and the wall or support of structure. Setbacks are not applicable for fences except where specifically indicated. 
    Sign: Any device for visual communication which is intended to, or in fact does, direct attention of the public whether by means of words, letters, trademarks, pictures, designs, objects or by any other means. 
    Sign shop: A commercial establishment having as a principal activity the fabricating of signs under seventy-two (72) square feet, banners, stencils, bumper stickers, decals and other graphics for commercial or private use. 
    Single Ownership: Refers to common ownership of property by one or more individuals or corporations directly, beneficially or as tenants in common. 
    Solid Waste: Garbage, refuse, sludge of sewage disposal plants, and other discarded solid materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and community activities, but does not include agricultural [waste]. 
    Standards of Development: Regulations pertaining to the physical development of a site including requirements pertaining to yards, heights, lot area, fences, walls, landscaping area, open space, access, parking, signs, setbacks, and other physical requirements. 
    Street: Any public or private right-of-way used for or intended to be used for passage or travel by motor vehicles and affording a principal means of access to abutting property. "Street" shall include such terms as highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
    Street, Arterial: A limited access street of great continuity, existing or planned, which serves as a principal trafficway carrying traffic volumes from one side of the City to the other. 
    Street, Collector: A street carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets within the community. 
    Street, Local: A street of very limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve a small number of dwelling units. 
    Street Plan: A part of the extraterritorial agreement with Logan County showing location and dimensions of principal streets. 
    Structural Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction. 
    Structure: A purposeful combination of materials fixed to the ground, or to some other structure. Structures include buildings, towers, masts, sheds, roofed storage areas, mechanical equipment, and signs. Structures do not include fences, walls, driveways, walkways, other paved areas or public utility lines and cables. 
    Structure, Permanent: A structure which is built of such materials and in such a way that it would commonly be expected to last and remain useful for an indefinite period of time given proper maintenance and repair. 
    Structure, Temporary: A structure which is built of such materials and in such a way that it would commonly be expected to have a relatively short, useful life, or is intended to be used for a short term only. 
    Subdivider: Any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined in this Section. 
    Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. 
    Tower (Radio and TV): The structure on which transmitting and/or receiving antennas are located. 
    Trailer: Any wheeled vehicle, without motive power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to carry its cargo load wholly upon its own structure and which is generally and commonly used to carry and transport property over the public highways. 
    Trailer Park: A parcel of land of at least one acre planned, designed and improved to accommodate transient travelling in a camper or trailer. Refer to Trailer Park requirements in the City Code. 
    Use: Goal, object, purpose or activity of property allowed to be carried on under the zoning regulations in that particular district. 
    Variance: An exception to the application of specific requirements of this Ordinance to a specific piece of property. Criteria and procedures for requesting and processing a variance are found in Chapter XIII of this Zoning Ordinance. 
    Veterinary Hospital: A building used for the diagnosis, treatment and care of animals or pets, including the boarding of animals for limited periods of time. It may include outdoor runs and pens. 
    Yard: An open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this Ordinance, on the lot on which a building is situated. 
    Yard, Front: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest line or point of the building. 
    Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the building. 
    Yard, Side: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest line or point of the building or accessory building attached thereto. 
    Zoning Compliance Permit: An official finding that a planned use of a property, as indicated by an application, complies with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or meets special requirements of a conditional use permit. 
    Zoning Lot: Is either: (a) a lot of record existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto, or (b) a tract of land either unsubdivided or consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots of record which, on the effective date of this Ordinance or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto, was in single ownership, or (c) a tract of land, located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a building permit (or if no building permit is required, at the time of filing for a Zoning Compliance Permit), is designated by its owner or developer as a tract all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership. 
    Zoning Yard: A setback concerning parking spaces to keep cars from protruding beyond the parking lot into public right-of-way or street. 
(Ord. No. 12-1989, 8-22-89, eff. 8-25-89; Ord. No. 11-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 13-1995, 7-25-95, eff. 8-4-95; Ord. No. 3-1996, 2-13-96, eff. 2-23-96; Ord. No. 10-1997, 4-8-97, eff. 4-18-97; Ord. No. 24-1997, 5-27-97, eff. 6-6-97; Ord. No. 55-1997, 10-28-97, eff. 11-7-97; Ord. No. 49-1998, 11-24-98, eff. 12-4-98; Ord. No. 51-1998, 11-24-98, eff. 12-4-98; Ord. No. 4-1999, 4-27-99, eff. 5-7-99; Ord. No. 30-2001, 10-23-01, eff. 11-2-01; Ord. No. 28-2002, 10-15-02, eff. 10-25-02; Ord. No. 9-2008, § 1, 9-9-08, eff. 9-19-08; Ord. No. 3-2010, 3-23-10, eff. 4-2-10; Ord. No. 4-2010, 5-11-10, eff. 5-21-10; Ord. No. 13-2017, 11-28-17, eff. 12-8-17) 
CHAPTER IV. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 401. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The following use regulations and review categories are intended to apply to all existing and future parcels of land within the incorporated area of Sterling. Except as otherwise provided for by law or in this Ordinance, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes permitted and in the zoning districts allowed. 
Sec. 402. - Schedule of permitted uses. 
    The following charts list the uses permitted in each zoning district. Applicants shall refer to these charts when making requests for land use activities. Uses by Right are denoted by the letter "X"; Conditional Uses are denoted by the letter "C"; Temporary Uses are denoted by the letter "T"; Uses not Permitted are denoted by a blank space: 
X Use by Right 
C Conditional Use 
T Temporary Use 
Not Permitted (Blank) 
R-1 R-2 R-3 MH MS NB CB CBD LI HI OS 1. *Accessory Building and Uses X X X X X X X X X X 2. *Adult Business C 3. Adult Day Care C X X X X 4. Agricultural Equipment Sales and Service X X X 5. Animal Shelter C C C 6. Appliance Sales and Repair X C X 7. *Arcades X C C 8. Assembly Halls or Auditoriums C X X 8a. Assisted Living Facility X X X X 9. Automobile Accessory Stores X C C 10. Automobile Body Shops C X X 11. Automobile Parking Lots (Commercial) C X X X X 12. Automobile Sales and Service X X X 13. Automobile Service Stations and Repair Garages X X X X 14. Automobile Wash and Polish X X 1. Truck Wash C X 15. Bakeries C C X X 16. Beauty and Barber Shops C C C X X 17. Boarding Houses and Rooming Houses C C C C X X C 18. Bottling Works C X X 19. Bowling Alleys X C X 19a. Brewpub C C 20. Buildings Supply Yards, Sale of Cement & Concrete Products & Lumber Yards X X X 21. Cabinet Making and Carpenters Shops X X X 22. *Carnival, Circuses, Bazaars, Fairs T T T T T T 23. Cement, Cinder Block, Concrete or Lime or Plaster Manufacture C X 24. Cement or Cinder Block Outside Storage X 25. Charitable, Civic, Youth, Social Fraternal Organizations C C C X C 26. *Christmas Tree Lots T T T T T T 27. Churches and Other Places of Worship X X X X X X X X 28. Cleaning and Dyeing Establishments 1. Commercial X X X X 2. Industrial X X 29. Clothing & Apparel Stores X X 30. Community Building C X X X 31. Construction Yards Enclosed by a Fence C X X 32. Construction Office & Yards Incidental to Construction on the Premise T T T T T T T T T T T 33. Convenience-Grocery Store of not more than 1,500 square feet C C C X X X 34. Dairy Plants 1. Processing C X X 2. Distribution X X X 35. Dance Halls X X 36. *Family Child Care Home X X X X C X X X *Large Family Child Care Home X X X C X X *Child Care Center C C X X X 37. Department Stores X X 38. *Drive-In Establishments X C 39. Driving Range C X X 40. Drug Stores, Pharmacy X X X X 41. Dwelling-Duplex X X X 42. Dwelling-Manufactured Home C X 43. Dwelling-Manufactured Home, Class A X X X X 43a. Dwelling-Manufactured Home, Class B C X X 44. Dwelling-Mobile Home X 44a. Modular Homes X X X X 45. Dwelling-Multiple Family X X C C X 46. Dwelling-Single Family X X X X X X 46a. Dwelling-Single Family, Live/Work Space C 47. Eating and Drinking Establishments C X X X 48. Equipment Rental Establishments C X X C 49. Exterminating Service C X X 50. Farm Supply Sales (including Feed and Fertilizer) X X X 51. Financial Institutions C X X 52. Fire Station X X X X X X X X X X 53. Flea Market Approved as a Conditional Use in all zoning districts. 54. Florist X C X X X 55. Frozen Food Locker C X X 56. Fuel Oil, Gasoline, Natural Gas and Petroleum Products-Bulk Storage X 57. Funeral Parlors, Undertaking Establishments C X C 58. Furniture Manufacturing C X X 59. Furniture Stores X X 60. Garage Sales T T T T 61. Glass Repair X X X C 62. Golf Courses C C C C X X X 63. Grain Elevator Operation X X 64. Group Home X C X X 65. Commercial Greenhouses C C X 66. Grocery Stores X C 67. *Harboring of Livestock, Fowl, Swine X 68. Hardware, Appliance, Electrical Supplies-Retail X X X 69. Heating, Plumbing and Electrical Contractor 1. Shops C X X 2. Offices X X X X 70. Home Appliance Stores X X 71. Home Occupations C C C C 72. Hospitals, Clinics C X X X X 72a. Jails C C 73. Hotels/Motels X C X 74. Ice-Manufacture, Storage and Sales X X X 75. Interior Decorating Shops C X X X 76. Janitor Service C C X X 77. Jewelry Stores X X 78. Junk Yards X 79. Kennels X X 80. Laboratories for Research and Testing C X X 81. Laundromat-Self Service-Coin Operated C C X X 82. Leather Goods and Luggage Stores X X 83. Libraries X C X X X 84. Light Manufacture or Processing, otherwise not named herein provided no operations are carried on which will create smoke, fumes, odor, vibration or dust, or which will be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. X X 85. Liquor Stores C X X C 86. Live Bait Stores C X C X 87. Machine Shops C X X 88. Marine Sales and Service X X X 89. Meat Processing, Pack and Slaughter X 89a. Mineral Extraction C 90. Mobile Home Park X 91. Factory Built Housing, Sales & Service X X 92. Mobile Home Storage X X X 93. Motorcycle Sales and Service X C X 94. Moving and Transfer Company C X X 95. Music Stores X X 96. Newsstands C X X X 97. Novelty, Curio, Antique, and Souvenir Shops X X X X 98. Nursing Homes C X C X 99. Office Buildings C C X X C C 100. Office Building-Modular (Must meet UBC Modular Office Requirements) C X X X X 101. Office Equipment, Supplies & Service Stores X X X 102. Optical & Scientific Instrument, Jewelry Clock, Musical Instrument Manufacture X X X 103. *Outdoor Storage C X 104. *Parking for Authorized Temporary Uses T T T T T T T T T T T 105. Paint and Body Shop C X X 106. Paint, Retail X X 107. Parks and Open Space X X X X X X X X X X X 108. Pet Shop & Small Animal Store C X C X X 109. Photographic Equipment & Supply Sales, Retail X X X 110. Photographic Studio C X X 111. Pipe Storage X X 112. Police Stations X X X X X X X 113. Post Office C C X X 114. Printing Establishments X X X 115. Professional Offices C X X X X X 116. Public Utility Storage Yards & Service Installments X X 117. Public Utility Offices C X X X X 118. Public Buildings C C X X X X 119. Radiator Shops X X X 120. Radio & TV Broadcasting Stations X X X X 121. Railroad Yards (together with related buildings) X 122. Rendering Plant X 123. Rodeos or Equine Facilities with Related Events & Facilities C C X X C 124. *Satellite Dishes/TV Antennas X X X X X X X X X X X 125. Schools 1. Public, Private, and Parochial X X X X C 2. College or University X X X 126. Sheet Metal Shops C X X 127. Shoe Repair and Sales X X X 128. Commercial Shooting Range C C C C 129. Sign Manufacturing, Repair or Maintenance C X X 129a. Sign Shop C X X X 130. Skating Rinks C X C X 131. Sporting Goods Stores X X 132. Storage Warehouses X X X 133. Studios C X X X X 134. Theaters X X 135. *Towers, Radio and Television C C C 136. Trailer Parks Approved as a Conditional Use in all zoning districts 137. Transmission Shop X X X 138. Travel Agencies & Ticket Offices C X X C 139. Truck Stops C X X 140. Truck Terminals X X 141. Upholstery Shops X C X X 142. Used Car Lots X X 143. *Veterinary Clinics & Hospitals X X X 144. Warehousing & Wholesaling X X X 145. Prisons or Correctional Facilities C C 146. *Auctioneering T T T T T X T X X 147. Shopping Malls X X 148. Public Facilities C C C C C C C C X X X  
*See Special Regulations 
(Ord. No. 1-1990, 3-27-90, eff. 3-30-90; Ord. No. 7-1990, 7-10-90, eff. 7-13-90; Ord. No. 11-1990, 8-28-90, eff. 8-31-90; Ord. No. 26-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 13-1995, 7-25-95, eff. 8-4-95; Ord. No. 5-1996, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 35-1996, 10-22-96, eff. 11-1-96; Ord. No. 12-1997, 4-8-97, eff. 4-18-97; Ord. No. 25-1997, 5-27-97, eff. 6-6-97; Ord. No. 40-1997, 8-26-97, eff. 9-5-97; Ord. No. 56-1997, 10-28-97, eff. 11-7-97; Ord. No. 65-1997, 12-23-97, eff. 1-2-98; Ord. No. 50-1998, 11-24-98, eff. 12-4-98; Ord. No. 5-1999, 4-27-99, eff. 5-7-99; Ord. No. 12-1999, 7-13-99, eff. 7-23-99; Ord. No. 21-1999, 9-28-99, eff. 10-8-99; Ord. No. 21-2000, 6-13-00, eff. 6-23-00; Ord. No. 36-2000, 11-14-00, eff. 11-24-00; Ord. No. 31-2001, 10-23-01, eff. 11-2-01; Ord. No. 10-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02; Ord. No. 27-2002, 9-15-02, eff. 9-25-02; Ord. No. 3-2005, 2-8-05, eff. 2-18-05; Ord. No. 9-2008, § 2, 9-9-08, eff. 9-19-08; Ord. No. 4-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09; Ord. No. 24-2009, 10-13-09, eff. 9-18-09; Ord. No. 3-2010, 3-23-10, eff. 4-2-10; Ord. No. 4-2010, 5-11-10, eff. 5-21-10; Ord. No. 16-2014, 11-25-14; Ord. No. 11-2017, 11-28-17, eff. 12-8-17; Ord. No. 13-2017, 11-28-17, eff. 12-8-17) 
Sec. 403. - Dimensional requirements. 
    In order to carry out the intent, purpose, and provisions of this Ordinance, the following charts contain the area and bulk regulations for uses within a particular zoning district: 
    403.1. Residential Regulations 
Zoning District Bulk and Area Regulations R-1 R-2 R-3 *MH Minimum Lot Area (in sq. ft.) Per dwelling 6,500 6,500 6,500 6,000 Per dwelling unit NA 3,250 1,000 1,000 Minimum Lot Width Interior lot 60' 60' 60' 50' Corner lot 70' 70' 70' 60' Minimum Building Setback 1. 
Front From principal building 20' 20' 20' 20' From accessory building 45' 45' 45' 45' Projections from principal building 36' 36' 36' 36' Projections from accessory building 24' 24' 24' 24' 2. 
Side From principal building 5' 5' 5' 5' From detached accessory building 3' 3' 3' 3' 3. 
Rear From principal building 20' 20' 20' 20' From accessory building 3' 3' 3' 3' 4. 
Corner Lot (on all sides adjacent to street, other than front)** From principal building 5' 5' 5' 5' From accessory building 5' 5' 5' 5' Maximum Building Height Principal building 35' 35' 50' 25' Accessory building 15' 15' 20' 15' Minimum Floor Area (in sq. ft.) Per dwelling 1,000 800 800 650 Per dwelling unit NA 700 700 NA  
*For mobile homes on individual platted lots. For Mobile Home Park requirements, see Chapter VII, Section 706. 
**No principal building or accessory building under this No. 4 shall be erected or rebuilt anywhere on a lot except where it does not interfere with line-of-sight clearance, which shall be defined as the triangular area formed by (1) the lines extending from any corner of a corner lot adjacent to two intersecting streets to a distance of forty feet (40') along both property lines from the corner (constituting two sides); and (2) the diagonal connecting such lines (constructing the third side). 
    403.2. Commercial Regulations. 
Zoning District Bulk and Area Regulations MS NB CB CBD Minimum Lot Area (in sq. ft.) 7,000 7,000 7,000 Subject to PC Approval Minimum Lot Width 60' 60' 50' Subject to PC Approval Minimum Front Yard Setback Property 
Line 20' Property Line Minimum Rear Yard Setback Property 
Line 20' Property Line Minimum Side Yard Setback Property 
Line 10' Property Line Maximum Building Height 50' 35' 50' 50'  
_____
    403.3. Industrial Regulations. 
Zoning District Bulk and Area Regulations LI HI Minimum Lot Area (in sq. ft.) 20,000 20,000 Minimum Front Yard Setback Property Line Minimum Rear Yard Setback Property Line Minimum Side Yard Setback Property Line Maximum Building Height 50' 50'  
(Ord. No. 11-1992, 4-14-92, eff. 4-27-92; Ord. No. 4-1996, 2-13- 96, eff. 2-23-96; Ord. No. 11-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
Sec. 404. - Uses not permitted. 
    In each zoning district, any use category not expressly permitted shall be deemed excluded. If a question arises as to whether a specific use does or does not come within the expressed use categories, any person may apply to the City Planning Commission for a determination as to whether or not a specific use is expressly permitted. 
Sec. 405. - Uses not itemized. 
A.  In any Zoning District where a building, structure or use is enumerated, any other building, structure or use which is similar to those enumerated and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which it is located shall be permitted. 
B.  Upon application or upon its own initiative, the City may, by ordinance, add to the uses listed for a zoning district and describe by which procedure the use may be allowed provided the use conforms to the conditions set forth in the following findings: 
1.  Such use is appropriate in the use group to which it is added; 
2.  Such use conforms to the basic characteristics of the use group to which it is added; 
3.  Such use does not create any more offensive effects, objectionable influences, or traffic hazards than the minimum amount normally resulting from other uses listed in the use group to which it is added; 
4.  Such use is consistent with and further implements the stated intent and purposes of this Ordinance and the Sterling Comprehensive Master Plan in effect; and, 
5.  Such use is determined to be one which fills an existing or anticipated need within the City of Sterling which cannot otherwise be accommodated through the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 406. - Changes in use. 
    Any person seeking a change in use in any zoning district shall first present such proposed change to the Director of Public Works or designee for determination as to which procedure shall be followed. A change in use shall require that the person proposing such change be issued a Zoning Compliance Permit prior to initiating the change and/or receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 407. - Combined lots usage. 
    Two (2) or more contiguous land tracts/lots of record, having the same identical ownership, may be used for a use/structure and/or to satisfy required setback(s), provided the owner submits to the Director of Public Works an executed, but unrecorded document committing attachment of such contiguous tracts/lots in order to create the desired or required parcel size for the use/structure and/or its setback(s), for the director's approval. Following approval of such document and final completion of other zoning ordinance requirements, the Director shall cause the recording of such document in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Logan County, retain a copy of such recorded document for city file records, and mail the original of such recorded document, certified, return receipt requested, to the owner(s). If said contiguous land tracts/lots are not in the same zoning district, the owner(s) must establish one zoning district for said contiguous land tracts/lots as provided for in map amendments of Chapter XII of this Ordinance. If any one of the said contiguous land tracts/lots contain a conditional use, the owner must comply with Section 507 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 33-1992, 11-24-92) 
CHAPTER V. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 501. - Purpose. 
    The Conditional Use process recognizes that there are a number of uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular zoning district depending upon all the circumstances of the individual case. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide a comprehensive review of such uses so that the City is assured that these uses are compatible with their locations and surrounding land uses. 
Sec. 502. - Approval required. 
    All requests for Conditional Uses shall be acted upon by the City Council following receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Commission. A public hearing on each request shall be held by both the Planning Commission and the Council. Notice of the public hearings shall be published and written notices provided in accordance with Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
Sec. 503. - Application requirements. 
    Applicants requesting a Conditional Use shall submit ten (10) copies of the following required material to the Director of Public Works or designee. Such application may be filed by a person or persons owning or having an interest in the property in question and shall be accompanied with the written concurrence of all owners of record of the property. The application shall be filed in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting and shall include: 
A.  A list of any easements, encumbrances, or rights-of-way internal to the property, and protective covenants; 
B.  A statement of intent for the proposal; 
C.  A complete site plan showing the major details of the proposed development, including existing adjacent land uses, locations of buildings and structures both existing and proposed, off-street parking and loading areas, access to and from the property, signs, pedestrian and open space areas, and any natural or manmade features on the property which could or would affect the development; 
D.  A time schedule for development; 
E.  Written and/or graphic material documenting compliance with the Special Regulations of Chapter VII, where appropriate to proposal; 
F.  Such other information as required by written rule of the City Council or the Planning Commission; 
G.  Any additional information the applicant believes will support the request. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
Sec. 504. - Fees. 
    A fee as determined by City Council shall be paid at the time of application. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 505. - Review and recommendation. 
    At the regularly scheduled Planning Commission Meeting, the Commission shall review the request taking into consideration the proposed use; intensity of use; and site development plan as it relates to the character of the surrounding area; the desirability and need for such a use in the specific area of the City; the availability of public utilities and services; the potential for environmental or objectionable impacts which could result from its approval; and compliance with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. 
    The Planning Commission shall forward a written recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial to the City Council. Such recommendation shall include the findings upon which the recommendation was made. A recommendation of conditional approval shall set forth the conditions and those requirements which the Commission deems necessary to meet before final action can be taken. 
Sec. 506. - Approval criteria and conditions. 
    Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation and in compliance with the requirements for public notification, the City Council shall consider the request, the Planning Commission's recommendation, and public comment. The Council shall then render a final decision of approval, conditional approval, or denial. The reasons for its decision shall be stated in the official minutes of the hearing and shall be mailed to the applicant. No Conditional Use shall be approved unless the City Council finds that the application complies with the requirements of this Chapter, is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, the Comprehensive Master Plan, and is compatible with the surrounding land uses. In making such determination, the Council shall consider and may impose modifications or conditions, by way of illustration and not limitation, such as: 
A.  Compliance with any other condition of this Ordinance regarding the particular Conditional Use; 
B.  Compliance with any other applicable regulation, whether in this or any other Sterling ordinance, or any county, state, or federal regulations; 
C.  Any other condition imposed by Council, which is deemed necessary to determine: 
1.  That the proposed Conditional Use will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property, or from the character of the neighborhood. 
2.  That the conditional use will serve to protect the best interests of the City of Sterling and the public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.  That the effect of the conditional use will facilitate the logical, efficient, and economic extension of public services and facilities. 
An approved conditional use shall be granted to the property in question and is transferable. 
Sec. 507. - Modification of approved conditional uses. 
    No approved Conditional Use may be changed, modified, expanded, or enlarged unless the same is amended and approved in accordance with the procedures applicable to initial approval of a Conditional Use. 
Sec. 508. - Denial of conditional uses. 
    When a Conditional Use has been denied by the Council, no request for that particular use may be refiled with the Planning Commission. The only exception to this provision shall be if the landowner or his agent can show a change of circumstances regarding the property, which would warrant reexamination of the Conditional Use request. Such showing of changed circumstances shall be submitted in writing, along with a Conditional Use application, to the Director of Public Works or designee. 
Sec. 509. - Revocation. 
    The City Council may revoke approval of a Conditional Use whenever the applicant has failed to complete the project substantially in accordance with the time schedule submitted with the application, or with the conditions placed on the approval. Before any such revocation is issued, the Council shall first notify the applicant of the pending action and provide the applicant an opportunity to appear before the Council to contest the pending action. 
CHAPTER VI. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 601. - Definition. 
    A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a clustering of buildings providing common open space, density increases, and a mix of building types and land uses. It permits the planning of a project and the calculation of densities over the entire development rather than on an individual lot by lot basis. 
Sec. 602. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to encourage flexibility, innovation and variety in the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design, character and quality of new development; to facilitate the adequate and economic provision of streets, utilities, and services; to achieve beneficial land use relationships with the surrounding area; to preserve the unique, natural and scenic features of the landscape; and to preserve open space as development occurs. 
Sec. 603. - Fees. 
    A fee set by City Council shall be paid at the time of application. No further processing of the PUD will take place until this fee has been paid. If the actual cost of processing exceeds the amount set by City Council, the excess amount shall be billed to the person requesting the PUD as soon as it can be accurately determined, and if said bill is not paid within sixty (60) days thereafter, further processing of the PUD shall cease until such bill is paid. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 604. - Application procedures. 
    A Planned Unit Development shall be processed in three (3) stages: conceptual review, preliminary plan, and final plan. Each stage shall be processed through the authorities in the order indicated in the following table: 
Stage Staff Planning 
Commission Council Conceptual Review X Preliminary Plan X X X Utility Plan X Final Plan X X X  
    604.1. Conceptual Review: This stage of processing is designed to allow exchange of information between the proposed developer and the City Staff. Each applicant shall confer with the Director of Public Works and other department or division heads involved in connection with the preparation of the Planned Unit Development application. The general outlines of the proposal, evidenced schematically by sketch plans, shall be considered before submission of the Planned Unit Development application. Thereafter, the Public Works Department shall furnish the applicant with written comments regarding such conference, including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the components of the Planned Unit Development application. 
    604.2. Preliminary Plan: 
A.  [Submittal:] Upon completion of the conceptual review meeting and after the recommendations from the Public Works Department have been made, application may be filed for a Planned Unit Development on a preliminary basis. Materials pertaining to the preliminary plan must all be submitted to the Public Works Department at least three (3) weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the preliminary plan will be considered. After the Public Works Department has received the preliminary plan application in the form required herein along with the application fee, the matter will be placed on the agenda for the appropriate meeting of the Planning Commission. 
B.  Written Documents: The application for the preliminary plan shall be in accordance with and include the following written documents: 
1.  A legal description of the site proposed for development which shall separately describe present and proposed ownership. 
2.  Present and proposed zoning districts. 
3.  A statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant, including the specific advantages the Planned Unit Development offers as opposed to a conventional subdivision. 
4.  A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the Planned Unit Development or stages of the same can be expected to begin and be completed, including the proposed phasing of construction of public improvements and recreational and common space areas. 
5.  A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to future ownership of all or portions of the Planned Unit Development. 
6.  Site data, including the following: 
a.  Total number and type of dwelling units showing number of rooms and bedrooms for each when applicable. 
b.  Parcel size. 
c.  Proposed coverage of buildings and structures for the purpose of calculating storm drainage runoffs and storm drainage retention requirements. Such calculations shall also be submitted by the applicant and shall have previously been submitted to the Director of Public Works or designee for consideration. 
d.  Gross and net residential densities. 
e.  For commercial Planned Unit Developments, estimated total floor area and estimated ratio of floor area to lot size. 
f.  Total area of open space. 
g.  Total area of open space which is suitable for active recreation. 
h.  Total area and description of nonresidential construction. 
i.  Off-street parking. 
7.  Physiographic data to include a description of: 
a.  Soils existing on the site accompanied by analysis as to the suitability of such soils for the intended construction and proposed landscaping. 
b.  A map showing all permanent and temporary streams and a sketch showing the one-hundred-year floodplain for each. 
c.  A description of the groundwater hydrologic conditions of the site with analysis of water table fluctuation and a statement of site suitability for the intended construction and proposed landscaping. 
C.  Site Plan and Supporting Maps: A site plan and such additional maps as necessary shall be submitted showing the major details of the proposed Planned Unit Development at a scale of not greater than 1? equals fifty feet (50') and containing the following minimum information: 
1.  The existing site conditions including contours at two-foot intervals; all water courses; floodplains; unique natural features and vegetative cover, including all trees and shrubs, by size and species. 
2.  Proposed lot lines and plat designs. 
3.  The tentative location and floor area of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, types of dwelling units, density per type and nonresidential structures, including commercial facilities. 
4.  Preliminary architectural elevations (prospectives) sufficient to relay the basic architectural intent of the proposed improvements. 
5.  The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved or otherwise used as common open space, public park, recreational areas, school sites and similar public and semi-public uses. 
6.  The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector and local streets, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading zones and major points of access to public rights-of-way, including major points of ingress and egress to the development. Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, should be included where appropriate. Rights-of-way and paved surfaces for each street shall be shown in accordance with the minimum design standards outlined in this Chapter. 
7.  The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including interrelationships with the vehicular circulation system, indicating proposed treatment of points of conflict. 
8.  The existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water, electric, gas and telephone lines, fire hydrants and trash collection areas. 
9.  A general landscaping plan indicating the treatment of materials used for private and common open spaces, including all existing vegetation with identification of all trees by size and species; and specific proposals to protect and preserve existing trees during and after construction. The details of size and species for intended plantings of vegetation will be required at the final plan phase. 
10.  A vicinity map of the area surrounding the site within a distance of at least one (1) mile (at a scale of 8? equals 1 mile) showing at least the following: 
a.  Zoning classifications; 
b.  Traffic circulation systems; and 
c.  Major public facilities (schools, parks, etc.) 
11.  The site plan shall include, at the same scale, the area surrounding the site within one hundred fifty feet (150') and shall show for such area at least the following: 
a.  Land uses and location of principal structures and major existing landscaping features; 
b.  Traffic circulation systems; 
c.  Densities of residential uses; 
d.  Natural features of landscape; and 
e.  General topographic mapping at two (2) street intervals. 
The site plan shall further indicate the proposed treatment of the perimeter of the planned unit development, including materials and techniques used, such as screens, fences, walls and other landscaping. 
12.  Street cross-section schematics shall be submitted for each general category of street to be included within the proposed development (one (1) for local, sub-collector, collector streets) to include proposed width, treatment of curbs and gutters, sidewalk systems and bikeway systems. Street designs must be consistent with the minimum street standards contained in this Chapter. 
13.  Any additional information as required by the review authority necessary to evaluate the character and impacts, both fiscal and environmental, of the proposed Planned Unit Development. 
D.  Project Phasing: All information and data required at the preliminary plan phase must include the entire development site. Applications for a final Planned Unit Development may be made for any portion of the overall approved preliminary plan. Phased projects shall include a proportional amount of the proposed recreational and open space amenities for the entire site, such that the project as it is built will comply with the overall density and design standards of this Section at all times. 
E.  Review and Approval: The preliminary plans shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall make recommendations to City Council either approving, approving conditionally or rejecting the plan. The matter shall then be scheduled on the agenda for City Council which shall take final action on the preliminary plan. 
F.  Time Limit for Action Upon a Preliminary Plan: Within a maximum of twelve (12) months following the approval of a preliminary plan, the applicant shall proceed by filing with the Public Works Department a final plan in detailed form covering all or a part of the Planned Unit Development. Upon application and for good cause, the Planning Commission may extend the period for filing a final development plan for successive six-month periods. If no final plan or request for extension is filed within an extended six (6) month period, the right to proceed under the preliminary plan shall expire. 
    604.3. Final Plan: 
A.  Submittal: After approval by the City Council of a preliminary plan, application may be made for approval of a final plan. Application for a final plan shall be in substantial compliance with the requirements of the approved preliminary plan, provided that the final plan does not violate any provision of the Zoning Ordinance and does not: 
1.  Involve a reduction of more than five percent (5%) of the area reserved for common open space and/or usable open space; 
2.  Increase the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than five percent (5%); 
3.  Increase residential densities by more than five percent (5%); or 
4.  Increase the total ground area covered by buildings by more than five percent (5%). 
B.  [Revisions:] If the final plan is not in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan, the revisions shall require the same review and public hearing process required for approval of preliminary plans. 
C.  [Contents:] The following information and materials shall be required for approval of a final plan: 
1.  Final site plan: The final site plan shall provide sufficient detail to facilitate recording, engineering and ease of building permit administration. The final site plan shall, where possible, locate the exact position of proposed buildings and structures. If this is not possible, a building envelope or range of possible locations shall be shown. If building envelopes are used, design specifics shall be coordinated with the Director of Public Works or designee, and such specifics shall be shown on the final site plan when determined. The final site plan and subdivision plat shall be submitted on twenty-four by thirty-six inch sheets at a scale of not greater than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Lot lines. 
b.  The location and floor area size of all existing proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, types of dwelling units, density per type and non-residential structures, including commercial facilities. All buildings shall be dimensioned with distances shown from clear reference points. 
c.  The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved or used as common open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites and similar public and semi-public uses. 
d.  The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector and local streets, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading zones and major points of access to public rights-of-way. Notations of ownership, public or private, shall be included where appropriate. Rights-of-ways and paved widths for each street shall be shown in accordance with the minimum design standards of this Ordinance. 
2.  Final landscape plan: A landscape plan shall be filed indicating a well-designed treatment of exterior spaces which measurably improve the overall quality of the project. The design objective of the plan must be clear and supported by written statement. 
The plan must provide an ample quantity and variety of ornamental plant species which are regarded as suitable for this climate. Landscape treatment must be balanced with plant material with sufficient use of upright species for vertical control. Plant material selections will be reviewed for adaptability to physical conditions indicated by site plan locations. The landscape plan shall include the following: 
a.  Extent and location of all plant materials and other landscape features. Plant material must be identified by direct labeling on the plan or by a clearly understandable legend. 
b.  Flower and shrub bed definition must be clear and drawn to scale with dimensions. 
c.  Proposed plant material should be indicated at mature sizes and in appropriate relation to scale. 
d.  Species and size of existing plant material. 
e.  Proposed treatment of all ground surfaces must be clearly indicated; paving, turf, gravel, grading, etc. 
f.  Location of water outlets. If areas of planting are extensive, plans for underground sprinkler system will be required. 
g.  Plant material schedule with common and botanical names, sizes, quantities, and method of transplant. Bareroot material will be permitted, but it is discouraged on all but the smallest sizes. Plants must be sized according to the following table: 
Type Size Standard deciduous trees 13/4 in. to 2 in. caliper Small ornamental & flowering trees 11/2 in. to 13/4 in. caliper Evergreen trees 5 ft. to 6 ft. in height Shrubs Adequate size to be consistent with design intent  
h.  All plant material must meet specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) for No. 1 grade. All trees must be balled and burlapped or equivalent. 
i.  No building permit shall be issued for construction of any building on any portion of a unit development until the landscaping required by the final landscape plan is in place or a bond, cash deposit or equivalent is deposited with the City conditioned on and guaranteeing the installation of all landscaping shown on the approved landscape plan. Such bond, cash deposit or equivalent shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of the landscaping improvements determined by an executed contract to install such landscaping or by adequate appraisals of such cost. Such bond, cash deposit or equivalent shall further guarantee the continued maintenance and replacement of the landscaping for a period of two (2) years after installation, but the amount of the same shall be reduced after installation is completed to twenty-five percent (25%) of the actual cost of such landscaping. If the required landscaping is already installed prior to application for a building permit, a bond in the amount of twenty-five percent (25%) of the actual cost of the landscaping guaranteeing continued maintenance and replacement of the same for a period of two (2) years shall be required as a condition of issuance of the building permit. Any bond, cash deposit or equivalent deposited pursuant to this requirement shall be released upon certification by the Director of Public Works or designee that the required landscaping program has been completed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the bond. If any landscaping required pursuant to this Chapter is not maintained in accordance with the requirements of the final plan, such failure to maintain the landscaping shall be a violation of this Chapter enforceable by action in the Municipal Court of the City of Sterling or the County or District Court of Logan County, Colorado. 
D.  Subdivision Plat: An official subdivision plat of the site must accompany the final plan. This plat must conform to the Subdivision Ordinance of the City except as waived by the approved preliminary plan for the Planned Unit Development. The subdivision shall contain proper dedications for public streets, utility easements and all other public rights required by the preliminary plan. Approval by City Council of the final plan and subdivision plat shall be required before filing of the subdivision plat or issuance of building permits. 
E.  Final Utility Plans: Final detailed engineering for sewer, water, electrical, street improvements and other public improvements must be submitted to and approved by the Director of Public Works or designee, and the developer shall execute an agreement in proper form providing for the installation of such improvements prior to submission of the final plan to the Council. 
F.  Approval: The final plan shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works or designee who shall recommend approval of the same to the Planning Commission unless the final plan fails to conform to the approved preliminary plan and the requirements of this Chapter. The Planning Commission shall either recommend to City Council approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the plan. After review and recommendation from the Administrative Staff and the Planning Commission, the final plan shall be submitted to City Council for final action. 
G.  Amendments to Final Unit Development Plan: 
1.  Minor changes in the location, sizing, height and siting of buildings and structures may be authorized by the Director of Public Works or designee without additional public hearings, if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. The Director of Public Works or designee shall not approve any of the following changes: 
a.  A change in the use or character of the development. 
b.  An increase in the overall coverage of structures. 
c.  An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities. 
d.  A reduction by greater than five percent (5%) of the total required open space. 
e.  A reduction by greater than three percent (3%) of the off-street parking and loading space. 
f.  A reduction in required pavement widths or rights-of-way for streets or easements. 
g.  An increase of greater than five percent (5%) in the approved gross leasable floor areas of commercial buildings in either residential or commercial Planned Unit Developments. 
h.  An increase by greater than five percent (5%) in the approved residential density of the proposed development. 
2.  All other changes in use or rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, or any changes other than listed above, may be made by the Board of Adjustment. Such amendments shall be made only if they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in community policy. Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedures established for the filing of the initial approved plan documents. 
H.  Time Limit for Validity of the Final Plan: The applicant must begin and substantially complete the development of an approved Planned Unit Development within two (2) years from the time of final approval. Extensions for successive periods of six (6) months may be granted by the Planning Commission. If the Planned Unit Development is to be developed in stages, the approved plan shall contain a development schedule and the applicant must begin and substantially complete the development of each stage within two (2) years of the time provided for the start of construction of each stage in the development schedule. Extensions may be granted by the Planning Commission on the same basis as for nonstaged developments. Failure to develop within the time limit set forth herein shall cause a forfeiture of the right to proceed under the final plan and require resubmission of all materials and reapproval of the same. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 605. - Special conditions for planned unit developments. 
    All Planned Unit Developments shall meet the requirements herein set forth and no final plan shall be approved that does not meet these requirements. 
A.  [Open Space Maintenance Plan:] The developer shall submit a legal instrument or instruments setting forth a plan providing for the permanent care and maintenance of open spaces. The same shall be submitted to the City Attorney and shall not be accepted until approved by him as to legal form and effect. The same shall then be submitted to the Planning Commission for its approval as to suitability for the proposed use and maintenance of open recreational areas and communally owned facilities and private streets. If the common open space is deeded to a homeowner's association, the applicant shall file the proposed documents governing the association. 
1.  The homeowners' association must be established before any residences are sold. 
2.  Membership in the association must be mandatory for each residence owner. 
3.  Open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a period of years. 
4.  The homeowners' association must be made responsible for liability insurance, taxes and maintenance of recreational and other facilities. 
5.  The association must have the power to levy assessments which can become a lien on individual premises for the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining common facilities. 
6.  The governing board of any such association shall consist of owners of property in the Planned Unit Development. 
B.  Open Space Maintenance Guaranty: In the event the organization established to own and maintain common open spaces, recreational areas, communally owned facilities and private streets, or any successor organization, shall at any time fail to maintain the common facilities in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved plan, City Council may cause written notice to be served upon such organization or upon the owners of property in the development setting forth the manner in which the common facilities have failed to be maintained in reasonable condition, which notice shall include the demand that the deficiencies noted be cured within thirty (30) days thereafter and shall state the date and place of a hearing to be held within fourteen (14) days of the notice. At the time of hearing, City Council may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may extend the time within which the same may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or modifications are not cured within the time set, City Council, in order to preserve the taxable values of properties within the development and to prevent the common facilities from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon such common facilities and maintain the same for a period of one (1) year. Such entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any right to use the common facilities not dedicated to public use. Before expiration of such year, City Council shall, upon its own initiative or upon the written request of the organization theretofore responsible for maintenance, call a public hearing and give notice of such hearing to the organization responsible for maintenance or the property owners of the Planned Unit Development. At such hearing, the organization responsible for maintenance and/or the residents of the development may show cause why maintenance by the City of Sterling should not be continued for a succeeding year. If City Council determines that it is not necessary for the City to continue such maintenance, the City shall cease such maintenance at the time established by City Council. Otherwise, the City shall continue maintenance for the next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination at the end of each year thereafter. The cost of maintenance by the City shall be a lien against the common facilities of the Planned Unit Development and the private properties within the development. City Council shall have the right to make assessments against properties in the development on at least the same basis that the organization responsible for maintenance of the facilities could make such assessments. Any unpaid assessment shall be a lien against the property responsible for the same, enforceable the same as a mortgage against such property. The City may further foreclose its lien on the common facility by certifying the same to the County Treasurer for collection as in the case of collection of general property taxes. The above is in accordance with Chapter 15A [§ 21-26 et seq.] of the Code, assessments and liens. 
C.  Guaranties for Open Space Preservation: Open space shown on the approved final plan shall not be used for the construction of any structures not shown on the final plan. 
Sec. 606. - Design standards. 
    The following design standards shall apply to any Planned Unit Development: 
A.  Open Space: 
1.  Required open space shall comprise at least thirty percent (30%) of the total gross area of any residential Planned Unit Development. 
2.  Within such thirty percent (30%) one-half (1/2) of the same may be developed for planting, walkways and landscape elements. The remaining one-half (1/2) shall be developed for active recreational use and shall be developed in parcels of not less than six thousand (6,000) contiguous square feet and not less than fifty (50) lineal feet in the smallest dimension. 
3.  Areas devoted to natural or improved flood control channels and areas encumbered by flowage, floodway or drainage easements may be used to partially satisfy the total open space requirements. 
4.  Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses located in approved areas shall be considered open space as long as the total impervious surfaces (paving, roofs, etc.) constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the total open space. 
5.  Public dedications may not contribute to the open space requirement. 
B.  Streets: The following table presents the minimum street design standards for Planned Unit Developments. 
Place Very Light 
(0-10 dwelling units) Local Light Traffic 
(11-100 dwelling units) Collector Local and Through 
(through traffic units) Pavement width (feet) No parking 24 1 - - Parking 1 side 30 30 - Parking 2 sides 36 36 44 Right-of-way width (feet) 36 50 80 Sidewalks At least 1 side 1 or both sides Both sides Sight distance (feet) 75 150 350 Utility easements 6 foot utility easements will be 
required on each side of all streets  
1 Not to exceed one hundred (100) feet in total length 
C.  Private Streets: 
1.  Private streets not dedicated for public use shall be designed and developed in accordance with the foregoing minimum street design standards. This requirement shall not apply to accessways serving four (4) or fewer residences or less than one hundred (100) feet in total length. 
2.  Access for emergency vehicles and other public vehicles shall be dedicated over all private streets. 
D.  Parking Standards: 
1.  Parking spaces shall be provided for residential developments as follows. All such parking spaces shall be off-street parking spaces and each space shall be accessible and usable. 
Number of Bedrooms 
 per Dwelling Unit Parking Spaces 
per Dwelling 
Unit   1 1.5   2 1.75   3 and above 2  
2.  Parking spaces shall be provided for nonresidential developments in accordance with the regulations in Chapter VIII. 
3.  Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other parking areas. 
4.  Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, roads and traffic arteries with hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in grade or walls, or otherwise. 
5.  No more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping. 
6.  No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be accommodated in any single parking area within a residential area. 
7.  All parking areas and any off-street loading area shall be paved and the design thereof shall be in accordance with the Parking Standards of this Ordinance. All areas shall be marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading, parking, and storage. 
8.  All parking areas shall be adequately lighted. Such lighting shall be so arranged so as to direct the light away from adjoining residences. 
9.  All parking areas and off-street loading areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding and other inconveniences. 
E.  Signs: All proposed signs shall be submitted as scale drawings and must conform to the provisions of Chapter X regarding signs. 
F.  Planned Unit Development Perimeters: Where Planned Unit Developments adjoin public streets or lands with a different zoning classification, the installation and maintenance of a landscaped area at such perimeter may be required. The detailed landscape plan for any such buffer required shall be a part of the landscape plan filed in conjunction with the final plan. 
(Ord. No. 46-1995, 12-12-95, eff. 12-22-95) 
Sec. 607. - Variance procedure. 
A.  The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, is empowered to grant variances to any of the provisions of this Chapter under the following circumstances: 
1.  The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of City Council, and the Council so finds, that the plan as submitted is equal to or better than such plan incorporating the applicable provision in this Chapter for which a variance is sought. 
2.  The variance may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter. 
B.  Nothing contained in this Chapter shall limit or otherwise alter the authority of the Board of Adjustment to grant variances as set forth in Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. 
CHAPTER VII. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 

Sec. 701. - Purpose. 
    Each use proposed within a zone district, whether by right, conditional use, or otherwise, will have actual and potential effects on the site, surrounding area, and the City. The degree of effect depends in large part on the type of use proposed and its location. This Chapter, therefore, lists certain regulations which may be necessary to address, depending upon the use proposed. 
Sec. 702. - Compliance. 
    In the event that a special regulation is denoted on the schedule of permitted uses, the applicant shall, with the assistance of City staff, address all applicable regulations for the proposal and submit such information along with other required material in conformance with the application requirements attendant to the provisions of the use procedure being pursued. 
Sec. 703. - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
    Accessory buildings or uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Home occupations; 
B.  Household pets; 
C.  Satellite dishes; 
D.  Private swimming pools; 
E.  Greenhouses; 
F.  Storage sheds; 
G.  Garages, automobile parking; and 
H.  Trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational vehicles stored in rear yard. 
    703.1 Home Occupations: Some types of work can be conducted at home with little or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood. The home occupation, regulations of this section are intended to permit residents to engage in home occupations, while ensuring that home occupations will not be a detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding area. The regulations require that home occupations (an accessory use) remain subordinate to the allowed principal use (residential), and that the residential character of the dwelling unit is retained. Such use shall be conducted entirely within a structure or dwelling. 
    There are two types of home occupations: major home occupations and minor home occupations. Both types are considered an accessory use. Home occupations shall not be allowed unless a conditional use permit is reviewed and approved in accordance with Chapter V. Conditional Uses. Major and minor home occupation permits will be renewed annually. 
    Home occupation permits are non-transferable. The permit expires upon the close of the business or the sale of the property. 
A.  Application and Approval Required: Home occupations [commencing after the adoption of this Ordinance] must file an application for said home occupation with the Department of Public Works. Applications must be approved by the Director of Public Works or designee. 
B.  Minor Home Occupations: The regulations of this subsection shall apply only to minor home occupations. Minor home occupations shall be allowed as an accessory use, provided that all regulations of this section are met 
1.  Approval: Minor home occupations will be reviewed and approved in accordance with the Conditional Use procedures of Chapter V. 
2.  Annual Renewal: A minor home occupation permit is required to be renewed once a year. The renewal process will include completing a Conditional Use Permit, along with the appropriate fee and an inspection by the Code Enforcement Specialist. The application will be reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the Conditional Use Procedures of Chapter V. Violations of this Ordinance may result in the home occupation permit being revoked. 
3.  Where Allowed: Minor home occupations that comply with the regulations of this section may be allowed in R1, R2, R3, and MH zoning districts. 
4.  Allowed Uses: The minor home occupation regulations of this subsection establish performance standards rather than detailed lists of allowed home occupations. Uses that comply with all of the standards of this subsection will be allowed as minor home occupations unless they are specifically prohibited. 
5.  Prohibited Uses: 
a.  Vehicle and Large Equipment Repair. Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws, and other small engines), or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators), or any other work related to automobiles and their parts, is prohibited as a minor home occupation. 
b.  Animal Care or Boarding Facilities. Animal care or boarding facilities are not allowed as minor home occupations. This includes animal hospitals, kennels, stables, and all other types of animal boarding and care facilities. 
c.  Medical Offices or Clinics. Medical offices and medical clinics are not allowed as minor home occupations. This includes doctor's offices, dentist's offices, psychologists' offices, hospitals, and all other medical use facilities. The prohibited will not be interpreted as preventing medical practitioners from seeing patients in their home on an emergency basis. 
d.  Restaurants. 
e.  Nursing Homes. 
6.  Employees : No minor home occupation shall have nonresident employees. For the purpose of this provision, the term "nonresident employee" includes an employee, business partner, co-owner, or other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation. 
7.  Resident Operator: The operator of a minor home occupation shall be a full time resident of the dwelling unit. 
8.  Customers : Customers may visit the site only during the hours of 8 a.m. to 7 p.m., and no more than six (6) customers or clients may visit the site in any single day. 
9.  Floor Area: Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or structure. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit or existing accessory structure may be used to house a minor home occupation. Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the character thereof. 
10.  Signs : There shall be no signs associated with the home occupation on the premises. 
11.  Exterior Appearance: There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of a minor home occupation when viewed from the street right of way or from an adjacent lot. There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that houses a minor home occupation, or the site upon which it is conducted that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. 
12.  Operational Impacts : No minor home occupation, or equipment used in conjunction with a minor home occupation, may cause odor, vibration, noise, electrical interference or fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible beyond the lot line of the lot upon which the home occupation is conducted. No hazardous substances may be used or stored in conjunction with a home occupation 
13.  Sales : There shall be no wholesaling of merchandise, supplies or products conducted on or adjacent to the premises. Retail sale of goods is prohibited except when conducted entirely as an accessory activity to any services provided on the site (i.e., hair care products sold to hair style customers). 
14.  Number : No more than one minor home occupation may be conducted on a single site. 
15.  Storage : There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used in the home occupation nor of any highly explosive or combustible material. Materials stored should be no more than what is normally used for family, domestic or household purposes. 
16.  Parking : A home occupation, including studios or rooms for instruction, shall provide additional off-street parking adequate to accommodate the needs created by the home occupation subject to approval of the Public Works Director or designee. 
17.  Utilities : A minor home occupation shall not cause an increase in the use of any one (1) or more city-provided utilities so that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood. 
C.  Major Home Occupations: The regulations of this subsection apply only to major home occupations. 
1.  Annual Renewal : A major home occupation permit is required to be renewed once a year. The renewal process will include completing a conditional use permit, along with the appropriate fee and an inspection by the Code Enforcement Specialist. The application will be reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the conditional use procedures of Chapter V. Violations of this Ordinance may result in the home occupation permit being revoked. 
2.  Where Allowed : Major home occupations that comply with the regulations of this section may be allowed in R1, R2, R3, and MH zoning districts, but only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the conditional use procedures of Chapter V. 
3.  Allowed Uses : Major home occupation regulations of this subsection establish performance standards rather than detailed lists of allowed home occupations. Uses that comply with all of the standards of this subsection will be allowed as major home occupations unless they are specifically prohibited. 
4.  Prohibited Uses: 
a.  Vehicle and Large Equipment Repair. Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws, and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators), or any other work related to automobiles and their parts. 
b.  Animal Care or Boarding Facilities. Animal care or boarding facilities are not allowed as major home occupations. This includes animal hospitals, kennels, stables, and all other types of animal boarding and care facilities. 
c.  Medical Officer or Clinics. Medical offices and medical clinics are not allowed as major home occupations. This include doctor's offices, dentist's offices, psychologists' office, hospitals and all other medical use facilities. The prohibition will not be interpreted as preventing medical practitioners from seeing patients in their home on an emergency basis. 
d.  Restaurants. 
e.  Nursing Homes. 
5.  Employees : A maximum of one (1) nonresident employee is allowed with a major home occupation. For the purposes of this provision, the term "nonresident employee" includes an employee, business partner, co-owner, or other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation. 
6.  Resident Operator: The operator of a major home occupation shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling unit. 
7.  Customers : Customers may visit the site only during the days and hours as approved in a conditional use permit, and no more than twelve (12) customers or clients may visit the site in any single day. 
8.  Floor Area : No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit or existing accessory structure may be used to house a major home occupation. 
9.  Signs : Major home occupations shall be limited to nameplate signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. Such signs shall be mounted on the house. 
10.  Exterior Appearance : There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of a major home occupation when viewed from the street right-of-way or from an adjacent lot. There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that houses a major home occupation, or the site upon which it is conducted that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. 
11.  Operational Impacts : No major home occupation, or equipment used in conjunction with a major home occupation, may cause odor, vibration, noise, electrical interference or fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible beyond the lot line of the lot upon which the home occupation is conducted. No hazardous substances may be used or stored in conjunction with a home occupation. 
12.  Sales : There shall be no wholesaling of merchandise, supplies or products conducted on or adjacent to the premises. Retail sale of goods is prohibited except when conducted entirely as an accessory activity to any services provided on the site (i.e., hair care products sold to hair style customers). 
13.  Number : No more than one major home occupation may be conducted on a single site. 
14.  Storage : There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used in the home occupation nor of any highly explosive or combustible material. Materials stored should be no more than what is normally used for family, domestic or household purposes. 
15.  Off-street parking : As per Section 804, Required Off Street Parking Spaces. 
    703.2. Household Pets: Pets, such as dogs and cats but not livestock, which are generally kept within a dwelling, shall be considered as a permitted accessory use, provided not more than three (3) animals (more than four (4) months old) are kept in any one (1) dwelling. 
    703.3. Satellite Dishes: 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts: Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve feet (12') in diameter may be permitted subject to the following criteria: 
1.  All installations must comply with all accessory use, yard, height, bulk, and setback requirements specified within the district. 
2.  All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and colors that blend with the surroundings. 
3.  All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the antenna's reception window from potential permitted development on adjoining properties. 
4.  All satellite dishes must have a building permit. All provisions of the Building Code, as may pertain to satellite dishes, shall be met. 
Roof-mounted satellite dishes four feet (4') in diameter or less may be permitted. Larger roof-mounted satellite dishes may be permitted in an R-3 zone as part of the Conditional Use provision for uses permitted in an R-3 as a Conditional Use, such as hospitals and nursing homes. 
B.  Commercial or Industrial Zoning Districts: Ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve feet (12') in diameter may be permitted subject to the following criteria: 
1.  All primary use installations or accessory use installations that abut land zoned for residential purposes shall comply with the principal setback requirements specified within the underlying district. All accessory use installations not abutting residentially zoned land shall comply with the district's accessory use setbacks. 
2.  All installations shall comply with the maximum height restrictions imposed on primary uses for primary use installations, and accessory uses for accessory use installations. 
3.  All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the antenna's reception window from potential permitted development in adjoining properties. 
4.  All satellite dishes must have a building permit. All provisions of the Building Code, as may pertain to satellite dishes shall be met. 
    703.4. Radio and TV Towers: 
A.  Construction Requirements: Each radio or television tower which is twenty feet (20') or more above the ground including antenna hereinafter constructed, erected, enlarged or altered shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  All towers must have a building permit and shall be accompanied by plans which are sufficient to determine compliance with the construction requirements herein. 
2.  FCC licensed commercial and amateur radio communication towers, including antenna, shall not exceed the maximum height of seventy-five feet (75'). 
3.  Residential towers including antenna shall not exceed the maximum height of thirty-five feet (35'), except for amateur radio antennas and supporting towers erected in conformity to the Building Code to heights reasonably needed for a licensed amateur's reasonable uses subject to the federal preemption of the Federal Communications Commission. 
4.  Every tower and guy wire must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning with a ground wire as specified in the Uniform Electrical Code. 
5.  In no case shall a tower of twenty feet (20') in height or more be installed nearer to a street or sidewalk than the height of the tower including antenna. 
6.  No wires, cables or guy wires shall cross or extend over any part of a public street or sidewalk. 
    703.5. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools may be permitted in any district as an accessory use subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  No public or private pool may be located in any required front or side yard abutting a street. 
2.  Every pool must be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than six feet (6'), with no openings large enough to permit children to pass through other than self-closing, self-latching gates or doors which can protect against entry. Such doors or gates shall be closed at all times when not in actual use. 
    703.6. Storage, Parking, and Use of Recreational Vehicles: The following regulations shall apply in all residential districts to the storage, parking, and use of self-contained trailers, campers, and motor homes, and boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational vehicles: 
1.  Such equipment shall not be stored or parked closer than twenty-four inches (24?) to any proposed or existing public sidewalk. 
2.  On corner lots, any such vehicular equipment which exceeds thirty six inches (36?) in height shall not be parked in the triangular area formed by the three (3) points established by: The intersection of property lines at the corner, and by measuring thirty feet (30') back from this intersection on each property line. 
3.  Such equipment shall not be used for living or housekeeping purposes except when located in an approved mobile home park or in a campground providing adequate sanitation facilities, or on a temporary basis not to exceed seven (7) days. 
4.  No business shall be conducted within any such equipment in a residential district. 
    703.7. Location and Maximum Area Coverage of Accessory Buildings: 
A.  Location in Side Yard: Any accessory building may be built in a side yard, providing such accessory building is not less than forty-five (45) feet to the front yard line (if the accessory structure is attached to the principal structure then the setbacks for the principal structure need to be followed) and not closer than three (3) feet to the nearest interior side lot line. 
B.  Location in Rear Yard: Accessory buildings may be built in rear yards, but such accessory buildings shall not occupy more than sixty (60) percent of the rear yard area; provided that, in any case where accessory buildings are not built on the side or rear lot lines, such accessory buildings shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to either side lot line or rear lot line. 
C.  Area; Number: The combined gross area of all accessory buildings or portions thereof located in side and rear yards shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the rear yard area, nor shall more than one (1) accessory building cover any part of a side yard. 
D.  If a proposed accessory building in a rear yard or proposed accessory buildings combined gross area exceeds sixty (60) percent, then that proposed building or buildings may be considered as a variance, pursuant to App. A, Chapter XIII, Section 1301 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-1991, 7-9-91, eff. 7-22-91; Ord. No. 10-1992, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-92; Ord. No. 35-2000, 11-14-00, eff. 11-24-00; Ord. No. 18-2002, 5-28-02, eff. 6-8-02) 
Sec. 704. - Adult business. 
    In order to minimize adverse effects that the operation of an adult business may have on a neighborhood or area in which it is located, the following regulations are established. Adult businesses may be permitted only, in the HI (Heavy Industrial) zone, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  No such business shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest point of a lot on which is located a religious and/or educational institution, a public park or recreation facility; 
B.  No such business shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any lot on which another adult business is located; 
C.  No such business shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any lot within any residential zone. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, "adult businesses" shall be a commercial establishment having as a principal activity an adult business. "Principal activity" is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of a business's stock in trade, display space, floor space or movie display time per month for adult activities characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to the following exposed bodily parts: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts. 
(Ord. No. 5-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 705. - Arcades. 
    In order to minimize adverse effects that arcades and electronic games may have on the neighborhood or area in which it is located, the following regulations are established. Arcades may be permitted only in the CB (Community Business) zone, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  No arcade shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest point on a lot on which is located a religious and/or educational institution, a public park or recreation facility; 
B.  Adult supervision (eighteen (18) years or older) shall be provided on the premises during all hours of operation and shall be stationed so as to have direct visibility over all machines; 
C.  A minimum of one (1) bicycle parking stall per video game machine shall be provided within twenty-five (25) feet of the arcade in a safe, convenient location with bicycle racks to accommodate said bicycles; 
D.  No electronic video or electrical coin operated game in a commercial business establishment shall be operated within the City by a person sixteen (16) years old or younger during normal public school hours, or after curfew; 
E.  All alcoholic and fermented malt beverage sale and/or consumption on-site is prohibited; 
F.  All gambling on-site is prohibited; 
G.  The operation of four (4) or less machines shall be permitted in all commercial zones provided their operation is accessory to the use of the building and said use does not materially alter the principal use of the building. 
Sec. 706. - Mobile home development. 
    The MH Mobile Home District is comprised of residential areas intended for mobile homes and is further divided into the following: 
1.  Mobile Homes on Platted Lots: Residential development where primarily mobile homes placed on individual lots create a low density, quiet, single-family environment. 
2.  Mobile Home Parks: Residential development intended for mobile homes located in a mobile home park. 
    706.1. Compliance Procedures: 
A.  Existing Mobile Home Parks: All existing mobile home parks located within the City at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, regardless of the zone district in which they are located, shall comply with the requirements and regulations of the following Sections (706.2, 706.3, 706.4, 706.5) and shall be exempt from compliance with the remaining provisions; 
1.  Section 706.2, Mobile Home Requirements and Construction Standards. 
2.  Section 706.3, Mobile Home Park Permit Procedures. (A, B1-5, 7, 12, 13, C, G) 
3.  Section 706.4, Mobile Home Park Requirements. (D2, J, K) 
4.  Section 706.5, Mobile Home Hook-Up Inspection Procedure. 
B.  Future Mobile Home Parks: Applicants to establish a mobile home park within the boundaries of the City on or after the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall comply with all rules, regulations, and requirements set forth herein. 
C.  Existing Mobile Homes on Individual Platted Lots: All existing mobile homes on platted lots within the boundaries of the City at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, regardless of the zone district in which they are located, shall comply with the requirements and regulations of the following Sections (706.2 and 706.5) and shall be exempt from compliance with the remaining provisions: 
1.  Section 706.2, Mobile Home Requirements and Construction Standards. 
2.  Section 706.5, Mobile Home Hook-Up Inspection Procedures. 
D.  Future Mobile Homes on Individual Platted Lots: All mobile homes established on individual lots within the boundaries of the City on or after the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall comply with Sections 706.2, 706.5 and 403.1. 
1.  Section 706.2, Mobile Home Requirements and Construction Standards. 
2.  Section 706.5, Mobile Home Hook-Up Inspection Procedure. 
3.  Section 403.1, Residential Regulations. For the applicable zone district in which the mobile home is located. 
    706.2. Mobile Home Requirements and Construction Standards: 
1.  Every conventional structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code, adopted by the City of Sterling. 
2.  Every mobile home shall be certified as such by HUD, pursuant to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard Act, 42 U.S.C. 778 5401, et seq., as amended. 
3.  Every mobile home in existing mobile home parks or on individually plated lots shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Federal and State Construction and Safety Standards applicable at the time of construction. 
4.  Each mobile home shall be properly and separately serviced with the necessary utilities and services to include water supply, sewage disposal, electrical and/or gas supply. 
5.  Permanent additions to the mobile home or free standing structures built on the mobile home lot shall meet the applicable provisions of current Federal, State, and City Codes; and a permit for such construction shall be obtained from the City. 
6.  All mobile homes shall meet the following requirements for tie-downs and anchors: 
Length of Mobile Home Tie-Down Sets Number of Anchors Up to 50' 2 4 50' to 60' 3 6 61' to 70' 4 8  
Each tie-down component must be able to withstand a vertical load of four thousand seven hundred fifty (4,750) pounds without pullout, continuous creep, or ultimate mechanical failure. Anchors must be capable of withstanding a load of five thousand seven hundred (5,700) pounds without failure. All expandable pullout additions to mobile homes shall be secured with tie-downs and anchors. 
7.  All mobile home stands shall provide adequate support for the placement of the mobile homes. 
8.  All mobile home stands shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast in place concrete "deadmen," eyelits embedded in concrete slabs or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices to be used to stabilize the mobile home. 
9.  Within sixty (60) days of entering a park or moving into a platted lot, skirting shall be installed which completely encloses the space beneath the mobile home. Readily openable access panels or doors shall be installed to permit entrance for servicing utility connections. The skirting shall at a minimum be constructed of materials which are the same or similar in design, texture and color as the exterior material used in the construction of the mobile home. The skirting shall not be permanently attached to the ground or used to anchor the mobile home to its pad. 
10.  Any electrical repairs, alterations, or installation of equipment, conductors, connections etc., within or on a mobile home or conventional building, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the current National Electrical Code and current Federal Construction and Safety Standards. 
11.  Any fuel gas line equipment repairs, alterations, or installations within a conventional building or a mobile home shall comply with the applicable portions of the current local, State and Federal gas piping, oil piping, ventilation, and appliance standards. 
12.  Any plumbing equipment repairs, alterations, or installations within or on a conventional building or a mobile home shall comply with the applicable provisions of the current Colorado State Plumbing Code, the currently adopted Edition of the Uniform Building Code, Federal Construction and Safety Standards and applicable regulations of the City of Sterling. 
    706.3. Mobile Home Park Permit Procedures: 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, establish, begin, or continue operation of a mobile home park within the City unless such person shall have first been granted a Mobile Home Park Permit from the City as hereinafter provided. 
B.  All applications for a Mobile Home Park Permit shall include a Mobile Home Park Plan and shall set forth the following information unless the Department of Public Works waives those requirements not applicable to an applicant for a Mobile Home Park Permit for an existing mobile home park. 
1.  The location, legal description, area, and dimension of the tract of land to be occupied by the park. 
2.  Entrances to and exits from the mobile home park. 
3.  The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces. 
4.  The location and width of all roadways and sidewalks. 
5.  The location of service buildings, recreation facilities, laundry facilities, storage facilities and paved off-street parking. 
6.  Topography of the proposed park at two foot (2') contour intervals. 
7.  Location, widths and other dimensions of all easements. 
8.  Provisions for storm water drainage. 
9.  Fencing, landscaping and screen planting. 
10.  Lighting of roadways, driveways and pedestrian walks. 
11.  The location, plans and specifications for any permanent structures. 
12.  The name under which the mobile home park shall be known. 
13.  The location and description of all utility services including water supply, sewage disposal, electrical and/or gas supply. 
C.  All applications for a Mobile Home Park Permit or a permit for an expansion of an existing mobile home park shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by City Council. (Fee schedules may be found in the Public Works Department.) The Mobile Home Park Permit fee shall be required in addition to, and not in lieu of other applicable fees for various subdivisions or rezonings applied for in conjunction with the permit. 
D.  Upon receipt of a completed application for a Mobile Home Park Permit the administrative staff shall consult with any other agencies necessary to determine the conformity of the site of the proposed mobile home park with the requirements of this Ordinance; its compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood; and the conformity with the planned development and land uses of the area. 
E.  Upon completion of the review by the Public Works Department, the application for the Mobile Home Park Permit shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall proceed to hold a public hearing; after due public notice, and make recommendations with findings relating to F below to City Council. The City Council shall then proceed to hold a public hearing on the application. 
F.  A Mobile Home Park Permit may be granted by City Council upon finding: 
1.  That the proposed location of the mobile home park is consistent with and further implements the purposes of the Comprehensive Master Plan and design for development of the area. 
2.  That the proposed location of the mobile home park would not be injurious to the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
3.  That the requirements of this Ordinance are provided for in the application for the Mobile Home Park Permit. 
G.  Upon acceptance of the application and final approval being granted for the issuance of the Mobile Home Park Permit, the specifications and data contained in the application and plan shall be binding upon the owners, their heirs, successors and assigns, and changes of lot sizes, location of facilities, roadways, or any other matter designated in the application and plan may not be made without review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council. 
    706.4. Mobile Home Park Requirements: 
A.  General Requirements: Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to affect the requirements of the City for obtaining a building permit. It shall be necessary to provide two (2) copies of a plan of the mobile home space to be built upon; drawn to scale; showing its shape and dimensions, and the shape, size, and location of the mobile home and other structures existing in the said space. The plan shall be of sufficient detail to enable the Director of Public Works or designee to ascertain whether the proposed construction, erection or emplacement is in uniformity with the ordinances of the City. 
B.  Location: The mobile home park shall be located only within Mobile Home zoning districts (MH). The park site shall be such that it is compatible with adjacent and surrounding land uses and in conformance with the Comprehensive Master Plan. 
C.  Area: The minimum area of the Mobile Home Park shall be no less than five (5) acres, shall have a minimum frontage of 280 feet, and shall be large enough to accommodate: 
1.  The number of mobile home spaces designated on the application for a Mobile Home Park Permit. 
2.  Necessary roadways and streets. 
3.  Parking areas for motor vehicles. 
4.  Service, utility and recreational areas. 
D.  Space Requirements: 
1.  New Mobile Home Parks: 
(a)  Minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(b)  Maximum height of all principal buildings shall be twenty-five (25') feet. Maximum height of all accessory buildings shall be fifteen (15') feet. 
(c)  Minimum front-yard setback of a mobile home shall mean the commonly used front entry side of the mobile home. The minimum front-yard setback of the mobile home shall be twenty (20') feet from the lot line. 
(d)  Minimum rear-yard setback of the mobile home shall mean that portion of the yard opposite the front-yard. Minimum rear-yard setback for all structures shall be ten (10') feet. 
(e)  Minimum side yard setback (all structures) from a street [shall be] ten (10') feet [and] from an interior lot line [shall be] five (5') feet. 
(f)  There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15') feet between mobile homes. 
(g)  Minimum width of a mobile home site shall be forty (40') feet. 
2.  Replacement Units Within Existing Mobile Home Parks: 
(a)  A replacement mobile home unit shall maintain the following setbacks pursuant to National Fire Code: 
1.  Setback a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from the side of a mobile home to the side of an adjoining mobile home unit and/or conventional structure. 

ms 2971 
2.  Setback a minimum distance of six feet (6') from the end of a mobile home to the end of an adjoining mobile home. 

ms 2972 
3.  Setback a minimum distance of eight feet (8') from the side of a mobile home to the end of an adjoining mobile home. 

ms 2973 
4.  Not withstanding paragraphs 1, 2, 3 above, a minimum setback of five feet (5') shall be maintained between the mobile home unit and the mobile home park property line. 
(b)  The Director of Public Works or designee shall make an interpretation of the setback provisions as they apply to irregular lots and irregular configuration of mobile home units. 
(c)  Replacement mobile homes shall be certified as such by HUD, pursuant to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 778 5401, et seq., as amended. 
E.  Required Mobile Home Park Setbacks: Each mobile home park shall set aside along the perimeter of the mobile home park the following areas which shall be landscaped: 
1.  Minimum front yard setback of park is twenty feet (20'), except if the mobile home park fronts a highway, then the minimum front yard setback shall be forty feet (40'). 
2.  Minimum side yard setback of park shall be fifteen feet (15'), except if the side yard of the park abuts a highway, then the side yard setback shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
3.  Minimum rear yard setback of park is fifteen feet (15'), except if the rear yard of the park abuts a highway, then the minimum rear yard setback shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
F.  Park Street System: 
1.  General Requirements: All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe vehicular access from abutting public streets to each mobile home space. All streets shall meet the requirements of the City's Engineering Specifications. Street plans shall be submitted to the Public Works Department prior to issuance of any building permits. 
2.  Access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. Entrance and exit roadways shall connect the mobile home park streets with a public street. 
3.  Internal Streets. All streets within the park shall be built to the City's Engineering Specifications, and shall include curb and gutter. No lot shall be laid out so as to permit direct access to any public street or highway. Street plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Public Works Department prior to issuance of any building permits. 
4.  Road Signs. All construction and installation of road signs shall comply with the applicable requirements of the City. 
G.  Walkways: All parks shall be provided with safe all-season pedestrian access for intended use between individual mobile homes, the park streets, and all community facilities provided for park residents. 
1.  All roadway sidewalks shall meet the City's Engineering Specifications. 
2.  A common walk system shall be provided and maintained. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of three feet (3'). 
3.  All mobile home sites shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). 
H.  Required Recreation Area: 
1.  Ten percent (10%) of the gross park area shall be maintained as a recreational site for park residents. The site may include any combination of open space and recreational facilities adequate to meet their needs. Walkways, driveways and parking areas shall not be included in the calculation of the required recreational site area. 
2.  Recreation areas shall be located as to be free of traffic hazards, and shall, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
I.  Nonresidential Uses: No part of any mobile home park shall be used for non-residential purposes. 
J.  Area Lights: Street lights shall be provided in such number and intensity as to ensure safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A light shall be located at each outside entrance of the service buildings and at all entrances and exits of the park. 
    706.5. Mobile Home Hook-Up Inspection Procedure: 
A.  [Inspection Required:] The Director of Public Works or designee shall conduct an inspection prior to the hook-up of any mobile home to determine satisfactory compliance with applicable provisions of this Section. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the mobile home park owner (in the case of a mobile home parks) or the mobile home owner (in the case of mobile homes on single lots) to notify the Public Works Department not less than seventy-two (72) hours in advance of placement, set-up, and connection of utilities to the mobile home. 
2.  The Public Works Director or designee shall make an interpretation of the advance notice procedures as they apply to the timing requirements. 
3.  Upon finding that the installation of the mobile home is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Section, the Public Works Director or designee shall issue a certificate of occupancy. 
4.  The Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued to the mobile home unit and its placement site or lot and is not transferable to another mobile home unit or site location. 
B.  Hook-Up Inspection Fees: The mobile home owner shall be assessed an inspection fee upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy as determined by City Council. Fee schedules may be found in the Public Works Department. 
C.  Responsibilities of Mobile Home Park Owner: 
1.  The Mobile Home Park owner shall operate the park in compliance with this Section. 
2.  The Mobile Home Park owner or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this Section. 
3.  The Mobile Home Park owner shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home site which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
4.  It shall be the duty of the park owner to: 
(a)  Pay promptly to the City all fees required by the City. 
(b)  Report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this Section. 
(c)  See that no mobile home is occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home site and complies with all the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 32-2000, 10-10-00, eff. 10-20-00; Ord. No. 31-2009, 12-22-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 707. - Temporary uses. 
    Temporary uses allowed under Section 402 of this code shall not exceed the period of time as indicated below for that temporary use in any year at that location. If such temporary use is not listed below, the time limit shall be one (1) week. 
A.  Carnivals, circuses, bazaars, fairs: One (1) week; 
B.  Christmas tree lots: Two (2) months; 
C.  Construction office and yards incidental thereto from construction on the premises: During construction; 
D.  Garage sales: Two (2) days; 
E.  Parking for authorized temporary uses: granted on an as-needed basis; and 
F.  Auctioneering: Two (2) days. 
Additional temporary uses and time extensions may be granted by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 26-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 708. - Regulations applicable to all zoning districts. 
    708.1. Building Height Requirements: The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to schools or portions of structures or buildings not used for human occupancy or activities provided that such exceptions will not impose a negative material impact on the use, safety, or access of light and air to adjacent properties, or intent and purposes of this Ordinance. Applicants requestingexceptions to the height limitations for buildings or structures shall only be approved by the Planning Commission upon written finding that the applicant has satisfactorily addressed the following: 
1.  Adequacy of light and air for adjacent properties; 
2.  Minimization of visual impacts upon adjacent or neighboring properties; 
3.  Adequacy for fire fighting and emergency responses. 
4.  The following noninclusive list of uses may be excepted from the maximum height requirements provided the above mentioned conditions are met: 
a.  Church steeples. 
b.  Water tanks. 
c.  Grain elevator enclosures. 
d.  Public utility poles. 
e.  Monuments. 
f.  Chimneys, cupolas, vanes. 
    708.2. Building, Multiple Uses: Multiple uses allowed by right shall be allowed in the same principal building for the zoning district in which the building is located. Uses allowed by right mixed with uses allowed by conditional use shall be allowed in the same principal building for the zoning district in which the building is located if the conditional uses have been approved as conditional uses pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    708.3. Building, Same Lot: Only one (1) principal building shall be permitted on any lot in R1, R2, and MH districts unless approved as part of a Planned Unit Development described in Chapter VI of this Ordinance. Two or more principal buildings on any lot in R3, NB, CB, CBD, LI and HI districts shall be permitted only upon approval by the Director of Public Works. 
    708.4. Building, Use Change: Any change in use of an existing building shall conform to the requirements and review procedures of the district within which it is located. For changes in uses in nonconforming buildings, refer to Chapter XI of this Ordinance. 
    708.5. Drive-In/Drive-Through Facilities: In addition to the review provisions under the Planned Unit Development or Conditional Use, the applicant must satisfactorily demonstrate that the traffic circulation on and adjacent to the site conforms to the following criteria: 
1.  Arranged so that the drive-through lane is off the public street, alley or right-of-way; and 
2.  Arranged so that internal pedestrian traffic and vehicular movements are compatible and traffic hazards are minimized; and 
3.  Arranged so as to avoid hazardous or adverse effects on adjacent sites and streets. 
    708.6. Minimum Ordinance Requirements: No lot area, yard or other open space, or required off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be reduced in area, dimension or size below the minimum required by this Ordinance, nor shall any lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this Ordinance for one use be used as the lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area requirement for any other use. 
    708.7. Projections into Required Yards: Every part of a required yard area shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky except for projections of architectural features as follows: 
1.  Unroofed terraces or patios, cornices, sills, mansards, chimneys, eaves or similar features up to a distance of three (3) feet from the face of the principal building and two (2) feet from an accessory building. 
2.  Open fire escapes up to a distance of four (4) feet. 
3.  Temporary awnings or shading devices. 
    708.8. Supplementary Yard and Setback Requirements: 
1.  On lots extending from one (1) street to another paralleling street, both streets shall be considered as front streets for purposes of calculating front yard setbacks. 
2.  On lots bordered on two (2) contiguous sides by streets, the required front yard setback shall be the narrow side. 
3.  For purposes of setback calculation, a two-family dwelling or an attached multiple family dwelling shall be construed as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
4.  On a vacant lot bordered on two sides by previously constructed buildings which do not meet the required front yard setback for the zoning district, the required front yard setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the average front yard setback of the two adjacent buildings. Where a vacant lot is bordered on only one side by a previously constructed building which does not meet the required front yard setback, the front yard setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the average of the front yard setback for the adjacent building and the minimum front yard setback for the zoning district. 
    708.9. Utilities: Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the construction or installation of public utilities or transmission facilities including mains or distribution lines in any zone district. Substations for a public utility, storage, maintenance facilities and business offices shall be restricted to their appropriate zone district. Location of power transmission lines with a capacity of 100 KV or over shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and approval by City Council. 
    708.10. Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall or landscaping which screens the storage from adjacent streets and buildings, or a combination of the above which is at least six feet (6') in height. 
    708.11. Public Projects: All public projects from any governmental agency must go before the Planning Commission in order to mitigate pending problems such as traffic, parking, access. 
    708.12. Enclosure of Uses. Every permitted use in any district, except in LI-Light Industrial and HI-Heavy Industrial, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except those uses expressly exempted from the complete enclosure requirement, as listed in this section. Such uses are not exempt from obtaining a certificate of occupancy for a permanent on-premises structure, from which general business operations must be conducted. Exemptions from the enclosure requirement are as follows: 
1.  Vehicular or equipment and machinery sales, including but not limited to automobiles, boats, trucks, farm equipment, trailers, manufactured housing or other similar uses. 
2.  Live bait sales. 
3.  Plant nurseries. 
4.  Lumberyards. 
5.  Stone monument sales. 
6.  Service stations and carwashes. 
7.  Contractor's storage yard for vehicles, materials or supplies. 
8.  Dog pound. 
9.  Public schools, private schools, childcare centers, kindergartens, nurseries or other similar uses. 
10.  Golf courses, driving ranges and skeet and trap ranges. 
11.  Parks, playgrounds or other similar recreational uses, or facilities contained therein. 
12.  Amusement places. 
13.  Drive-in theaters, drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks or other similar drive-in facilities. 
14.  Farm operations and sales and private gardens. 
15.  Parking lots and garages. 
16.  Cemeteries. 
17.  Restaurant cafes. 
18.  Vending machines. 
19.  Accessory patio lounges, i.e., a type of lounge which must be attached to an existing, operating, indoor lounge; provided, however, that these patio lounges are situated exclusively in a CB-Commercial Business, are fenced, screened or otherwise closed off from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by means of a minimum four foot high fence or wall, and meet all other requirements of this chapter and other ordinances, as applicable. 
20.  Temporary uses, including but not limited to: fairs, street vendors, carnivals, and sidewalk sales. (See Section 707. Temporary Uses for time limits on these uses.) 
(Ord. No. 26-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 32-1997, 7-22-97, eff. 8-1-97; Ord. No. 26-1999, 11-9-99, eff. 11-19-99) 
Sec. 709. - Veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
    In order to minimize adverse effects that the operation of an animal veterinary clinic or hospital may have on an area in which it is located, the following regulations apply. Animal veterinary clinics or hospitals may be permitted in the CB (Community Business) and LI (Light Industrial) zones, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  All facilities of an animal veterinary clinic or hospital, including all treatment rooms, cages, pens, kennels and exercise runs, shall be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building; 
B.  All such veterinary clinics and hospitals shall be designed and constructed in a manner that shall eliminate any emission of odor offensive to persons in the area of such clinics or hospitals. 
C.  All such veterinary clinics and hospitals shall be designed and constructed in a manner that shall reduce the sound coming from any such clinic or hospital to the level of sixty-five (65) decibels at any given adjacent property line. 
Sec. 710. - Buffers and landscaping. 
    Buffers and landscaping shall be required for nonresidential uses located adjacent to or across a street, as defined in Section 302, from residentially zoned lands, and a buffering and landscape plan shall be submitted by the nonresidential owner to the Director of Public Works for determination as to whether the plan addresses off-site impacts such as noise, glare, odor or objectionable or harmful substances, conditions or operations, by eliminating or sufficiently reducing such off-site impacts through the use of landscape, screen or natural features, taking into account line-of-sight clearance, where applicable, as defined in Chapter IX, Fence Regulations, Section 905.B. The Director of Public Works shall review the plan and shall forward a written recommendation of approval, conditional approval or denial to the Board of Adjustment. Such recommendation shall include the findings upon which the recommendation was made. A recommendation of conditional approval shall set forth the conditions and those requirements which the Director of Public Works deems necessary to meet, before final action can be taken. 
(Ord. No. 1-1993, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 711. - Environmental performance standards. 
    Where otherwise not provided for in this Ordinance, applicants for new construction or reconstruction of existing structures for other than single family residential purposes shall demonstrate that the proposal satisfactorily addresses such factors as: 
A.  Drainage and storm water runoff; 
B.  Natural hazards where affecting the site; 
C.  Erosion controls during and after construction; 
D.  Reclamation and/or revegetation and landscaping; 
E.  Preservation of unique natural features; 
F.  Visual impacts on adjacent properties; 
G.  Disposition of any historic features or structures; and 
H.  Adequacy of public improvements to serve the proposed use. 
Sec. 712. - Industrial performance standards. 
    Any application for an industrial use shall comply with applicable state and federal regulations as required by law and administered by the Environmental Protection Agency, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Colorado Department of Health, and others which govern or establish guidelines for controls on the following: 
A.  Noise and sound volume in decibels; 
B.  Odor; 
C.  Glare in footcandles; 
D.  Vibration generated in cycles/second or hertz; 
E.  Visible and nonvisible emissions including vapors, particulate matter, dust, and degree of opacity; 
F.  Types and volumes of wastes generated and proposed storage/disposal methods; 
G.  Storage and use of flammable/explosive materials; 
H.  Discharged water quality levels and site drainage; 
I.  Any other factors such as heat, humidity, or electromagnetic radiation which may produce adverse impacts. 
    Where not otherwise specified by a governing regulation, the determination of compliance with these items shall be based upon measurements taken at the boundaries of the property in which such uses are proposed or at the boundaries of residentially zoned districts adjacent to or across any street from such proposed uses. 
    Upon receipt of an application for an industrial use, the City shall send referrals to appropriate county, state, and/or federal agencies to solicit responses to the adequacy of the information as submitted and the most appropriate methods and time schedules for monitoring compliance with any imposed standards if a proposal is approved. 
Sec. 713. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 11-1997, adopted April 8, 1997, effective April 18, 1997, repealed § 713 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to day care facilities and derived from Ord. No. 6-1989, adopted April 11, 1989, effective April 14, 1989; and Ord. No. 11-1990, adopted August 28, 1990, effective August 31, 1990. 
Sec. 714. - Harboring of livestock, fowl, swine. 
    Limited to slaughtering houses and sale barns, except as may otherwise be specifically permitted by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3-2014, 1-28-14) 
CHAPTER VIII. - PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 801. - Purpose. 
    The primary purpose of this Chapter is to reduce traffic congestion on public streets by providing parking off streets; providing additional traffic lanes for major streets; providing more traffic capacity on major streets; allowing faster emergency access; and allowing narrower local streets to be designed within subdivisions. Secondary purposes include: minimizing development problems with neighboring uses; providing for special parking needs for handicapped drivers, compact cars, and bicycles; providing adequate parking for all uses; and allowing flexibility in meeting the community's parking needs. 
Sec. 802. - General provisions. 
A.  Responsibility: The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking areas shall be the joint and sole responsibility of the operator and owner of the land use(s) and the land for which the off-street parking areas are required to be provided and maintained. 
B.  New Structure Uses: For structures and/or uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this Ordinance, there shall be provided the amount or number of off-street parking spaces set forth herein. 
C.  Alterations or Additions to Existing Structures or Uses: All nonconforming structures and uses which are subsequently moved, converted, extended, enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area or seats shall provide and maintain parking spaces for the increment of increase in the amount or number of off-street parking spaces that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land use or structure. All structures and uses meeting the parking requirements of this Ordinance, but then subsequently moved, converted, extended, enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area, or seats shall provide and maintain parking spaces for the increment of increase in the amount or number of off-street parking spaces that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land use or structure. 
D.  Combined Off-Street Parking: Application may be made to the Director of Public Works or designee for combined use of off-street parking area for two (2) or more buildings or uses provided that: 
1.  The off-street parking facilities are located within six hundred feet (600') of all buildings or uses proposed to use the parking facilities; 
2.  The applicant shows that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the involved buildings or uses proposed to use the parking facilities; 
3.  The applicant present[s] for approval by the City Attorney, a properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties for the joint use of off-street parking facilities. Such instrument is to be filed with and made a condition of occupancy of the building and uses. 
E.  Obstructions: All off-street parking spaces shall be unobstructed and free of other uses. 
Sec. 803. - Parking design requirements. 
A.  Computation: When calculation of the required amount of off-street parking results in a requirement of a fractional space, a fraction shall be counted as an entire parking space. 
B.  Size: A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') wide by twenty feet (20') long, exclusive of access drives, ramps or aisles. Compact car spaces shall be at least seven and one half feet (71/2') by eighteen feet (18'). Handicapped car spaces shall be at least thirteen feet (13') wide by twenty feet (20') long. Such spaces must be clearly marked on the pavement in standard blue marking, with a sign heading the space using the international wheelchair profile symbol for handicapped persons. There shall be a minimum of one (1) handicapped space provided for each use requiring thirty (30) spaces, two (2) spaces for each use requiring one hundred (100) spaces, and one (1) space for every one hundred (100) spaces thereafter. 
C.  Access: All off-street parking spaces shall be reasonably accessible to the uses served. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or drive of such design as to provide safe and efficient means of access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with traffic flow. Parking facilities must be designed to require vehicles leaving parking stalls to maneuver on site to exit onto streets head first. One-way entrances/exits shall be at least sixteen feet (16') wide. Two-way entrances/exits shall be at least twenty-two feet (22') wide, but not wider than thirty-five feet (35') at the property line. The foregoing may not be applicable to R-1 and MH zones. 
D.  Curb Cuts: All curb cuts are subject to approval of the Director of Public Works or designee, or the State Highway Department for state highways. Their placement, size, use signing, signaling, and construction shall conform to the Director of Public Works or designee's written requirements. No new curb cuts shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of a corner of an intersection, except for access to a single family residence. For any commercial, multiple family, or industrial use, curb cuts shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') and a maximum of thirty-five feet (35') measured at the property line. There shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') between curb cuts or radius points for curb returns and no more than one (1) curb cut or return shall be permitted for each seventy-five feet (75') or major portion thereof, of street frontage, nor shall more than two (2) curb cuts be permitted for any individual property per street frontage. 
E.  Surfacing: All driveways and open off-street parking spaces shall be surfaced with gravel, asphalt or concrete. 
F.  Lighting: All parking areas in business or industrial districts shall be suitably illuminated for night use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential districts or uses. 
G.  Storm Drainage: Storm drainage shall be designated on the parking site plan, acceptable to the Director of Public Works or designee. 
H.  Screens, Buffers and Walls: Walls are required between commercial parking lots in side and rear yards abutting parcels that are residentially zoned or contain dwellings. These walls must be solid with a minimum height of six feet (6'). 
I.  Zone Yards and Setbacks: Parking zone yards are required between parking facilities and property lines for any parking facility abutting or within residential zones. Parked vehicles must not overhang into zone yards. The zone yard setback shall be a minimum of one foot (1'). Each space shall be equipped with wheel guards when necessary to prevent vehicles from extending beyond the boundary of the space and from coming into contact with other vehicles, walls, zone yards or plantings. 
J.  Landscaping: There shall be one (1) tree and/or shrub planted for every twenty (20) internal parking stalls, and one (1) tree and/or shrub for every five feet (5') of zone yard. 
Sec. 804. - Required off-street parking spaces. 
    The minimum number of parking spaces required for each type of use is as follows: 
A.  Assembly Halls: For auditoriums, arenas, gymnasiums, exhibition halls, theaters, convention centers and other similar public gathering places, at least one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area or one (1) space for each four (4) seats, whichever is greater, plus one (1) additional parking space for every two (2) employees. When individual seats are not provided, twenty-two inches (22?) of undivided seating shall constitute one (1) seat. 
B.  Assisted Living: One (1) parking space for each two (2) residents, plus one (1) parking space for each employee on largest shift. 
C.  Automobile Service Stations: One (1) space for each service bay, plus one (1) space for each two (2) persons employed at one time, but in no case less than two (2) employee parking spaces shall be provided. 
D.  Bowling Alleys: Three (3) parking spaces shall be provided for each bowling lane. 
E.  Churches: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the principal auditorium shall be provided. Where patrons occupy benches or pews, each twenty-two inches (22?) of undivided seating shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purposes of determining off-street parking requirements. 
F.  Day Care Facilities: One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross indoor play area plus one space for every two (2) employees shall be provided. (Note: Does not apply to Home Based Day Care facilities.) 
G.  Eating and Drinking Establishments: Other than specified in (H) below, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each four (4) seats. 
H.  Educational Institutions: For high schools and colleges, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees, plus one (1) space for every four (4) students. For junior high and elementary schools, two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for every classroom. 
I.  Hotels, Motels: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus space equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of maximum seating capacity in restaurants or lounges serving the general public. 
J.  Hospitals, Nursing Homes: One (1) parking space for every two (2) employees, plus one (1) space for each five (5) beds, shall be provided. 
K.  Libraries, Museums: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
L.  Manufacturing and Industrial Uses: 
1.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees based on the number of combined employees of the two (2) largest successive shifts. 
2.  One (1) parking space shall be provided for each company vehicle based at the plant, in addition to employee parking. 
3.  One (1) parking space in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the employee parking area for the major shift shall be provided for customer and visitors, in addition to employee and company parking. 
4.  Plant or employee expansion shall provide for employee and company vehicle parking in the same ratio as indicated above. 
5.  Off-street parking agreements shall apply to any change in industrial occupancy. 
M.  Professional Clinics: For medical, dental and veterinary clinics two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each doctor, plus one (1) additional space for every two (2) employees. 
N.  Professional Offices and Financial Institutions: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each three hundred (300) square feet of usable floor area. 
O.  Residential R-1, R-2, R-3, MH Districts: Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family equivalent dwelling unit. 
P.  Retail Store, Office, or Other General Commercial Use Not Specified Above: The number of spaces shall be the total obtained using the following formula: 
1.  Ground floor space: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of interior floor space, plus one (1) additional space for each two (2) employees. 
2.  Other than ground floor space: One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of usable floor space, excluding basement storage areas. 
Q.  Other: For all uses which could not reasonably be placed in one of the above classifications, the required number of spaces shall be determined by the Director of Public Works or designee. 
(Ord. No. 13-1997, 4-8-97, eff. 4-18-97; Ord. No. 6-1998, 3-24-98, eff. 4-3-98) 
Sec. 805. - Reductions and exceptions. 
    This Section provides flexibility to vary the requirements of the Parking Chapter to accommodate special needs, situations, and new and unusual uses. 
A.  Reductions: 
1.  A five percent (5%) reduction is allowed in the required number of spaces if two (2) or more uses with different hours of operation can share the same spaces. 
2.  Ten percent (10%) of the parking spaces in a parking facility can be provided for compact cars. 
3.  If the applicant can demonstrate that users for a use do not come by automobile, but rather as pedestrians or by bus, the parking requirements may be reduced. 
4.  If the applicant can demonstrate that users for a use strictly utilize a drive-through facility, the parking requirements may be reduced. 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  Planned projects: Recognize design flexibility for parking zone yards, buffers, screening and landscaping. These are design elements integral to the unified design of the planned project. Planned projects include: Planned Unit Developments; residential cluster and zero lot line projects; special assessment parking districts; and public redevelopment districts. 
2.  Off-site parking facilities: Allow a percentage of the required parking for non-residential uses to be located on another parcel. Applicants for off-site parking must meet these conditions: off-site facilities must be located within four-hundred feet (400') of the public entrance; the walking path must not cross major streets except at a cross-walk; the off-site lot shall be limited to all-day parkers and employees and not to the general public and customers of the use. 
3.  Central Business District: Exceptions as approved by the Board of Adjustment. 
C.  Application Procedure: For any changes in required parking design or any reduction or exception, the applicant must show non-economic hardship or demonstrate with expert evidence that the proposed use does not need the number of parking spaces required by this Parking Chapter. The Board of Adjustment shall grant all approvals for reductions or exceptions to this Parking Chapter. 
Sec. 806. - Off-street loading regulations. 
    Off-street loading berths accessory to uses permitted in the use districts shall be provided, subject to the following regulations and any other applicable provision of this Ordinance. 
A.  General Provisions: 
1.  Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use served. No loading space shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No loading space shall be located in a required front or transitional yard. 
2.  Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least thirty-five feet (35') long and ten feet (10') wide, not including aisle and maneuvering space. 
3.  Access: Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
4.  Surfacing: All drives and loading berths shall be surfaced with gravel, asphalt or concrete. 
Sec. 807. - Special applications for parking regulations. 
A.  Parking Structures, Garages: For parking structures or garages, roof parking, and underground parking, site plans must show the location of all parking stalls, aisles, walls, posts, pilasters, and pedestrian ways, stairs, railings, and elevators. The plans for adequate turning radii and clearance for aisles inside structures, height clearance, top to bottom clearance on ramps, and adequate maneuvering room for all parking stalls, are subject to approval of the Director of Public Works or designee. 
B.  Cash Fees Paid in Lieu of Providing Parking Spaces: Special assessment parking districts, historic and architectural districts, rehabilitation and/or redevelopment projects may apply to pay cash in lieu of providing parking spaces. The fee for each space is determined for each application by the Director of Public Works or designee, subject to Council approval. 
CHAPTER IX. - FENCE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 25-1991, adopted Jan. 14, 1992, with an effective date of Jan. 27, 1992, repealed Ch. IX in its entirety. Formerly, Ch. IX consisted of §§ 901-915, which pertained to fences and derived from Ord. No. 1-1989, adopted Mar. 28, 1989. Ordinance No. 25-1991 enacted new provisions pertaining to fence regulations; such provisions are set out as §§ 901-913 herein. 

Sec. 901. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all fences so as to protect the character of various areas of the city and to protect the health, safety, and public welfare of the citizens. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 902. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall construct or rebuild any fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge without obtaining a fence permit through the Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 903. - Same-Application. 
    An application for a fence permit as described in Section 902, of this chapter, shall be made upon forms provided by the Department of Public Works. Required information shall include an accurate drawing showing all property lines, sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and improvements. The drawing should also include a sketch of the proposed fence, wall, or hedge and a description of the materials to be used. No application shall be approved unless each structure is properly designed in compliance with the currently adopted Uniform Building Code. The application permit fee shall be determined by City Council. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 904. - General requirements. 
A.  No person shall erect or rebuild any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall which extends beyond the property lines except as allowed under Section 910 of this chapter. 
B.  No person shall plant the trunk of any hedge closer than two (2) feet within any property line, except as allowed under Section 910 of this chapter. 
C.  No person shall erect or rebuild any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge or any combination thereof in excess of six (6) feet in height in any district except as allowed under Section 910 of this chapter. 
D.  If, in the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works, any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge is permitted on any public easement, in flood control areas or across ditches, they must be designed and constructed so as to allow the ingress and egress of respective utility companies; avoid obstruction of drainage, not impede the flow of floodwaters, not accumulate debris; and are subject to being easily moved for maintenance or any other purpose, and said removal shall be the responsibility of and at the sole expense of the property owner without any liability to the City. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 12-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02; Ord. No. 15-2008, 10-15-08, eff. 10-25-08) 
Sec. 904.1. - Fences and divisional walls permitted. 
A.  Masonry walls 
B.  Ornamental iron 
C.  Woven wire and chainlink 
D.  Wood 
E.  Hedges 
F.  Vinyl 
G.  Stone or rock 
(Ord. No. 11-1999, 7-13-99, eff. 7-23-99) 
Sec. 905. - Location-R1, R2, R3, NB, and MH districts. 
A.  Any solid fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge not over thirty-six inches (36") in height and fences at least fifty percent (50%) open and not over forty-eight inches (48") in height, to be measured from the ground to the tallest portion of fence excluding posts, may be erected or rebuilt anywhere on a lot in R1, R2, R3, NB, and MH districts except as limited in other sections of this chapter. 
B.  Any fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge not over six feet (6') in height in R1, R2, R3, NB, and MH districts may be erected or rebuilt anywhere on a lot except in a front yard and line of sight clearance area as defined below: 
Line of sight clearance area is defined as the triangular area formed by: (1) the lines extending from any corner of a corner lot adjacent to two intersecting streets to a distance of forty feet (40') along both property lines from the corner (constituting two sides); and (2) the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third side). 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 3-2009, 2-24-09, eff. 3-6-09) 
Sec. 906. - Same-MS, CB, CBD, LI, HI, and OS districts. 
A.  Any fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge not over six feet (6') in height may be erected or rebuilt anywhere on a lot in MS, CB, CBD, LI, or HI districts except as limited in other sections of this chapter. 
B.  Any fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge proposed in an OS district may be allowed, but only for recreational or security purposes and at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 12-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
Sec. 907. - Fences not permitted. 
A.  Electrically charged fences are not permitted in any zoning district. No person shall erect, or rebuild any device or system for electrically charging any fence, wall or partition within the city. 
B.  No person shall erect, repair or maintain any barbed wire fence in the city, with the following exception: 
Not more than four (4) horizontal strands of barbed wire may be strung on the top of a chain link fence for industrial or commercial uses located in any industrial or commercial zone for security purposes. The lowest strand of barbed wire shall be a minimum of six feet (6') above the ground. 
C.  Any fence, in the opinion of the building inspector, public works director or chief of police, that would constitute a hazard to the health or safety of any person. 
D.  Any fence which does not comply with the provisions hereof, unless a variance has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 11-1999, 7-13-99, eff. 7-23-99) 
Sec. 908. - Temporary fences. 
    Land under development may be surrounded by a temporary chain link fence up to six feet (6') in height and allowed for a specified time as a temporary fence at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, upon application. Gates into the fence enclosure may be provided as needed, however, they shall be located at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, upon application. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 909. - Fences required. 
A.  All outdoor swimming pools of five thousand (5,000) gallon capacity, or more, shall be enclosed by a fence or wall six feet (6') in height. 
B.  In the event the Planning Commission of the City of Sterling deems it necessary for the general health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of property by citizens, or for environmental and aesthetic values, it may require up to an eight-foot (8') fence made of materials suitable to the circumstances to separate the various residential zoning districts from one another and from commercial and industrial districts, or to surround junkyards, lumber yards, salvage yards, and similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 910. - Exceptions-Location and height. 
    The Director of Public Works may, after finding the circumstances meet the following criteria: (1) that the adjacent property owner will not be adversely affected, (2) that pedestrian access will not be hampered, and (3) the line of sight clearance area will be clear, consider the following as exceptions to the location and height requirements of a fence, and in his sole discretion, grant a fence permit. 
A.  For location exceptions: 
1.  Where a fence, divisional, retaining or free-standing wall or hedge is requested to extend over the right-of-way line toward a public street. 
2.  On a through lot. 
B.  For height exceptions: 
1.  Recreational fences and walls: 
a.  Tennis courts 
b.  Baseball fields 
c.  Other similar recreational uses 
2.  Commercial and industrial zones: 
a.  Fences for security purposes 
b.  Fences necessary for and used in conducting a particular business 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 911. - Violations. 
    Existing fences in violation of this chapter and erected prior to its amendment, except those fences hampering pedestrian access or those fences in the line of sight clearance area may be permitted to remain; however, once destroyed, damaged, in disrepair, or removed, fences, if rebuilt, must conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 29-2001, 10-9-01, eff. 10-19-01) 
Sec. 912. - Enforcement. 
A.  Authority: The Director of Public Works will be responsible for enforcing compliance with this Chapter. 
B.  Noncomplying Fences, Notice of Violation: Notice of violation shall be given to the property owner of such fence to be removed or brought into compliance within fifteen (15) days, except in cases when, upon request by the property owner, the Director of Public Works has granted a reasonable extension of time for compliance. 
C.  Removal Order: The Director of Public Works may, in order to protect the health, safety, welfare and property enjoyment of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of Sterling, order that fences, divisional, retaining or free-standing walls, hedges and other plantings which cause traffic hazards or which are dilapidated, unsightly or dangerous, order that the same be removed within a specific time period, depending upon the severity of the hazard. 
D.  Noncomplying Fences, Failure to Comply with Notice: Any person who fails to comply with any such order by the Director of Public Works shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties of Section 1-15 of the Code effective as of final denial of an appeal by the Board of Adjustment or thirty (30) days from the date of this order, whichever is shorter. Such an order is appealable to the Board of Adjustment as outlined in Section 913. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92) 
Sec. 913. - Variances. 
A.  Appeals: A denial of a permit under this chapter or an order under this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. Such appeal shall be made in writing and received within fifteen (15) days of said denial or order, and accompanied by a fee determined by City Council. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
B.  Information Required: All requests shall include the following information: 
1.  Street address of proposed fence. 
2.  Name and address of proposed owners of record. 
3.  Description of fence or wall to be constructed. 
4.  Site plan showing location of existing improvements and location of proposed fence or wall. 
C.  Public Hearing Required: Upon receipt of the request and payment of fees, the Board of Adjustment shall publish a notice of public hearing and mail written notices in accordance with Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
D.  Grant of Variance: The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance subject to any conditions which it deems necessary or desirable to make the fence which is permitted by the variance compatible with the purpose of this Fence Chapter and shall mail notice of the action of the Board of Adjustment to the applicant within seven (7) days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 25-1991, 1-14-92, eff. 1-27-92; Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
CHAPTER X. - SIGN REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 18-1992, adopted June 9, 1992, with an effective date of June 22, 1992, repealed Ch. X of Appendix A in its entirety. Formerly, Ch. X consisted of §§ 1001-1010, which pertained to sign regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1-1989, adopted March 28, 1989. Ord. No. 18-1992 enacted new provisions regarding sign regulations as herein set out in this Ch. X. 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose and scope of this chapter is to regulate all exterior signs so as to protect property values, to protect the character of various areas of the City, and to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the citizens. This chapter is not intended to regulate official traffic or government signs; window displays; product dispensers; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of any nation, government, or noncommercial organizations; gravestones; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; or any display or construction not defined as a sign. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1002. - Definitions. 
    Abandoned Sign: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
    Administrator: The Public Works Director or his designated representative. 
    Area: See "Sign, Area of." 
    Awning: A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework. 
    Awning Sign: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning. 
    Banner Sign: A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework. 
    Billboard: Is an off-premise sign whose outdoor sign structure is greater than 72 square feet in size and advertises a business, commodity, good, service, entertainment or attraction, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished on the premises where the billboard is located, or which contains a political or ideological or noncommercial message. (Billboards are customarily located on lots not containing a building.) Such structure is usually a freestanding sign and may be double-faced or V-type, provided the angle of the V shall not exceed 45 degrees and the maximum size of the sign structure shall not exceed 320 square feet. 
    Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic): A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp- bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. 
    Changeable Copy Sign (Manual): A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., readerboards with changeable letters. 
    City: Unless the context clearly discloses a contrary intent, the word "City" shall mean the City of Sterling. 
    Clearance (of a Sign): The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the closest adjacent street or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade. 
    Construction Sign: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 
    Copy: The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removeable letter form. 
    Directional/Information Sign: An on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs. 
    Electronic Message Center: See "Changeable Copy Sign, Automatic." 
    Face of Sign: The area of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
    Flat Wall Sign: A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than six (6) inches from the wall of a building. This definition includes painted wall, individual letter, and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard. 
    Freestanding Sign: A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building. 
    Government Sign: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service property or facility. 
    Height (of a Sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative embellishments, to the grade of any adjacent street, road, or highway to any lot or subdivision. 
    Identification Sign: A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified. 
    Illuminated Sign: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
    Incidental Sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business. 
    Legal Nonconforming Sign: A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations. 
    Maintenance: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
    Mansard: A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
    Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. 
    Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Multi-Faced Sign: A sign with more than one face. 
    Nameplate: A nonelectric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Off-Premise Sign: A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located, e.g. "billboards" or "outdoor advertising." 
    On-Premise Sign: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. 
    Owner: A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the administrator, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company. 
    Painted Wall Sign: Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. (See also: "Flat Wall Sign"). 
    Person: For the purposes of this Ordinance, any individual corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly defined interest. 
    Point of Purchase Display: Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser. 
    Political Sign: For the purposes of this Ordinance, a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum. 
    Portable Sign: Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. 
    Premises: A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
    Projecting Wall Sign: A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign. 
    Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale. 
    Roofline: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections. 
    Roof Sign: Any sign erected over any roofline, or on the roof of a building to which it is attached. 
    Sign: Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or services. 
    Sign, Area of: The area of a sign is the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space of a similar nature, together with any frame or other material, color, or condition which forms an integral part of the display and is used to differentiate such sign from the wall or background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Further, where a sign consists only of individual letters, numerals, symbols, or other similar components and is painted on or attached flat against the wall of a building, and where such individual components are without integrated background definition and are not within a circumscribed frame area, the total area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of the squares or rectangles surrounding each individual sign component. 
    Snipe Sign: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc. 
    Subdivision Identification Sign: A freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development. 
    Temporary Sign: A sign not constructed or intended for longer than one (1) month per year. 
    Under-Canopy Sign: A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee. 
    Window Sign: A sign installed or painted on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92; Ord. No. 41-1997, 8-26-97, eff. 9-5-97; Ord. No. 6-2007, 3-13-07, eff. 3-23-07) 
Sec. 1003. - Permit-Required. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs shall require permits and payment of fees. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted, printed, or changeable copy signs. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1004. - Same-Application. 
    An application for a sign permit, as described in Section 1003 of this chapter, shall be made upon forms provided by the Department of Public Works. Required information shall include an accurate drawing showing all property lines, sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and improvements. The drawing should also include a sketch of the proposed sign and a description of the materials to be used. No application shall be approved unless each structure is properly designed in compliance with the currently adopted Uniform Building Code. The application permit fee shall be determined by City Council. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1005. - General provisions. 
    It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain a sign in the City of Sterling except in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    1005.1. Signs Prohibited: The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts: 
A.  Abandoned signs that are a blight or nuisance; 
B.  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals; 
C.  Snipe signs attached to trees, telephone poles, street lights, or placed on any public property or public right-of-way; 
D.  Signs placed on vehicles or semi-trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of advertising a service or product other than said vehicle or semi-trailer. 
    1005.2. Unregulated Signs: The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Construction signs of 32 square feet or less. 
2.  Directional/informational signs of 5 square feet or less. 
3.  Nameplates and identification signs of 3 square feet or less. 
4.  Political signs. 
5.  Public signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency. 
6.  Real estate signs of 16 square feet or less. 
7.  Window signs. 
8.  Incidental signs. 
9.  Point of purchase display signs. 
10.  Subdivision identification signs of 32 square feet or less. 
11.  Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building and which is not visible from outside the building, and any sign which is so located that it is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which it is located or from any public thoroughfare. 
12.  Any grave marker, headstone, memorial statue, or other similar remembrances that are noncommercial in nature. 
13.  Names and addresses on postal boxes. 
14.  Residential address numbers. 
15.  Names of newspapers and similar publications on their delivery boxes. 
16.  The posting of privately owned land and/or buildings or structures against trespass, hunting, fishing, swimming or any other activity, and/or the warning of any person against any danger, hazard or condition pertaining to such land and/or buildings and structures. 
17.  Cornerstones, memorial tablets, and similar markers made of masonry, bronze and other incombustible and durable material and used to indicate, without advertising matter, information relating to the development of the facility on which they are located such as those involved in planning, financing and construction of buildings. 
18.  Historical signs and markers designating places of historical significance. 
19.  City entry identification signs designating entry points to the City of Sterling. 
20.  City park identification signs designating City parks and recreation areas. 
21.  Flags, pennants or insignia of nations or an organization of nations, states or cities, except when such flags are used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
22.  Window displays incorporating placards, pennants, merchandise, pictures or models of products or services. 
23.  Works of fine art which in no way identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, which enterprise may benefit or realize direct commercial gain from such display. 
24.  Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holiday celebrations or special events. 
25.  Traffic and other official signs of any public or governmental agency. 
26.  Signs over gas pumps which indicate gas prices, provided that such signs shall be limited to one (1) per pump island and shall be no larger than four (4) square feet per face. 
27.  Bus benches and/or shelters within any City rights-of-way displaying advertisements pursuant to an agreement between the City and the owner, provided that such agreement regulates the size, content, placement, design and materials used for construction of said bus bench and/or shelter sign. 
28.  Bus benches and/or shelters on private property displaying advertisements, upon approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
    1005.3. Line of Sign Clearance Area: Any sign proposed in a line of sight clearance area of a lot shall have the sign height less than three feet (3') or its sign clearance at least seven feet (7'). Line of sight clearance area is defined as the triangular area formed by: (1) the lines extending from any corner of a corner lot adjacent to two intersecting streets to a distance of forty feet (40') along both property lines from the corner (constituting two sides); and (2) the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third side). 
    1005.4. Sign Clearance: All signs proposed to overhang any public sidewalk shall have a clearance of at least seven feet (7') except for projecting signs which shall have a clearance of at least nine feet (9'). 
    1005.5. Changeable Copy: Any sign herein allowed may use manual or automatic changeable copy. 
    1005.6. Sign Contractor's License: No person or group of persons may engage in the business of erecting, altering, relocating, constructing, or maintaining signs requiring a permit under this Chapter without a valid contractor's license and all required state and federal licenses. 
    1005.7. Indemnification: All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, alteration, or relocation of signs near or upon any public right-of-way or property shall agree to save and hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents, and employees, against any and all claims of negligence resulting from such work. 
    1005.8. Restrictions on Size and Location: Billboards shall be limited to a maximum size of 320 square feet and a maximum height of 30 feet, and shall have a minimum setback from the property line of 35 feet, and no billboard shall be erected or constructed within a 100-foot radius of an existing billboard. No billboard shall be erected within 200 feet of an adjoining residential district if designed to face into such district. Billboards, which convey or express political or ideological or noncommercial messages, shall be exempt from the 100-foot radius requirement. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1-1995, 2-28-95, eff. 3-10-95; Ord. No. 42-1997, 8-26-97, eff. 9-5-97) 
Sec. 1006. - Requirements by zone. 
    The sign requirements for various types of signs for each zoning district are given in Table 10.1 [following this chapter]. All requirements apply to each individual use of that property. For instance, for two uses of a property, the number of signs allowed doubles. 
    1006.1. Residential Districts: In R1, R2, R3, and MH districts, signs are allowed as an accessory use to legal nonresidential uses only, such as churches, hospitals, schools, legal nonconforming uses, and signs described in Section 1005.2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1007. - Design and construction standards. 
    1007.1. Compliance with Building Code: All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the currently adopted Uniform Building Code and all applicable state or federal codes. 
    1007.2. Anchoring: No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a wind, and all freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently attached to concrete foundations. 
    1007.3. Wind Loads: Solid signs, other than flat wall signs, shall be designed to withstand a wind load of thirty-five (35) pounds per square foot on any face, up to a sign height of thirty-five feet (35'), and forty (40) pounds per square foot for signs in excess of thirty-five feet (35') in height. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1008. - Enforcement. 
    1008.1. Inspection Authority: All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the administrator or designee. 
    1008.2. Reinspection Authority: All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the administrator or designee. 
    1008.3. Maintenance Required: All signs shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to be distracting, unattractive or a public nuisance, and shall be kept in good repair and effectively serve the purpose for which they are intended. 
    1008.4 Noncomplying Signs, Notice of Violation: Notice of violation shall be given by the administrator to the owner of the real property on which the sign is or is to be located and, if it has been brought to the attention of the administrator that the owner and/or user of the sign is different than the owner of the real property, notice of violation shall also be given to the owner and/or user of the sign. Such notice shall state specifically the sign to be removed or brought into compliance, with details of action to be taken to bring into compliance in accordance with this chapter. Removal or compliance shall be completed within the time frame specified in the notice, which time frame shall be determined by the administrator, based upon the size of the sign, the complexity of compliance and other factors, as determined by the administrator in setting the time frame for removal or compliance. 
    1008.5. Noncomplying Signs, Failure to Comply with Notice: Failure to remove or bring the sign(s) into compliance in accordance with notice given according to Section 1008.4 above shall be in violation of this Chapter and subject to the penalties of Section 1-15 of the City Code effective as of the date of final denial by the Board of Adjustment or thirty (30) days, whichever period of time is longer. Such an order is appealable to the Board of Adjustment as outlined in Section 1008.6. 
    1008.6. Appeals: A denial of a permit under this Chapter or an order issued under this Chapter may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. Such an appeal shall be in writing and received by the administrator within fifteen (15) days of said denial or order, and be accompanied by a fee as determined by City Council. Fee schedules may be found in the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92) 
Sec. 1009. - Variances. 
    1009.1. Conditions for Variances: When considering granting a variance from these sign regulations, the Board of Adjustment shall take into consideration the following conditions: 
A.  The existence of special circumstances or conditions, such as buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structure or other matters on adjacent lots or within the adjacent public right-of-way, which would substantially restrict the effectiveness of the sign in question; provided that such special circumstances or conditions must be peculiar to the specific business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention and not peculiar generally to all businesses or enterprises. 
B.  The variance, if granted, would be in general harmony with the purposes of this Sign Chapter and specifically would not be injurious to the neighborhood in which the business or enterprise is located and to which business or enterprise the applicant desires to draw attention is located. 
C.  The variance is the minimum necessary. 
    1009.2. Public Hearing Required: Upon receipt of request and payment of fees, the Board of Adjustment shall publish a notice of public hearing and mail written notices, pursuant to Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
    1009.3. Grant of Variance: The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance subject to any conditions which it deems necessary or desirable to make the device which is permitted by the variance compatible with the purpose of this Sign Chapter and shall mail notice of the action of the Board of Adjustment to the applicant or appellant within seven (7) days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18-1992, 6-9-92, eff. 6-22-92; Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
TABLE 10.1 
Sign 
Classification 
by Zoning 
District Max. Area 
in s.f. Min. 
Setback 
in ft. Max. Height 
in ft. No. Allowed 
of Sign Type No. Allowed 
Total Illuminated 
Allowed? Off- 
Premise 
Allowed? R1, R2, R3, WH (*6) Freestanding 25 2 6 1 - No No Flat Wall 25 N/A TOW (*3) 1 - No No Under Canopy 10 N/A N/A 1 - No No Awning 10 N/A N/A 1 - No No Marquee 25 N/A N/A 1 2 No No Portable 25 PL(*4) 6 1 - No No Banner 25 5 10 1 - No No Projecting Wall 25 N/A N/A 1 - No No  
MS, NB, CB, CBD 0-39 MPH 40+ MPH (*5) 0-39 MPH 40+ MPH 0-39 MPH 40+ MPH 0-39 MPH 40+ MPH Freestanding 2/lf 4/lf (*2) 2 2 35 50 1/St 1/St (*1) - Yes Yes Flat Wall 2/lf 4/lf N/A N/A TOW TOW 2/St 2/St - Yes Yes Under Canopy 25 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1/St 1/St - Yes No Awning 25 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1/St 1/St - Yes No Marquee 50 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 1 4 Yes No Portable 25 50 PL PL 10 10 1 1 - Yes No Banner 30 50 3 3 10 10 1 1 - Yes No Projecting Wall 50 100 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2/St 2/St - Yes Yes Rooftop 2/lf 4/lf N/A N/A 35 50 1 1 - Yes No LI, HI Freestanding 2/lf 4/lf 2 2 35 50 1 1 - Yes Yes Flat Wall 2/lf 4/lf N/A N/A TOW TOW 2/St 2/St - Yes Yes Under Canopy 25 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1/St 1/St - Yes No Awning 25 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1/St 1/St - Yes No Marquee 50 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 1 4 Yes No Portable 25 50 PL PL 10 10 1 1 - Yes No Banner 30 50 3 3 10 10 1 1 - Yes No Projecting Wall 50 100 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2/St 2/St - Yes Yes  
(*1)-1/St = One sign per street front allowed. 
(*2)-2/lf = 2 square feet per linear foot of structure frontage. 
(*3)-TOW = Top of wall. 
(*4)-PL = Property line. 
(*5)-Regulations according to posted speed limit of street or highway adjacent to sign. 
(*6)-See Section 1006.1 for other restrictions. 
Note: Signs on corner lots must also comply with Section 1005.3. 
(Ord. No. 13-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
CHAPTER XI. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 27-1991, adopted Dec. 23, 1991, with an effective date of Dec. 27, 1991, repealed Ch. XI in its entirety. Formerly, Ch. XI consisted of §§ 1101-1110, which pertained to nonconforming uses of structures and lots and derived from Ord. No. 1-1989, adopted Mar. 28, 1989. Ordinance No. 27-1991 enacted new provisions pertaining to nonconforming uses, structures and lots: such provisions are set out as §§ 1101-1109 herein. 

Sec. 1101. - Purpose. 
    Certain existing uses of lots or structures and locations of such uses, or sizes and dimensional requirements of lots and structures, may not be in conformance with the provisions and requirements of this ordinance or subsequent amendments. 
    This chapter recognizes these situations, permits the restricted use and maintenance of such nonconformities, and offers provisions for their possible replacement, expansion, and alteration. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1102. - Continuance. 
    A nonconforming use, structure, or lot may continue, if legally in existence on April 10, 1989, subject to other provisions in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1103. - Conforming use, structure and lot. 
    Once changed to a conforming condition, no use, structure or lot thereof shall be reverted to a nonconforming condition, except when a residential use in either zoning district MS, NB, CB or CBD was in existence at any time prior to the initial effective date of this Appendix A, Zoning (namely April 10, 1989), and the residential use was changed to conform to a use (whether by right or by conditional use) in such zoning district and the present owner makes application under Section 1107.5. Application for review for re-establishment under Section 1107.4. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91; Ord. No. 31-1994, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 14-2002, 3-12-02, eff. 3-22-02) 
Sec. 1104. - Transfer of ownership. 
    Whenever a nonconforming use, structure or lot is transferred or sold to a new owner, the existing nonconformity may be utilized by the new owner. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1105. - Registration of nonconforming uses, structures and lots. 
    Nonconforming uses, structures and lots must be registered with the Public Works Department by the property owner and a Zoning Compliance Permit, listing such nonconformity as legal, shall be issued by the Public Works Department following inspection of such registered nonconformity and such other nonconformity as may be found upon inspection by the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1106. - Planned unit developments. 
    Nothing in this chapter pertaining to nonconforming uses, structures, and lots shall be construed or applied so as to require termination, discontinuance or removal, or in any other way affect an approved PUD which is or has been developed in accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1107. - Nonconforming uses. 
    1107.1. Abandonment: If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding twelve (12) months, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished nor shall it be replaced by another nonconforming use unless as approved under section 1107.4 of this chapter. 
    1107.2. Change in use: Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to other nonconforming uses, unless as approved under section 1107.4 of this chapter. 
    1107.3. Expansion: Nonconforming uses may be expanded within a structure or lot after recommendation by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council by resolution, provided the Planning Commission has determined that: 
A.  The increase or expansion is confined to the same structure and/or lot and does not encroach upon any other structure or lot subsequently added to the original; or 
B.  If the proposed increase or expansion will not be confined to the same structure or lot, the Planning Commission shall consider one or more of the following in making its determination: 
1.  Compatibility with surrounding area. 
2.  Harmony with the character of the area. 
3.  Its effect upon the immediate area. 
4.  Its effect on the future development of the area. 
5.  The health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area and of the City of Sterling. 
C.  Off-street parking is provided which meets the requirements of Chapter VIII of this ordinance [appendix]. 
D.  The existence of the nonconforming use has not had, and proposed expansion or increase will not have, an adverse or incompatible effect or impact on abutting properties and the neighborhood (i.e., visual, noise, or air pollution, traffic volumes and on-street parking, and does not change the existing character and purpose of the district within which located). 
    1107.4. Reestablishment and replacement: Nonconforming uses may be reestablished after abandonment as stated in section 1107.1 or may be replaced with another nonconforming use after recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council by resolution, provided the Planning Commission has determined that: 
A.  The proposed nonconforming use which replaces an existing nonconforming use is more compatible with the zoning district in which it is located than the existing nonconforming use. 
B.  The proposed nonconforming use will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property, or from the character of the neighborhood. 
C.  The proposed nonconforming use will not have an adverse effect upon the future development of the area. 
D.  There are adequate and available public utilities and services for the proposed nonconforming use and will facilitate logical, efficient and economic extensions of public services and facilities. 
E.  The proposed nonconforming use will have no potential for environmental or objectionable impacts. 
F.  The proposed nonconforming use is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this ordinance and the comprehensive Master Plan. 
G.  The proposed nonconforming use will serve to protect the best interests of the City of Sterling and the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
H.  The proposed nonconforming use will not create any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line. 
I.  Off-street parking is provided which meets the requirements of Chapter VIII of this ordinance [appendix]. 
    1107.5. Application: Application for expansion under [Section] 1107.3 or reestablishment or replacement under [Section] 1107.4, both above of this chapter, all of nonconforming uses, shall be filed with the Public Works Department on such forms as shall be required by the Planning Commission, along with appropriate fees, as determined by resolution of City Council. Fee schedules may be found in the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1108. - Nonconforming structures. 
    1108.1. Repairs and maintenance: Repairs and maintenance to nonconforming structures may be made or required by the City which would reduce the degree of nonconformity. Any other proposals which would expand or alter the structure shall comply with Sec. 1108.2 of this chapter. 
    1108.2. Expansion or alteration: Nonconforming structures may be expanded or altered after review and approval of the Public Works Director provided the expansion or alteration does not increase the extent of the nonconformity existing and remains within the other minimum requirements of the district within which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
Sec. 1109. - Nonconforming lots. 
    Nonconforming lots which are vacant may be used after review and approval of the Public Works Director provided the following situations are met: 
A.  Nonconforming lots can be shown to have been legally created and all the owners of interest certify that the use proposed has their authorization; 
B.  The use proposed on the lot conforms to the uses allowed by the ordinance within the district in which the lot is located; 
C.  The use proposed complies, as nearly as possible, with the bulk, setback, and dimensional requirements of the district within which it is located, or the setbacks in feet from the front, side, and rear yard are equal in proportion to the setbacks required on a conforming lot in the same district or are consistent with existing historic setbacks of adjacent land uses; 
D.  The use proposed can be served by public water, sewer and utilities; and 
E.  The Fire Department, after reviewing the proposed use, approves the use to be in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code Standards. 
(Ord. No. 27-1991, 12-23-91, eff. 12-27-91) 
CHAPTER XII. - AMENDMENT PROCEDURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 1201. - Purpose. 
    For the purposes of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development or redevelopment within the City of Sterling, the rezoning of land and consequent amendment to the text, zoning map, or both shall be allowed only under the procedures as provided in this Chapter. 
Sec. 1202. - General procedures. 
    The City Council may, from time to time, amend the number, shape, boundaries, or area of any district, and the regulations or any other provisions of this Ordinance. Any such amendment shall not be made or become effective unless it has been submitted to review and written recommendation of the Planning Commission. Amendments to this Ordinance may be initiated by City Council, the Planning Commission or by application from any citizen, group of citizens, firm, or corporation having interest in the subject property, with the record property owner's consent and signature. 
Sec. 1203. - Application. 
    Application for an amendment to the text, map, or both of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Public Works Department on such forms as shall be prescribed by the Planning Commission, along with the appropriate fees. Upon staff review, the applicant shall be notified as to whether or not the application is sufficiently complete to forward to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
Sec. 1204. - Amendment fee. 
    For proposed amendments to the zoning text or map, a nonrefundable fee set by City Council shall be charged to the petitioner to cover the costs of advertising and processing. A schedule of fees may be found in the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 1205. - Review and action; text amendments and/or zone-map amendments. 
A.  The following procedures shall be followed in reviewing and acting upon either a text amendment or a zone-map amendment: After review by City Staff and upon determination of completeness, the application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, hold a public hearing on the matter. A notice of said hearing shall be published in accordance with Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
B.  The following procedures shall be followed in addition to A., above, if the application is for both a text amendment and a zone-map amendment, or solely for a zone-map amendment: Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to owners of the affected property and to all others, as provided in and pursuant to Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
C.  Upon conclusion of the hearing provided in A. above, the Planning Commission shall forward, in writing, a recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial to City Council and the applicant within seven (7) days of hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
Sec. 1206. - Text amendment. 
    No request for text amendments shall be considered by City Council unless the Planning Commission has determined that: 
A.  The amendment is consistent with and in furtherance of the stated intent and purposes of the Sterling Zoning Ordinance; 
B.  The existing text is in need of amendment; 
C.  Where the amendment would include a map change, the provisions governing adoption of a map amendment have been met as provided for in Section 1207 of this Chapter; 
D.  Where the amendment would add to the uses listed for a zoning district that the provisions of Chapter IV, Section 405, Uses Not Itemized, have been met; and 
E.  The amendment is in compliance with the Sterling Comprehensive Master Plan. 
Sec. 1207. - Map amendments. 
    No requests for map amendments shall be considered by City Council unless the Planning Commission has determined that: 
A.  There was an error in the original zoning, taking into account the impropriety of spot zoning; or 
B.  There have been significant changes in the area such that it is in the public interest to encourage a redevelopment of the area or to recognize the changed character of the area; and 
C.  The amendment is consistent with and in furtherance of the general intent and purposes of the Sterling Zoning Ordinance; and 
D.  The amendment is in compliance with the Sterling Comprehensive Master Plan; and 
E.  There is adequate justification for the rezoning; and 
F.  The subject property is the correct site for the rezoning and is a reasonable parcel of land for such reclassification; and 
G.  The rezoning will not have an adverse impact on community services and the surrounding area; and 
H.  The rezoning will not result in undue traffic congestion or traffic hazards; and 
I.  The subject property, if rezoned, can be provided with public utilities to handle new uses; and 
J.  The rezoning or map amendment will not result in significant environmental problems or pollution and that any environmental constraints on the site can be reasonably overcome; and 
K.  The rezoning or map amendment will not result in the creation of a substantial number of nonconformities. 
(Ord. No. 5-1991, 4-9-91, eff. 4-22-91) 
Sec. 1208. - Protest. 
    Protests against changes approved by Council shall be filed in a consistent manner with and pursuant to Colorado Law. 
Sec. 1209. - Annexation. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Annexation Law, zoning of land in the process of annexation shall be done in accordance with the procedure and notice requirements of this Chapter. The proposed zoning shall not be acted upon by the Council prior to the time when the Annexation Ordinance is acted upon. If the zoning process is commenced prior to the effective date of the Annexation Ordinance, the legal protest area for rezoning shall be determined solely on geographic location, irrespective of whether the land in such protest area is within, without, or partly within and without the City limits. 
    Any area annexed shall be brought under the provisions of this Ordinance and the map thereunder within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the Annexation Ordinance, irrespective of any legal review which may be instituted challenging the annexation. During such ninety (90) day period or such portion thereof as is required to zone the territory, the City shall refuse to issue any building permit or certificate of occupancy for any portion or all of the newly annexed area. 
Sec. 1210. - Reversion of amendments. 
    At the time the Planning Commission and City Council consider a rezoning request, and/or any amendments to the zoning map, the applicant shall be advised that a building permit must be obtained and construction must have commenced within a time specified by the Council in their action on the amendments. In the event these provisions have not been met, the City shall notify the property owner to show cause why the Council, at their sole and exclusive option, should not review the zoning classification and initiate proceedings to rezone the land to its prior classification or to such other classification as may be deemed to be in compliance with this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XIII. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; VARIANCES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Personal financial interest in city contracts or purchases restricted, § 2-3; compensation of members of boards, committees, commissions, § 2-56; boards, committees and commissions, § 2-56 et seq. 

Sec. 1301. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment of the City of Sterling which shall consist of the members of the Sterling Planning Commission, as provided in Chapter 2 of the Code of the City of Sterling, Colorado. 
Sec. 1302. - Organization. 
    The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers who shall serve annual terms and who may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing or the taking of any action, a quorum of four (4) members is necessary. A majority affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members is necessary to authorize any action of the Board. 
Sec. 1303. - Duties and procedures. 
    The duties of the Board shall be as follows: 
A.  To meet at the call of the Chairman, by his or her request, or by the request of the Director of Public Works or designee, or by any aggrieved or appealing party wishing to appeal the decision. 
B.  To adopt any rules necessary to transact the Board's business or to expedite its functions or powers so long as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  To keep minutes of the proceedings of each meeting which shall be of public record. 
D.  To permit the public to attend and to be heard at all of its meetings. 
E.  To notify, in writing, the Director of Public Works or designee and the owner involved of all decisions made, resolutions passed, hearings scheduled, or permits authorized. All written decisions shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon. 
F.  To publish, or cause to be published, notice of public hearing for variances of this Ordinance fifteen (15) days prior to the date of public hearing of a variance request. 
(Ord. No. 39-1998, 9-22-98, eff. 10-2-98) 
Sec. 1304. - Powers. 
    The Board shall have the power to: 
A.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
B.  Hear and decide requests for interpretation of this Ordinance, including any uncertainty as to boundary location, or meaning of wording, so long as this interpretation is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 
C.  Hear and decide, grant or deny applications for variances from the provisions of this Ordinance. However, the Board may not grant variances from these provisions governing Planned Unit Developments. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1305. - Variance requests. 
    A person wishing to obtain a variance from any requirement of this Ordinance shall make application upon forms to be provided by the Public Works Department. The following information shall be provided: 
A.  The name and address of the person requesting the variance (and legal authority to act for the owner if not the same person listed in B below.) 
B.  The name and address of the owner of the property for which the variance is requested. 
C.  The specific requirement(s) of the City's Ordinance from which a variance is requested. 
D.  A brief description of how the applicant wishes to vary the requirements of the section cited. 
E.  Specific facts which support the issuance of a variance pursuant to 1308 below. 
Sec. 1306. - Fees. 
    A fee as determined by City Council shall be paid at the time the application is filed. No further processing of the request for variance will take place until this fee has been paid to the Director of Finance. If the actual cost of processing any variance request exceeds the amount specified by Council, the excess amount shall be billed to the person requesting the variance as soon as it can be accurately determined, and if said bill is not paid within sixty (60) days, further processing of the variance request shall cease until such bill is paid. A fee schedule may be found in the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 1307. - Public hearing. 
    Whenever a request for a variance is received by the Board of Adjustment, the Board shall provide for a public hearing to take testimony from affected parties regarding the request for variance, for which published notice shall be had, pursuant to Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. "Affected parties" shall include owners of property. 
    Upon application for a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall send a written notice of said hearing pursuant to Section 112 of this Zoning Ordinance of Sterling. 
(Ord. No. 13-1993, 9-28-93, eff. 10-8-93) 
Sec. 1308. - Granting of variances. 
    The Board may grant a variance only if it makes findings that the following requirements, insofar as applicable, have been satisfied: 
A.  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, such as irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of the lot, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the affected property; 
B.  That the unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist throughout the neighborhood or district in which the property is located; 
C.  That, because of such physical conditions or circumstances, the property cannot reasonably be developed in conformity within the provisions of this Ordinance; 
D.  That such circumstances found to constitute the hardship were not purposely created by the applicant and cannot be reasonably corrected; 
E.  That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property; 
F.  That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the provisions of this Ordinance which are in question; 
G.  That the variance, if granted, would not authorize any use other than uses enumerated as a Use by Right, or Conditional Use in the district within which the variance is requested; 
H.  That the present or proposed situation of such building or structure is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. 
Sec. 1309. - Appeals. 
A.  All appeals to the board shall be in writing and on such a form as prescribed by the board. Every appeal shall indicate which provisions of this section are involved, what relief from these provisions is being sought, and the grounds upon which such an appeal is being sought. The notice of appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the act or decision which caused the appeal to be made. Appeals shall be submitted to the director of public works or designee and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount currently in effect as established by city council. Such appeal shall be forwarded to the chairman of the board. A fee schedule may be found in the public works department. 
B.  Any decision made by the board may be appealed to the city council. The board shall deliver its written decision to the applicant, via U.S. Mail. The applicant may within thirty (30) days of receiving the decision of the board, appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 18-2007, 10-9-07, eff. 10-19-07) 
Sec. 1310. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Director of Public Works or designee certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him/her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property; but in such instances, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, on notice to the Director of Public Works from whom the appeal is taken, and on good cause shown. 
Sec. 1311. - Hearing and decision. 
    Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the Board shall schedule a time for the hearing, not to exceed thirty (30) days from the filing of the notice of appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. The Board shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) days of said hearing. The majority concurring vote of not less than three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from or to effect any variation of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1312. - Records; filing. 
    The Director of Public Works or designee shall keep a record of all variances granted under this Chapter and shall file the findings and decision of the Board of Adjustment in each case together in a book or other filing system indexed separately as to name of the applicant and description of the property, including street address. 
Sec. 1313. - Effective date. 
    Where a building permit is required, a variance granted by the Board shall automatically expire within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the date it was granted or within such time as the Board shall prescribe, unless a building permit for such variance is obtained within such period. The Board may grant variance extensions for good cause shown, but only if an application for such extension is made prior to the expiration of the variance. 
CHAPTER XIV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 1401. - Director of public works. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Public Works or designee or authorized representative, and [he] shall be vested with the following powers and duties: 
A.  To receive, review, process and issue all building permits, zoning compliance permits, and certificates of occupancy. 
B.  To receive applications for variances and appeals from variance decisions pursuant to Chapter XIII of this Ordinance and forward them to the Board of Adjustment. 
C.  To review with City Staff applications for amendments to this Ordinance. 
D.  To conduct inspections to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this Ordinance. 
E.  To issue stop, cease and desist orders and/or order in writing correction of any and all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of all applicable City Ordinances. 
F.  To institute, in the name of the City, any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent or bring to a halt any activity in violation of this Ordinance. 
G.  To register nonconforming uses, structures, and lots in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XI of this Ordinance. 
H.  To create and maintain the files required to carry out and maintain records of all actions pursuant to this Section. 
Sec. 1402. - Planning commission. 
    The Planning Commission shall review all applications for conditional uses, amendments, PUDS, rezonings, alterations, changes, or expansions to nonconforming uses, structures or lots. Recommendations for action on such applications shall be transmitted in writing to the City Council and applicant, and shall contain findings and/or conditions substantiating their recommendations. 
    In addition, the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to review and make recommendation on any other request for a use or a change of use governed by this Ordinance if formally requested to do so by the Director of Public Works or the Council. In such instances, the applicant shall be notified in writing that such a request has been made and the reasons behind the request. 
Sec. 1403. - City council. 
    The City Council shall review all applications forwarded by the Planning Commission with the attendant recommendations at regularly scheduled public meetings. Special hearings may be called at the discretion of the Council provided that notice of the hearing is published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and mailed to the applicant at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the Council shall take action on the request and notify the applicant of the decision and reasons for the decision in writing. If the application is approved, the applicant shall be free to proceed subject to obtaining the necessary permits. If the application is denied, the applicant may contest such decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the action. Such action shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works and shall include information substantiating the applicant's position. The Council shall reconsider the decision at a regularly scheduled public meeting. If the application is approved, the applicant may proceed. If denied, the file shall be closed. 
Sec. 1404. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the City Manager or authorized representative or by use of the following methods: 
A.  Requirements of Zoning Compliance, Building and Occupancy Permits: 
1.  Zoning Compliance Permits: Hereinafter, no uses listed in this Ordinance may be established or changed; no structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or removed; and no building or land shall be used, occupied, or changed in use or occupation until a zoning compliance permit has been secured from the Public Works Department. No permit will be considered as complete or as permanently effective until the Public Works Department has noted on the permit that the work, occupancy, and/or use have been inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. A zoning compliance permit need not precede subdivision or land development applications. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued prior to the securing of a zoning compliance permit. However, a building permit may be issued in conjunction with a zoning compliance permit. 
2.  Building Permits: No building or structure shall be erected, moved, or structurally altered unless a building permit has been issued by the Public Works Department. All permits shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable City Ordinances. 
3.  Certificate of Occupancy: No land may be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered, may be used or changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Public Works Department. Such permit shall only be issued when the building and use thereof complies with this Ordinance and all other applicable City Ordinances. 
B.  Inspections: The Director of Public Works or authorized representative is hereby empowered to cause any building, other structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed on the building, structure, or tract of land covered by such order except to correct or comply with the terms of the order. 
Sec. 1405. - Life of a permit. 
    Any construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of a building or other structure shall be commenced within 180 days after the date of the issuance of the permit. The same shall apply to any change in use of a building or land authorized by a zoning compliance permit. If not, the permit shall be considered void. Extension of this time limitation may be granted by the Director of Public Works or authorized representative upon request of a written statement from the permittee as to the nature of any circumstances prohibiting the fulfillment of this obligation. Upon request of the Board or at the discretion of the Director of Public Works or authorized representative, a request for an extension may be reviewed by the Council. 
[Sec. 1406. - Severability.] 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance; the City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
[Sec. 1407. - Effective date.] 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days after its passage and final publication. 
    Introduced, read and ordered published this 14th day of February, 1989. 
Published this 17th day of February, 1989. 
Adopted and approved this 28th day of March, 1989. 
Final publication by title: 
Edith M. Evans 
_____
Mayor Attest: Michael J. Harman 
_____
Ex-Officio City Clerk Reviewed by city manager: Randy Gustafson 
_____
City Manager Approved as to form and legality: Joseph H. Miller, Jr. 
_____
City Attorney  
APPENDIX B - GAS AND ELECTRIC FRANCHISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20, adopted Nov. 13, 2007, repealed former App. B, Arts. I-XIX relative to the gas and electric franchise of the City of Sterling with Public Service Company of Colorado, and derived from Ord. No. 25-1987, adopted Dec. 8, 1987. Said ordinance has been printed as adopted, except that obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

ORDINANCE NO. 20 
Series of 2007 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF STERLING, LOGAN COUNTY, COLORADO, GRANTING BY FRANCHISE TO PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY OF COLORADO, ITS AFFILIATES, SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT TO USE THE STREETS WITHIN THE CITY TO FURNISH, SELL, TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTE GAS AND ELECTRICITY TO THE CITY AND TO ALL RESIDENTS OF THE CITY, GRANTING THE RIGHT TO ACQUIRE, CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, LOCATE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE AND EXTEND INTO, WITHIN AND THROUGH THE CITY ALL FACILITIES REASONABLY NECESSARY TO FURNISH, SELL, TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTE GAS AND ELECTRICITY WITHIN AND THROUGH THE CITY, AND GRANTING THE RIGHT TO PROVIDE STREET LIGHTING SERVICE TO THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
Introduced by Councilmember Mayor Jones . 
    WHEREAS, Section 14-2 of the Charter of the City of Sterling provides that no franchise shall be granted except by ordinance; and 
    WHEREAS, City, acting as the Municipality, has determined that the Grantee has the financial, legal, and technical ability which is reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities, and equipment necessary to meet the future gas and electric needs of the community; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the terms and conditions set forth herein, and it being the intention of the parties to be legally bound hereby, the Municipality and the Grantee agree as follows: 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STERLING, COLORADO, AS FOLLOWS: 
ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purpose of this franchise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Article. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this Article shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
§1.1 "City" refers to the City of Sterling, a municipal corporation of the State of Colorado. 
§1.2 "City Council" or "Council" refers to the legislative body of the City. 
§1.3 "Company" refers to Public Service Company of Colorado d/b/a Xcel Energy and its successors and assigns including affiliates or subsidiaries that undertake to perform any of the obligations under this franchise. 
§1.4 "Company Facilities" refer to all facilities of the Company reasonably necessary to provide gas and electric service into, within and through the City, including but not limited to plants, works, systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, pipes, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, gas compressors, meters, meter reading devices, communication and data transfer equipment, control equipment, gas regulator stations, street lights, wire, cables and poles. 
§1.5 "Electric Gross Revenues" refers to those amounts of money which the Company receives from the sale or delivery of electricity in the City, after adjusting for refunds, net write-offs of uncollectible accounts, corrections, or regulatory adjustments. Regulatory adjustments include, but are not limited to, credits, surcharges, refunds, and pro-forma adjustments pursuant to federal or state regulation. "Electric Gross Revenues" shall exclude any revenue for the sale or delivery of electricity to the City. 
§1.6 "Gross Revenues" refers to those amounts of money which the Company receives from the sale of gas and electricity within the City under rates authorized by the Public Utilities Commission, as well as from the transportation of gas to its customers within the City (unless otherwise preempted by applicable federal or state law), as adjusted for refunds, net write-offs of uncollectible accounts, corrections, or regulatory adjustments. Regulatory adjustments include, but are not limited to, credits, surcharges, refunds, and pro-forma adjustments pursuant to federal or state regulation. "Gross Revenues" shall exclude any revenues from the sale of gas or electricity to the City or the transportation of gas to the City. 
§1.7 "Private Project" refers to any project which is not covered by the definition of Public Project. 
§1.8 "Public Project" refers to (1) any public work or improvement within the City that is wholly owned or wholly funded by the City; (2) any public work or improvement within the City where fifty percent (50%) or more of the funding is provided by any combination of the City, the federal government, the State of Colorado, the Regional Transportation District, or any Colorado county; and (3) any public work or improvement within the City where fifty percent (50%) or more of the funding is provided by special districts that in the reasonable exercise of their legal authority are the sole providers within specified areas of the City of water, sewer, and/or water and sewer service, and only to the extent the project at issue involves water, sewer, and/or water and sewer facilities, but excluding all other entities established under Title 32 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
§1.9 "Public Utilities Commission" or "PUC" refers to the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado or other state agency succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission. 
§1.10 "Public Utility Easement" refers to any easement over, under, or above public or private property, lawfully acquired by or dedicated to the use of the Company, its predecessors in interest, or other public utility companies for the placement of public utility facilities, including but not limited to Company Facilities. 
§1.11 "Residents" refer to all persons, businesses, industries, governmental agencies, including the City, and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the City. 
§1.12 "Streets" or "City Streets" refers to the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any City dedicated streets, alleys, bridges, roads, lanes, public easements, and other public rights-of-way within the City. Streets shall also include other public places within the City that are suitable locations for the placement of Company Facilities as specifically approved in writing by the City. Streets shall not include Public Utility Easements. 
§1.13 "Supporting Documentation" refers to all information reasonably required in order to allow the Company to design and construct any work performed under the provisions of this franchise. Supporting Documentation may include, but is not limited to, construction plans, a description of known environmental issues, the identification of critical right of way or easement issues, the final recorded plat for the property, the date the site will be ready for the Company to begin construction, the date electric service and meter set are needed, the date gas service and meter set are needed, and the name and contact information for the City's project manager. 
§1.14 "Tariffs" refer to those tariffs of the Company on file and in effect with the PUC. 
§1.15 "Utility Service" refers to the sale of gas or electricity to Residents by the Company under rates approved by the PUC, as well as the delivery of gas to Residents by the Company. 
ARTICLE 2 - GRANT OF FRANCHISE 
§2.1  Grant of Franchise. 
A.  Grant. The City hereby grants to the Company, subject to all conditions, limitations, terms, and provisions contained in this franchise, the non-exclusive right to make reasonable use of City Streets: 
 (1) to provide Utility Service to the City and to its Residents under tariffs on file with the PUC; and 
 (2) to acquire, purchase, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate, and extend into, within and through the City all Company Facilities reasonably necessary for the generation, production, manufacture, sale, storage, purchase, exchange, transmission, transportation and distribution of Utility Service within and through the City. 
B.  Street Lighting and Traffic Signal Lighting Service. The rights granted by this franchise encompass the nonexclusive right to provide street lighting service and traffic signal lighting service as directed by the City, and the provisions of this franchise shall apply with full and equal force to street lighting service and traffic signal lighting service provided by the Company. Wherever reference is made in this franchise to the sale or provision of Utility Service, these references shall be deemed to include the provision of street lighting service and traffic signal lighting service. Street lighting service and traffic signal lighting service within the City shall be governed by tariffs on file with the Colorado PUC. 
§2.2  Conditions and Limitations. 
A.  Scope of Franchise. The grant of this franchise shall extend to all areas of the City as it is now or hereafter constituted; however, nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to authorize the Company to engage in activities other than the provision of Utility Service. 
B.  Subject to City Usage. The right to make reasonable use of City Streets under the franchise is subject to and subordinate to any City usage of said Streets. 
C.  Prior Grants Not Revoked. This grant is not intended to revoke any prior license, grant, or right to use the Streets and such licenses, grants or rights of use are hereby affirmed. Such rights shall, however, be governed by the terms of this franchise. 
D.  Franchise Not Exclusive. The rights granted by this franchise are not, and shall not be deemed to be, granted exclusively to the Company, and the City reserves the right to make or grant a franchise to any other person, firm, or corporation. 
§2.3  Effective Date and Term. 
A.  Term. This franchise shall take effect on December 7, 2007, and shall supersede any prior franchise grants to the Company by the City. This franchise shall terminate on December 8, 2027, unless extended by mutual consent. 
ARTICLE 3 - CITY POLICE POWERS 
§3.1  Police Powers. The Company expressly acknowledges the City's right to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions contained herein, such laws, including ordinances and regulations, as it may deem necessary in the exercise of its governmental powers. 
§3.2  Regulation of Streets or Other City Property. The Company expressly acknowledges the City's right to enforce regulations concerning the Company's access to or use of the Streets, including requirements for permits. 
§3.3  Compliance With Laws. The Company shall promptly and fully comply with all laws, regulations, permits, and orders enacted by the City that are applicable to the Company's provision of Utility Service within the City. 
ARTICLE 4 - FRANCHISE FEE 
§4.1  Franchise Fee. 
A.  Fee. In consideration for the franchise, which provides for the Company's use of City Streets, which are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the City at great expense to its Residents, and in recognition that the grant to the Company of the use of City Streets is a valuable right, the Company shall pay the City a sum equal to three percent (3%) of all Gross Revenues. The Company shall collect this fee from a surcharge upon City residents who are customers of the Company. 
B.  Obligation in Lieu of Fee. In the event that the franchise fee specified herein is declared void for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, unless prohibited by law, the Company shall be obligated to pay the City, at the same times and in the same manner as provided in the franchise, an aggregate amount equal to the amount which the Company would have paid as a franchise fee as consideration for use of the City Streets. The Company shall collect the amounts agreed upon through a surcharge upon Utility Service provided to City Residents. 
C.  Changes in Utility Service Industries. The City and the Company recognize that utility service industries are the subject of restructuring initiatives by legislative and regulatory authorities, and are also experiencing other changes as a result of mergers, acquisitions, and reorganizations. Some of such initiatives and changes have or may have an adverse impact upon the franchise fee revenues provided for herein. In recognition of the length of the term of this franchise, the Company agrees that in the event of any such initiatives or changes and to the extent permitted by law, upon receiving a written request from the City, the Company will cooperate with and assist the City in modifying this franchise to assure that the City receives an amount in franchise fees or some other form of compensation that is the same amount of franchise fees paid to the City as of the date that such initiatives and changes adversely impact franchise fee revenues, provided, however, that the Company shall be entitled to collect such amounts from City Residents in conjunction with the provision of Utility Service. 
D.  Utility Service Provided to the City. No franchise fee shall be charged to the City for Utility Service provided to the City for its own consumption, including street lighting service and traffic signal lighting service. 
§4.2  Remittance Of Franchise Fee. 
A.  Remittance Schedule. Franchise fee revenues shall be remitted by the Company to the City as directed by the City in monthly installments not more than thirty (30) days following the close of each month. 
B.  Correction of Franchise Fee Payments. In the event that either the City or the Company discovers that there has been an error in the calculation of the franchise fee payment to the City, it shall provide written notice to the other party of the error. If the party receiving written notice of error does not agree with the written notice of error, that party may challenge the written notice of error pursuant to Section 4.2.C of this franchise; otherwise, the error shall be corrected in the next monthly payment. However, if the error results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the City, and said overpayment is in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the error was undiscovered. All franchise fee underpayments shall be corrected in the next monthly payment, together with interest computed at the rate set by the PUC for customer security deposits held by the Company, from the date when due until the date paid. In no event shall either party be required to fund or refund any overpayment or underpayment made as a result of a Company error which occurred more than three (3) years prior to the discovery of the Company error. 
C.  Fee Disputes. Either party may challenge any written notification of error as provided for in Section 4.2.B of this franchise by filing a written notice to the other party within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written notification of error. The written notice shall contain a summary of the facts and reasons for the party's notice. The parties shall make good faith efforts to resolve any such notice of error before initiating any formal legal proceedings for the resolution of such error. 
D.  Reports. Upon written request by the City, but not more than once per year, the Company shall supply the City with reports, in such formats and providing such details as reasonably requested by the City, of all suppliers of utility service that utilize Company Facilities to sell or distribute utility service to Residents and the names and addresses of each such supplier. 
§4.3  Franchise Fee Payment Not in Lieu Of Permit Or Other Fees. Payment of the franchise fee does not exempt the Company from any other lawful tax or fee imposed generally upon persons doing business within the City, including any fee for a street closure permit, an excavation permit, a street cut permit, or other lawful permits hereafter required by the City, except that the franchise fee provided for herein shall be in lieu of any occupancy tax, occupation tax or other fee for the use of City Streets. 
ARTICLE 5 - ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE 
§5.1  City Designee. The City shall designate in writing to the Company an official having full power and authority to administer the franchise. The City may also designate one or more City representatives to act as the primary liaison with the Company as to particular matters addressed by this franchise and shall provide the Company with the name and telephone numbers of said City representatives. The City may change these designations by providing written notice to the Company. The City's designee shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect any Company Facilities in City Streets. 
§5.2  Company Designee. The Company shall designate a representative to act as the primary liaison with the City and shall provide the City with the name, address, and telephone number for the Company's representative under this franchise. The Company may change its designation by providing written notice to the City. The City shall use this liaison to communicate with the Company regarding Utility Service and related service needs for City facilities. 
§5.3  Coordination Of Work. 
A. The Company agrees to meet with the City's designee upon written request for the purpose of reviewing, implementing, or modifying mutually beneficial procedures for the efficient processing of Company bills, invoices and other requests for payment. 
B. The Company agrees to coordinate its activities in City Streets with the City. The City and the Company will meet annually upon the written request of the City designee to exchange their respective short-term and long-term forecasts and/or work plans for construction and other similar work which may affect City Streets. The City and Company shall hold such meetings as either deems necessary to exchange additional information with a view towards coordinating their respective activities in those areas where such coordination may prove beneficial and so that the City will be assured that all provisions of this franchise, building and zoning codes, and air and water pollution regulations are complied with, and that aesthetic and other relevant planning principles have been given due consideration. 
ARTICLE 6 - SUPPLY, CONSTRUCTION, AND DESIGN 
§6.1  Purpose. The Company acknowledges the critical nature of the municipal services performed or provided by the City to the Residents which require the Company to provide prompt and reliable Utility Service and the performance of related services for City facilities. The City and the Company wish to provide for certain terms and conditions under which the Company will provide Utility Service and perform related services for the City in order to facilitate and enhance the operation of City facilities. They also wish to provide for other processes and procedures related to the provision of Utility Service to the City. 
§6.2  Supply. The Company shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide a sufficient supply of gas and electricity to Residents at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with reliable supplies. 
§6.3  Service to City Facilities. 
A.  Transport Gas. To the extent the City is or elects to become a gas transport customer of the Company, the Company shall transport natural gas purchased by the City for use in City facilities pursuant to separate contracts with the City. 
B.  Charges to the City. No charges to the City by the Company for Utility Service (other than gas transportation which shall be subject to negotiated contracts) shall exceed the lowest charge for similar service or supplies provided by the Company to any other similarly situated customer of the Company. The parties acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Colorado PUC over the Company's regulated intrastate electric and gas rates. 
§6.4  Restoration Of Service. 
A.  Notification. The Company shall provide to the City daytime and nighttime telephone numbers of a designated Company representative from whom the City designee may obtain status information from the Company on a twenty-four (24) hour basis concerning interruptions of Utility Service in any part of the City. 
B.  Restoration. In the event the Company's gas system or electric system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the Company shall use due diligence to restore such systems to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time, or provide a reasonable alternative to such system if the Company elects not to restore such system. 
§6.5  Obligations Regarding Company Facilities. 
A.  Company Facilities. All Company Facilities within City Streets shall be maintained in good repair and condition. 
B.  Company Work Within the City. All work within City Streets performed or caused to be performed by the Company shall be done: 
 (1) in a high-quality manner; 
 (2) in a timely and expeditious manner; 
 (3) in a manner which minimizes inconvenience to the public; 
 (4) in a cost-effective manner, which may include the use of qualified contractors; and 
 (5) in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
C.  No Interference With City Facilities. Company Facilities shall not interfere with any City facilities, including water facilities, sanitary or storm sewer facilities, communications facilities, or other City uses of the Streets. Company Facilities shall be installed and maintained in City Streets so as to minimize interference with other property, trees, and other improvements and natural features in and adjoining the Streets. 
D.  Permit And Inspection. The installation, renovation, and replacement of any Company Facilities in the City Streets by or on behalf of the Company shall be subject to permit, inspection and approval by the City. Such inspection and approval may include, but not be limited to, the following matters: location of Company Facilities, cutting and trimming of trees and shrubs, and disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, and surfaces of City Streets. The Company agrees to cooperate with the City in conducting inspections and shall promptly perform any remedial action lawfully required by the City pursuant to any such inspection. 
E.  Compliance. The Company and all of its contractors shall comply with the requirements of all municipal laws, ordinances, regulations, permits, and standards, including but not limited to requirements of all building and zoning codes, and requirements regarding curb and pavement cuts, excavating, digging, and other construction activities. The Company shall assure that its contractors working in City Streets hold the necessary licenses and permits required by law. 
F.  As-Built Drawings. Upon reasonable written request of the City designee, if available, the Company shall provide, on a project by project basis, as-built drawings of any Company Facility installed within the City Streets or contiguous to the City Streets. 
§6.6  Excavation And Construction. The Company shall be responsible for obtaining, paying for, and complying with all applicable permits including, but not limited to, excavation, street closure and street cut permits, in the manner required by the laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City. Although the Company shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with the terms of such permits when performing relocations requested by the City under Section 6.8 of this franchise and undergrounding requested by the City under Article 10 of this franchise, the City will not require the Company to pay the fees charged for such permits. 
§6.7  Restoration. To the extent practicable, when the Company does any work in or affecting the City Streets, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such City Streets to a condition that meets applicable City standards. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the Company may with the approval of the City, temporarily restore the affected City Streets, provided that such temporary restoration is at the Company's sole expense and provided further that the Company promptly undertakes and completes the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. If the Company fails to promptly restore the City Streets as required by this Section, the City may, upon giving fourteen (14) days' written notice to the Company, restore such City Streets or remove the obstruction therefrom; provided however, City actions do not interfere with Company Facilities. The Company shall be responsible for the actual cost incurred by the City to restore such City Streets or to remove any obstructions therefrom. The City shall not perform work on Company Facilities. 
§6.8  Relocation Of Company Facilities. 
A.  Relocation Obligation. The Company shall at its sole cost and expense temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any Company Facility in City Streets whenever such removal, relocation, change or alteration is necessary for the completion of any Public Project. For all relocations, the Company and the City agree to cooperate on the location and relocation of the Company Facilities in the City Streets in order to achieve relocation in the most efficient and cost-effective manner possible. Notwithstanding the foregoing, once the Company has relocated any Company Facility at the City's direction, if the City requests that the same Company Facility be relocated within three years, the subsequent relocation shall not be at the Company's expense. 
B.  Private Projects. The Company shall not be responsible for the expenses of any relocation required by any Private Projects or for the expenses of any required relocation where the City has directly or indirectly assisted any Private Projects, and the Company has the right to require the payment of estimated relocation expenses from the affected private party before undertaking such relocation. 
C.  Relocation Performance. The relocations set forth in Section 6.8.A of this franchise shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed 120 days from the later of the date on which the City designee requests in writing that the relocation commence, or the date when the Company is provided all Supporting Documentation. The Company shall be entitled to an extension of time to complete a relocation where the Company's performance was delayed due to a cause that could not be reasonably anticipated by the Company or is beyond its reasonable control, after exercise of best efforts to perform, including without limitation fire, strike, war, riots, acts of governmental authority, acts of God, forces of nature, judicial action, unavailability or shortages of labor, materials or equipment and failures or delays in delivery of materials. Upon request of the Company, the City may also grant the Company reasonable extensions of time for good cause shown and the City shall not unreasonably withhold any such extension. 
D.  City Revision of Supporting Documentation. Any revision by the City of Supporting Documentation provided to the Company that causes the Company to substantially redesign and/or change its plans regarding facility relocation shall be deemed good cause for a reasonable extension of time to complete the relocation under the franchise. 
E.  Completion. Each such relocation shall be deemed complete only when the Company actually relocates the Company Facilities, restores the relocation site in accordance with Section 6.7 of this franchise or as otherwise agreed with the City, and removes from the site or properly abandons on site all unused facilities, equipment, material and other impediments. 
F.  Scope of Obligation. The relocation obligation set forth in this Section shall only apply to Company Facilities located in City Streets. The obligation shall not apply to Company Facilities located on property owned by the Company in fee, or to Company Facilities located in privately-owned easements or Public Utility Easements, unless such Public Utility Easements are on or in City owned property. 
G.  Underground Relocation. Underground facilities shall be relocated underground. Above ground facilities shall be placed above ground unless the Company is paid for the incremental amount by which the underground cost would exceed the above ground cost of relocation, or the City requests that such additional incremental cost be paid out of available funds under Article 10 of this franchise. 
H.  Coordination. When requested in writing by the City designee or the Company, representatives of the City and the Company shall meet to share information regarding anticipated projects which will require relocation of Company Facilities in City Streets. Such meetings shall be for the purpose of minimizing conflicts where possible and to facilitate coordination with any timetable established by the City for any Public Project. 
I.  Proposed Alternatives Or Modifications. Upon receipt of written notice of a required relocation, the Company may propose an alternative to or modification of the Public Project requiring the relocation in an effort to mitigate or avoid the impact of the required relocation of Company Facilities. The City shall in good faith review the proposed alternative or modification. The City shall not unreasonably withhold its approval of the proposed alternative or modification. In the event the City designee accepts the proposed alternative or modification, the Company agrees to promptly compensate the City for all additional costs, expenses or delay that resulted from the implementation of the proposed alternative. 
§6.9  New or Modified Service Requested By City. The conditions under which the Company shall install new or modified utility service to the City as a customer shall be governed by this franchise and the Company's PUC tariffs. 
§6.10  Service To New Areas. If the territorial boundaries of the City are expanded during the term of this franchise, the Company shall, to the extent permitted by law, extend service to Residents in the expanded area at the earliest practicable time. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the terms of the Company's PUC tariffs and this franchise, including the payment of franchise fees. 
§6.11  City Not Required To Advance Funds. Upon receipt of the City's authorization for billing and construction, the Company shall extend Company Facilities to provide Utility Service to the City as a customer, without requiring the City to advance funds prior to construction. The City shall pay for the extension of Company Facilities once completed in accordance with the Company's extension policy on file with the PUC. 
ARTICLE 7 - RELIABILITY 
§7.1  Reliability. The Company shall operate and maintain Company Facilities efficiently and economically and in accordance with the standards, systems, methods, and skills consistent with the provision of adequate, safe, and reliable Utility Service. 
§7.2  Franchise Performance Obligations. The Company recognizes that, as part of its obligations and commitments under this franchise, the Company shall carry out each of its performance obligations in a timely, expeditious, efficient, economical, and workmanlike manner. 
ARTICLE 8 - COMPANY PERFORMANCE OBLIGATIONS 
§8.1  New or Modified Service To City Facilities. In providing new or modified Utility Service to City facilities, the Company agrees to perform as follows: 
A.  Performance. The Company shall complete each project requested by the City within a reasonable time. The Parties agree that a reasonable time shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date upon which the City designee makes a written request and provides the required Supporting Documentation as described in this section. The Company shall be entitled to an extension of time to complete a project where the Company's performance was delayed due to a cause that could not be reasonably anticipated by the Company or is beyond its reasonable control, after exercise of best efforts to perform, including but not limited to fire, strike, war, riots, acts of governmental authority, acts of God, forces of nature, judicial action, unavailability or shortages of materials or equipment and failures or delays in delivery of materials. Upon request of the Company, the City designee may also grant the Company reasonable extensions of time for good cause shown and the City shall not unreasonably withhold any such extension. 
B.  City Revision of Supporting Documentation. Any revision by the City of Supporting Documentation provided to the Company that causes the Company to substantially redesign and/or change its plans regarding new or modified service to City facilities shall be deemed good cause for a reasonable extension of time to complete the relocation under the franchise. 
C.  Completion/Restoration. Each such project shall be complete only when the Company actually provides the service installation or modification required, restores the project site in accordance with the terms of the franchise or as otherwise agreed with the City and removes from the site or properly abandons on site any unused facilities, equipment, material and other impediments. 
§8.2  Third Party Damage Recovery. 
A.  Damage To Company Interests. If, by violation of any traffic or other ordinance of the City, or in any other unlawful manner, any individual or entity damages any Company Facilities that the Company is responsible to repair or replace, the City will notify the Company of any such incident and will provide to the Company within a reasonable time all pertinent information within its possession regarding the incident and the damage, including the identity of the responsible individual or entity. 
B.  Damage To City Interests. If, by violation of any traffic or other ordinance of the City, or in any other unlawful manner, any individual or entity damages any Company Facilities for which the City is obligated to reimburse the Company for the cost of the repair or replacement of the damaged facility, the Company will notify the City of any such incident and will provide to the City within a reasonable time all pertinent information within its possession regarding the incident and the damage, including the identity of the responsible individual or entity. 
C.  Meeting. The Company and the City agree to meet periodically, upon written request of either party, for the purpose of developing, implementing, reviewing, improving and/or modifying mutually beneficial procedures and methods for the efficient gathering and transmittal of information useful in recovery efforts against third parties for damaging Company Facilities. 
ARTICLE 9 - USE OF COMPANY FACILITIES 
§9.1  City Use Of Company Facilities. The City shall be permitted to make use of Company Facilities in the City at no cost to the City for the placement of City equipment or facilities necessary to serve a legitimate police, fire, emergency, public safety or traffic control purpose. The City will notify the Company in writing in advance of its intent to use Company facilities and the nature of such use. The City shall be responsible for costs associated with modifications to Company Facilities to accommodate the City's use of such Company Facilities and for any electricity used. No such use of Company Facilities shall be required if it would constitute a safety hazard or would interfere with the Company's use of Company Facilities. Any such City use must comply with the National Electric Safety Code and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
§9.2  Third Party Use of Company Facilities. If requested in writing by the City, the Company may allow other companies who hold franchises, or otherwise have obtained consent from the City to use the Streets, to utilize Company Facilities for the placement of their facilities upon approval by the Company and agreement upon reasonable terms and conditions including payment of fees established by the Company. The Company shall not unreasonably withhold such permission. No such use shall be permitted if it would constitute a safety hazard or would interfere with the Company's use of Company Facilities. The Company shall not be required to permit the use of Company Facilities for the provision of utility service by the City or by third parties. 
§9.3  City Use of Company Transmission Rights-Of-Way. The Company shall offer to grant to the City use of transmission rights-of-way which it now, or in the future, owns in fee within the City for parks and open space; provided, however, that the Company shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstance where such offer would constitute a safety hazard or would interfere with the Company's use of the transmission right-of-way. 
§9.4  Emergencies. Upon written request, the Company shall assist the City in developing an emergency management plan. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Company shall, upon verbal request of the City, make available Company Facilities for emergency use during the emergency or the disaster period. Such use of Company Facilities shall be of a limited duration and will only be allowed if the use does not interfere with the Company's own use of Company Facilities. 
ARTICLE 10 - UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD FACILITIES 
§10.1  Underground Electrical Lines In New Areas. The Company shall, upon payment to the Company of the charges provided in its tariffs or their equivalent, place all newly constructed electrical distribution lines in newly developed areas underground in accordance with applicable laws, regulations and orders. 
§10.2  Underground Conversion At Expense Of Company. 
A.  Underground Fund. The Company shall budget and allocate an annual amount, equivalent to one percent (1%) of the preceding year's Electric Gross Revenues (the "Fund"), for the purpose of undergrounding existing overhead distribution facilities in the City, as may be requested by the City, provided that the undergrounding shall extend for a minimum distance of one (1) block or 750 feet, whichever is less, or as may be mutually agreed by the parties. Except as provided in §6.8.F, no relocation expenses which the Company would be required to expend pursuant to Article 6 of this franchise shall be charged to this allocation. 
B.  Unexpended Portion and Advances. Any unexpended portion of the Fund shall be carried over to succeeding years and, in addition, upon request by the City designee, the Company agrees to expend amounts anticipated to be available under the preceding paragraph for up to three (3) years in advance. Any amounts so expended shall be credited against amounts to be expended in succeeding years. Any funds accumulated under any prior franchise shall be carried over to this Fund balance. Any funds allocated under subsection A of this section, and not spent under the terms of this Agreement, will be carried forward for expenditure under a subsequent franchise agreement between the Company and the City, provided that the terms of the subsequent agreement so provide. The City shall have no vested interest in the Fund and any monies in the Fund not expended at the expiration or termination of this Agreement shall remain the property of the Company. 
C.  Systemwide Undergrounding. If, during the term of this franchise, the Company should receive authority from the PUC to undertake a systemwide program or programs of undergrounding its electric distribution facilities, the Company will budget and allocate to the program of undergrounding in the City such amount as may be determined and approved by the PUC, but in no case shall such amount be less than the one percent (1%) of annual Electric Gross Revenues provided above. 
D.  City Requirement to Underground. In addition to the provisions of this Article, the City may require any above ground Company Facilities to be moved underground at the City's expense. 
§10.3  Undergrounding Performance. Upon receipt of a written request from the City, the Company shall, to the extent of monies available in the Fund and as otherwise provided herein, underground Company Facilities in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section. 
A.  Performance. The Company shall complete each undergrounding project requested by the City within a reasonable time, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the later of the date upon which the City designee makes a written request and the date the City provides to the Company all Supporting Documentation. The Company shall be entitled to an extension of time to complete each undergrounding project where the Company's performance was delayed due to a cause that could not be reasonably anticipated by the Company or is beyond its reasonable control, after exercise of best efforts to perform, including but not limited to, fire, strike, war, riots, acts of governmental authority, acts of God, forces of nature, judicial action, unavailability or shortages of materials or equipment and failures or delays in delivery of materials. Upon request of the Company, the City may also grant the Company reasonable extensions of time for good cause shown and the City shall not unreasonably withhold any such extension. 
B.  City Revision of Supporting Documentation. Any revision by the City of Supporting Documentation provided to the Company that causes the Company to substantially redesign and/or change its plans regarding an undergrounding project shall be deemed good cause for a reasonable extension of time to complete the undergrounding project under the franchise. 
C.  Completion/Restoration. Each such undergrounding project shall be deemed complete only when the Company actually undergrounds the designated Company Facilities, restores the undergrounding site in accordance with Section 6.7 of this franchise or as otherwise agreed with the City designee and removes from the site or properly abandons on site any unused facilities, equipment, material and other impediments. 
D.  Estimates. Promptly upon receipt of an undergrounding request from the City and the Supporting Documentation necessary for the Company to design the undergrounding project, the Company shall prepare a detailed, good faith cost estimate of the anticipated actual cost of the requested project for the City to review and, if acceptable, issue a project authorization. The Company will not proceed with any requested project until the City has provided a written acceptance of the Company estimate. 
E.  Report Of Actual Costs. Upon completion of each undergrounding project, the Company shall submit to the City a detailed report of the Company's actual cost to complete the project and the Company shall reconcile this total actual cost with the accepted cost estimate. 
F.  Audit Of Underground Projects. The City may require that the Company undertake an independent audit of any undergrounding project for five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or greater. The cost of any such independent audit shall reduce the amount of the Fund. The Company shall cooperate fully with any audit and the independent auditor shall prepare and provide to the City and the Company a final audit report showing the actual costs associated with completion of the project. If a project audit is required by the City, only those actual project costs confirmed and verified by the independent auditor as incurred by the Company to complete the particular City undergrounding project shall reduce the Fund. The City may require that the Company undertake an internal audit of any project costing less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) once every three (3) years. 
§10.4  Audit Of Underground Fund. Upon written request of the City, but no more frequently than once every three (3) years, the Company shall audit the Fund for the City. Such audits shall be limited to the previous three (3) calendar years. The Company shall provide the audit report to the City and shall reconcile the Fund consistent with the findings contained in the audit report. 
§10.5  Cooperation With Other Utilities. When undertaking an undergrounding project the City and the Company shall coordinate with other utilities or companies that have their facilities above ground to attempt to have all facilities undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their facilities underground, the City shall provide the Company written notice of the specific undergrounding project. The Company shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground Company facilities as part of the same project where financially, technically and operationally feasible. The Company shall not be required to pay for the cost of undergrounding the facilities of other companies or the City. 
§10.6  Planning And Coordination Of Undergrounding Projects. The City and the Company shall mutually plan in advance the scheduling of undergrounding projects to be undertaken according to this Article as a part of the review and planning for other City and Company construction projects. In addition, the City and the Company agree to meet, as required, to review the progress of then-current undergrounding projects and to review planned future undergrounding projects. The purpose of such meetings shall be to further cooperation between the City and the Company to achieve the orderly undergrounding of Company Facilities. At such meetings, the parties shall review: 
A. Undergrounding, including conversions, Public Projects and replacements which have been accomplished or are underway, together with the Company's plans for additional undergrounding; and 
B. Public Projects anticipated by the City. 
ARTICLE 11 - PURCHASE OR CONDEMNATION 
§11.1 Municipal Right To Purchase Or Condemn. 
A.  Right And Privilege Of City. The right and privilege of the City to construct, purchase or condemn any Company Facilities located within the territorial boundaries of the City, and the Company's rights in connection therewith, as set forth in applicable provisions of the constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado relating to the acquisition of public utilities, are expressly recognized. The City shall have the right, within the time frames and using the procedures set forth in such provisions, to purchase Company Facilities, land, rights-of-way and easements now owned or to be owned by the Company located within the territorial boundaries of the City. In the event of any such purchase, no value shall be ascribed or given to the rights granted under this franchise in the valuation of the property thus taken. 
B.  Notice Of Intent To Purchase or Condemn. The City shall provide the Company no less than one (1) year's prior written notice of its intent to purchase or condemn Company Facilities. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to constitute a consent by the Company to the City's purchase or condemnation of Company Facilities. 
ARTICLE 12 - TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE 
§12.1  Consent Of City Required. The Company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to an unaffiliated third party, except by merger with such third party, or, except when the transfer is made in response to legislation or regulatory requirements, unless the City approves such transfer or assignment in writing. Approval of the transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
§12.2  Transfer Fee. In order that the City may share in the value this franchise adds to the Company's operations, any transfer or assignment of rights granted under this franchise requiring City approval, as set forth herein, shall be subject to the condition that the Company shall promptly pay to the City a transfer fee in an amount equal to the proportion of the City's then-population provided Utility Service by the Company to the then-population of the City and County of Denver provided Utility Service by the Company multiplied by one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Except as otherwise required by law, such transfer fee shall not be recovered from a surcharge placed only on the rates of Residents. 
ARTICLE 13 - CONTINUATION OF UTILITY SERVICE 
§13.1  Continuation of Utility Service. In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or is terminated for any reason, and the City has not provided for alternative utility service, the Company shall continue to provide Utility Service within the City until the City arranges for utility service from another provider. The Company further agrees that it will not withhold any temporary Utility Services necessary to protect the public. The City agrees that in the circumstances of this Article, the Company shall be entitled to monetary compensation as provided in the Company's tariffs on file with the Public Utilities Commission and the Company shall be entitled to collect from Residents and shall be obligated to pay the City, at the same times and in the same manner as provided in the franchise, an aggregate amount equal to the amount which the Company would have paid as a franchise fee as consideration for use of the City's Streets. Only upon receipt of written notice from the City stating that the City has adequate alternative Utility Service for Residents and upon order of the PUC shall the Company be allowed to discontinue the provision of Utility Service to the City and its Residents. 
ARTICLE 14 - INDEMNIFICATION AND IMMUNITY 
§14.1  City Held Harmless. The Company shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on account of or arising from the grant of this franchise, the exercise by the Company of the related rights, or from the operations of the Company within the City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees. The City shall (a) give prompt written notice to the Company of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the City seeks indemnification hereunder and (b) unless in the City's judgment a conflict of interest may exist between the City and the Company with respect to such claim, demand or lien, shall permit the Company to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien with counsel satisfactory to the City. If such defense is assumed by the Company, the Company shall not be subject to any liability for any settlement made without its consent. If such defense is not assumed by the Company or if the City determines that a conflict of interest exists, the parties reserve all rights to seek all remedies available in this franchise against each other. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Company shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent or intentional act or failure to act of the City or any of its officers or employees. 
§14.2  Immunity. Nothing in this Section or any other provision of this agreement shall be construed as a waiver of the notice requirements, defenses, immunities and limitations the City may have under the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act (§4-10-101, C.R.S., et. seq.) or of any other defenses, immunities, or limitations of liability available to the City by law. 
ARTICLE 15 - BREACH 
§15.1  Non-Contestability. The City and the Company agree to take all reasonable and necessary actions to assure that the terms of this franchise are performed. 
§15.2  Breach. 
A.  Notice/Cure/Remedies. Except as otherwise provided in this franchise, if a party (the "breaching party") to this franchise fails or refuses to perform any of the terms or conditions of this franchise (a "breach"), the other party (the "non-breaching party") may provide written notice to the breaching party of such breach. Upon receipt of such notice, the breaching party shall be given a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, in which to remedy the breach. If the breaching party does not remedy the breach within the time allowed in the notice, the non-breaching party may exercise the following remedies for such breach: 
 (1) specific performance of the applicable term or condition; and 
 (2) recovery of actual damages from the date of such breach incurred by the non-breaching party in connection with the breach, but excluding any consequential damages. 
B.  Termination Of Franchise By City. In addition to the foregoing remedies, if the Company fails or refuses to perform any material term or condition of this franchise (a "material breach"), the City may provide written notice to the Company of such material breach. Upon receipt of such notice, the Company shall be given a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to remedy the material breach. If the Company does not remedy the material breach within the time allowed in the notice, the City may, at its sole option, terminate this franchise. This remedy shall be in addition to the City's right to exercise any of the remedies provided for elsewhere in this franchise. Upon such termination, the Company shall continue to provide Utility Service to the City and its Residents until the City makes alternative arrangements for such service and until otherwise ordered by the PUC and the Company shall be entitled to collect from Residents and shall be obligated to pay the City, at the same times and in the same manner as provided in the franchise, an aggregate amount equal to the amount which the Company would have paid as a franchise fee as consideration for use of the City Streets. 
C.  No Limitation. Except as provided herein, nothing in this franchise shall limit or restrict any legal rights or remedies that either party may possess arising from any alleged breach of this franchise. 
ARTICLE 16 - AMENDMENTS 
§16.1  Proposed Amendments. At any time during the term of this franchise, the City or the Company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other of the proposed amendment(s). 
§16.2  Effective Amendments. No alterations, amendments or modifications to this franchise shall be valid unless executed by an instrument in writing by the parties, adopted with the same formality used in adopting this franchise. Neither this franchise, nor any term hereof, may be changed, modified or abandoned, in whole or in part, except by an instrument in writing, and no subsequent oral agreement shall have any validity whatsoever. 
ARTICLE 17 - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY 
§17.1  Economic Development. The Company is committed to the principle of stimulating, cultivating and strengthening the participation and representation of persons of color, women and members of other under-represented groups within the Company and in the local business community. The Company believes that increased participation and representation of under-represented groups will lead to mutual and sustainable benefits for the local economy. The Company is also committed to the principle that the success and economic well-being of the Company is closely tied to the economic strength and vitality of the diverse communities and people it serves. The Company believes that contributing to the development of a viable and sustainable economic base among all Company customers is in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders. 
§17.2  Employment. 
A. The Company is committed to undertaking programs that identify, consider and develop persons of color, women and members of other under-represented groups for positions at all skill and management levels within the Company. 
B. The Company recognizes that the City and the business community in the City, including women and minority owned businesses, provide a valuable resource in assisting the Company to develop programs to promote persons of color, women and members of under represented communities into management positions, and agrees to keep the City regularly advised of the Company's progress by providing the City a copy of the Company's annual affirmative action report upon the City's written request. 
C. In order to enhance the diversity of the employees of the Company, the Company is committed to recruiting diverse employees by strategies such as partnering with colleges, universities and technical schools with diverse student populations, utilizing diversity specific media to advertise employment opportunities, internships, and engaging recruiting firms with diversity specific expertise. 
D. The Company is committed to developing a world-class workforce through the advancement of its employees, including persons of color, women and members of under represented groups. In order to enhance opportunities for advancement, the Company will offer training and development opportunities for its employees. Such programs may include mentoring programs, training programs, classroom training, and leadership programs. 
E. The Company is committed to a workplace free of discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, military status, sexual orientation, marital status, or physical or mental disability or any other protected status in accordance with all federal, state or local laws. The Company shall not, solely because of race, creed, color, religion, sex, age, national origin or ancestry or handicap, refuse to hire, discharge, promote, demote or discriminate in matters of compensation, against any person otherwise qualified, and further agrees to insert the foregoing provision or its equivalent in all agreements the Company enters into in connection with this franchise. 
F. The Company shall identify and consider women, persons of color and other under represented groups to recommend for its Board of Directors, consistent with the responsibility of boards to represent the interests of the Shareholders, customers and employees of the Company. 
§17.3  Contracting. 
A. It is the Company's policy to make available to minority and women owned business enterprises and other small and/or disadvantaged business enterprises the maximum practical opportunity to compete with other service providers, contractors, vendors and suppliers in the marketplace. The Company is committed to increasing the proportion of Company contracts awarded to minority and women owned business enterprises and other small and/or disadvantaged business enterprises for services, construction, equipment and supplies to the maximum extent consistent with the efficient and economical operation of the Company. 
B. The Company agrees to maintain and continuously develop contracting and community outreach programs calculated to enhance opportunity and increase the participation of minority and women owned business enterprises and other small and/or disadvantaged business enterprises to encourage economic vitality. The Company agrees to keep the City regularly advised of the Company's programs. 
C. The Company shall maintain and support partnerships with local chambers of commerce and business organizations, including those representing predominately minority owned, women owned and disadvantaged businesses, to preserve and strengthen open communication channels and enhance opportunities for minority owned, women owned and disadvantaged businesses to contract with the Company. 
ARTICLE 18 - MISCELLANEOUS 
§18.1  No Waiver. Neither the City nor the Company shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions. 
§18.2  Successors and Assigns. The rights, privileges, and obligations, in whole or in part, granted and contained in this franchise shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the Company, its successors and assigns, to the extent that such successors or assigns have succeeded to or been assigned the rights of the Company pursuant to Article 13 of this franchise. 
§18.3  Third Parties. Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
§18.4  Notice. Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the Company and the City who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this franchise. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent as follows: 
To the City: 
Mayor of Sterling 
P.O. Box 4000 
421 North 4 th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751 
  
Manager of Public Works 
P.O. Box 4000 
421 North 4 th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751 
  
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Sterling 
P.O. Box 4000 
421 North 4 th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751 
  
To the Company: 
Vice President of Customer and 
Local Government Affairs 
Public Service Company of Colorado 
P.O. Box 840 
Denver, Colorado 80201 
  
With a copy to: 
Legal Department 
Public Service Company of Colorado 
P.O. Box 840 
Denver, Colorado 80201 
  
§18.5  Examination Of Records. The parties agree that any duly authorized representative of the City and the Company shall have access to and the right to examine any directly pertinent non-confidential books, documents, papers, and records of the other party involving any activities related to this franchise. All such records must be kept for a minimum of four (4) years. 
§18.6  Payment Of Taxes And Fees. 
A. The Company shall pay and discharge as they become due, promptly and before delinquency, all taxes, assessments, rates, charges, license fees, municipal liens, levies, excises, or imposts, whether general or special, or ordinary or extra-ordinary, of every name, nature, and kind whatsoever, including all governmental charges of whatsoever name, nature, or kind, which may be levied, assessed, charged, or imposed, or which may become a lien or charge against this agreement ("Impositions"), provided that Company shall have the right to contest any such Impositions and shall not be in breach of this section so long as it is actively contesting such Impositions. 
B. The City shall not be liable for the payment of taxes, late charges, interest or penalties of any nature other than pursuant to applicable tariffs on file and in effect from time to time with the PUC. 
§18.7  Conflict Of Interest. The parties agree that no official, officer or employee of the City shall have any personal or beneficial interest whatsoever in the services or property described herein and the Company further agrees not to hire or contract for services any official, officer or employee of the City to the extent prohibited by law, including ordinances and regulations of the City. 
§18.8  Certificate of Convenience and Necessity. The City agrees to support any application the Company may file with the PUC to obtain a certificate of public convenience and necessity to exercise the rights and obligations granted under this franchise. 
§18.9  Authority. Each party represents and warrants that except as set forth below, it has taken all actions that are necessary or that are required by its ordinances, regulations, procedures, bylaws, or applicable law, to legally authorize the undersigned signatories to execute this agreement on behalf of the parties and to bind the parties to its terms. The person(s) executing this agreement on behalf of each of the parties warrants that they have full authorization to execute this agreement. The City acknowledges that notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company requires a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the PUC in order to operate under the terms of this franchise. 
§18.10  Severability. Should any one or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be unconstitutional, illegal, unenforceable or otherwise void, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft one or more substitute provisions that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
§18.11  Force Majeure. Neither the City nor the Company shall be in breach of this franchise if a failure to perform any of the duties under this franchise is due to uncontrollable forces, which shall include, but not be limited to: accidents, breakdown of equipment, shortage of materials, shortage of labor, acts of God, floods, storms, fires, sabotage, terrorist attack, strikes, riots, war, labor disputes, forces of nature, the authority and orders of government, and other causes or contingencies of whatever nature beyond the reasonable control of the party affected, which could not reasonably have been anticipated and avoided. 
§18.12  Earlier Franchises Superseded. This franchise shall constitute the only franchise between the City and the Company for the furnishing of Utility Service, street lighting service, and traffic signal lighting service, and it supersedes and cancels all former franchises between the parties hereto. 
§18.13  Titles Not Controlling. Titles of the paragraphs herein are for reference only, and shall not be used to construe the language of this franchise. 
§18.14  Applicable Law. Colorado law shall apply to the construction and enforcement of this franchise. The parties agree that venue for any litigation arising out of this franchise shall be in the District Court for Logan County, State of Colorado. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance; the City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days after its passage. 
INTRODUCED, READ AND ORDERED PUBLISHED THIS 9th DAY OF OCTOBER , 2007. 
PUBLISHED ON OCTOBER 12, 19, AND 26, 2007, AND NOVEMBER 2 AND 9, 2007. PUBLIC HEARING AND SECOND READING SCHEDULED FOR THE 13TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2007, AT 7:00 P.M. IN CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS, 421 NORTH FOURTH STREET, STERLING, COLORADO. 
/s/  _____

  Mayor ATTEST: /s/  _____
City Clerk REVIEWED BY CITY MANAGER: /s  _____
City Manager APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY /s/  _____
City Attorney  
ADOPTED AND APPROVED THIS 13TH DAY OF NOVEMBER , 2007. 
/s/  _____

  Mayor ATTEST: /s/  _____
City Clerk  
"CITY" 
Approved this 20TH of DECEMBER, 2007, by Public Service Company of Colorado, subject to applicable federal, state and local law. 
PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY OF COLORADO By  _____ Name:  _____ Title:  _____ ATTEST: Reviewed 
Legal /s/  _____

 Assistant Secretary _____ 
"COMPANY" 
APPENDIX C - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the cable television franchises of the City of Sterling with Bresnan Communications, LLC, adopted by Ord. No. 13-2015, and enacted January 12, 2016; and Kentec Communications, Inc., adopted by Ord. No. 14-2015, and enacted January 12, 2016. Said ordinances have been treated as superseding the provisions of former Ord. No. 1-2008, §§ 1-14, enacted March 25, 2008, which pertained to the cable television franchise of the City of Sterling with Kentec Communications, Inc. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been enclosed in brackets. 
Cross reference- Cable communications system, Ch. 5.5; unauthorized connection to CATV system, § 12-18; tampering with CATV facilities, § 12-19; installation of cable television facilities, § 17-1; gas and electric franchise, App. B. 

ORDINANCE NO. 13 Series of 2015 
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING A FRANCHISE AGREEMENT WITH BRESNAN COMMUNICATIONS, LLC, DOING BUSINESS AS CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS, TO CONSTRUCT AND OPERATE A CABLE SYSTEM AND OFFER CABLE SERVICE AND OTHER SERVICES IN, ALONG, AMONG, UPON, ACROSS, ABOVE, OVER, UNDER, OR IN ANY MANNER CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC WAYS WITHIN THE CITY. 
Introduced by Councilmember Appelhans 
    WHEREAS, the cable franchise previously granted to Bresnan Communications, LLC, has expired; and 
    WHEREAS, Section 14-2 of the Charter of the City of Sterling provides that no franchise shall be granted except by ordinance; and 
    WHEREAS, the City has determined that Bresnan Communications, LLC, doing business as Charter Communications, has the financial, legal, and technical ability which is reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities, and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STERLING, COLORADO: That the Franchise Agreement with Bresnan Communications, LLC, doing business as Charter Communications, in the form attached is hereby approved and the Mayor is authorized to execute it on behalf of the City of Sterling. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance; the City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days after its passage. 
    INTRODUCED, READ AND ORDERED PUBLISHED THIS 24TH DAY OF NOVEMBER , 2015. 
    PUBLISHED ON DECEMBER 1, 2, 3, 4, AND 5 2015. 
    PUBLIC HEARING AND SECOND READING SCHEDULED FOR THE 12TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2016, AT 7:00 P.M. IN CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS, 421 NORTH FOURTH STREET, STERLING, COLORADO. 
/s/   
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk   REVIEWED BY CITY MANAGER: 
/s/   
      City Manager   APPROVED AS TO FORM & LEGALITY: 
/s/   
      Attorney       ADOPTED AND APPROVED THIS 12Th DAY OF JANUARY 2016. 
/s/   
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
    This Franchise Agreement (this "Agreement") is between the City of Sterling, Colorado hereinafter referred to as the "Grantor" and Bresnan Communications, LLC, doing business as Charter Communications, hereinafter referred to as the "Grantee." 
    WHEREAS, the Grantor finds that the Grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the current Franchise under Applicable Law, and that the financial, legal and technical ability of the Grantee is sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community; and 
    WHEREAS, having afforded the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, Grantor desires to enter into this Agreement with the Grantee for the construction and operation of a Cable System on the terms set forth herein; and 
    WHEREAS, the Grantor and the Grantee have complied with all federal and State-mandated procedural and substantive requirements pertinent to the renewal of this Agreement. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the City of Sterling and the Grantee agree as follows: 
SECTION 1 
Definition of Terms 
1.1 Terms. For the purpose of this Agreement, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings when used herein with initial capital letters. Other defined terms are set forth throughout this Agreement, and shall have the meanings ascribed herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  The following terms shall be defined as set forth in the Section 602 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 522) - "Affiliate," "Cable Operator," "Cable Service," "Cable System," "Channel," "Franchise" and "Person" - and "Franchise Fee" shall be as defined in Section 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542). 
B.  "Applicable Law" shall mean any statute, ordinance, judicial decision, executive order or regulation having the force and effect of law, that determines the legal standing of a case or issue, provided, however that any statute, ordinance, order or regulation that has been preempted by a higher governmental or legal authority, which prior to preemption had the force and effect of law, shall no longer be considered Applicable Law. This definition shall not be considered a waiver of the right of any party to assert the position that a statute, ordinance, order or regulation has not been preempted. 
C.  "City Council" shall mean the governing body of the Grantor. 
D.  "Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended (47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et seq.). 
E.  "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any successor governmental entity thereto. 
F.  "Gross Revenue" means any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, received by the Grantee (or any Affiliate of the Grantee who is a Cable Operator providing Cable Services over the Cable System in the Service Area) from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in the Service Area, including but not limited to (1) late fees, (2) installation and reconnection fees, (3) upgrade and downgrade fees, (4) converter and remote control rental fees, (5) parental control device rental fees, (6) advertising revenue (less commissions paid to advertisers, but not internal commissions earned by employees of the Grantee or its Affiliates), (7) home shopping commissions, and (8) interactive guides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, "Gross Revenue" shall not include (A) any taxes, fees or assessments collected by the Grantee from Subscribers for pass-through to a government agency, including, without limitation, the FCC user fee, Franchise Fee, or any sales or utility taxes, (B) unrecovered bad debt, (C) credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers and (D) any exclusions available under Applicable Law. 
The parties acknowledge that the Grantee may need to allocate Gross Revenue between Cable Services (which are subject to the Franchise Fee) and non-Cable Services (which are not subject to the Franchise Fee but may be subject to other fees and/or taxes), when these two types of services are bundled together in a discounted package offered to Subscribers. The Grantee shall make such allocation in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, but in no event shall the Grantee allocate Gross Revenue between Cable Services and non-Cable Services where such services are bundled together in a discounted package offered to Subscribers for the purpose of evading its Franchise Fee obligations under this Agreement. 
G.  "Service Area" shall mean the geographic boundaries of the Grantor, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
"Standard Installation" shall mean any Cable Service installation that can be completed using a drop of one hundred twenty five (125) feet or less. 
I.  "State" shall mean the State of Colorado. 
J.  "Street" shall include each of the following located within the Service Area: public streets, roadways, highways, bridges, land paths, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, circles, drives, easements, rights of way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, including but not limited to public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the Grantor in the Service Area, which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the Cable System. 
K.  "Subscriber" shall mean any Person lawfully receiving Cable Service from the Grantee. 
SECTION 2 
Grant of Franchise 
2.1 Grant. The Grantor hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, now in existence and as may be created or established during the term of this Agreement, any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a Cable System. This Agreement shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the Cable Services required by, and to fulfill the obligations set forth in, the provisions of this Agreement. 
2.2 Term. The Agreement and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall be for an initial term of five (5) years, commencing on the Effective Date of this Agreement as set forth in Section 14.10. The term may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. 
2.3 Police Powers and Conflicts with Agreement. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, this Agreement, the Grantor and the Grantee are subject to and shall be governed by Applicable Law, including but not limited to the Cable Act. The Grantee shall at all times during the term of this Agreement be subject to all lawful exercise of the Grantor's police power, and the Grantor's right to adopt and enforce generally applicable ordinances and regulations necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public; provided, however, that such hereinafter enacted ordinances and regulations shall be reasonable and not materially modify the terms of this Agreement. In the event of a conflict between a provision of this Agreement and a provision of Grantor police power reflected in a generally applicable local ordinance, rule or regulation, local law shall be controlling, provided, however, such local law has not been preempted by any federal or state laws, rules, regulations or orders. 
2.4 Cable System Franchise Required. No Cable System shall be allowed to occupy or use the Streets or be allowed to operate in the Service Area without a Franchise. 
SECTION 3 
Franchise Renewal 
3.1 Procedures for Renewal. The Grantor and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Grantor that relate to the renewal of this Agreement shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546), or any such successor statute. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the parties agree that at any time during the term of the then current Agreement, while affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, the parties may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current Agreement and the Grantor may grant a renewal thereof. The parties consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546). 
SECTION 4 
Indemnification and Insurance 
4.1 Indemnification. The Grantee shall, by acceptance of the Agreement granted herein, defend the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees for all claims for injury to any Person or property to the extent caused by the negligence of the Grantee in the construction or operation of the Cable System or in any way connected with the Grantee's operations, including the actions of its subcontractors, employees and agents, and in the event of a determination of liability, the Grantee shall indemnify and hold Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees harmless from any and all liabilities, claims, demands, or judgments growing out of any injury to any Person or property as a result of the negligence of the Grantee arising out of the construction, repair, extension, maintenance, operation or removal of its wires, poles or other equipment of any kind or character used in connection with the operation of the Cable System (including the actions of its subcontractors, employees and agents), provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Grantor within ten (10) business days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. The indemnification obligations of the Grantee set forth in this Agreement are not limited in any way by the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for the Grantee under Workers' Compensation, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this Agreement or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance held by the Grantee, provided, however, that the Grantee's obligations to indemnify pursuant to this section shall be reduced by any amounts paid by any third parties directly or indirectly to the indemnified parties related to the same claims, including insurance proceeds. In the event any such claim arises, the Grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee and the Grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the Grantor shall cooperate fully herein. If the Grantor determined in good faith that its interests cannot be represented by the Grantee, the Grantee shall be excused from any obligation to represent the Grantor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify the Grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Grantor or for the Grantor's use of the Cable System. 
4.2 Insurance. 
A.  The Grantee agrees to maintain continuous uninterrupted insurance coverage, in at least the amounts set forth below, for the duration of this Agreement and, in the case of the Commercial General Liability, for at least one (1) year after expiration of this Agreement. 
Workers' Compensation Statutory Limits Commercial General Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence, Combined Single Liability (C.S.L.) $2,000,000 General Aggregate Auto Liability including coverage on all owned, non-owned hired autos $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L. Umbrella Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.  
B.  The Grantor shall be added as an additional insured to the above Commercial General Liability, Auto Liability and Umbrella Liability insurance coverages. 
C.  The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage upon request. 
4.3 Letter of Credit. Except as expressly provided herein or as required by a generally Applicable Law, the Grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain a bond, letter of credit or other surety as a condition of this Agreement. The Grantor acknowledges that the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the Grantee are sufficient as of the Effective Date to afford compliance with the terms of this Agreement and the enforcement thereof. The Grantee and the Grantor recognize that the costs associated with bonds, letters of credit and other surety may ultimately be borne by Subscribers in the form of increased rates for Cable Service. In order to minimize such costs, the Grantor agrees to only require a letter of credit if there is a change in the Grantee's legal, financial or technical qualifications that would materially impair or prohibit its ability to comply with the terms of this Agreement. The Grantor further agrees that in no event shall it require a letter of credit in an amount greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000). In the event that a letter of credit is required in the future, the Grantor agrees to give the Grantee at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. The letter of credit may only be drawn upon by the Grantee in the event, following any notice and opportunity to cure periods provided in this Agreement or under Applicable Law: 
A.  The Grantee fails to pay the Grantor any amounts due under the terms of this Agreement; 
B.  The Grantee fails to reimburse costs borne by the Grantor to correct violations of this Agreement not corrected by the Grantee; or 
C.  The Grantee fails to pay any monetary remedies or damages assessed by a court of law against the Grantee and awarded to Grantor for a violation of this Agreement. 
The Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of any withdrawal under this Section 4.3 at the time of such withdrawal. 
SECTION 5 
Service Obligations 
5.1 No Discrimination. The Grantee shall not deny Cable Service, access to Cable Service, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers, Channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The Grantee shall comply at all times with all Applicable Laws relating to nondiscrimination. Subject to Section 6 and the Grantee's rights under Section 625 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 545), all residential structures in the Service Area shall have the same availability of Cable Services from the Grantee's Cable System under non-discriminatory rates, terms and conditions. 
5.2 Privacy. The Grantee shall fully comply with the privacy rights of Subscribers as contained in Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551). 
SECTION 6 
Service Availability 
6.1 Service Area. The Grantee shall continue to provide Cable Service to all residences within the Service Area where the Grantee currently provides Cable Service. Upon receipt of a request for Cable Service from a potential residential Subscriber(s) in an unserved portion of the Service Area, and a written commitment from such Subscriber(s) (or payment in advance if required by the Grantee) to pay any applicable non-Standard Installation charges associated with providing Cable Service (if applicable), the Grantee shall extend the Cable System to the Street in front of such residential dwelling unit(s), provided that the average density is equal to or greater than thirty (30) residential dwelling units per linear mile measured from the nearest active trunk or feeder portion of the Cable System. 
6.2 Subscriber Charges for Extensions of the Cable System. No potential Subscriber shall be refused Cable Service arbitrarily. However, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 6.1 above, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the Cable System to the Street in that area if the potential Subscribers are willing to share the capital costs of extending the Cable System and pay any applicable non-Standard Installation charges associated with providing Cable Service. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential Subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any Standard or non-Standard Installation charges to extend the Cable System from the tap to the residence. Such cost estimates shall be submitted to and accepted by the potential Subscriber(s) in writing before any Cable System extension or installation is required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the Cable System into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present Service Area of the Grantee, if the Grantee does not, at the time of annexation, have the legal authority to locate its Cable System in the areas necessary to reach such annexed parts of the Service Area. At such time as the Grantee has the legal authority to access the newly annexed areas, Cable Service shall be made available in accordance with the density requirements of this Section 6.2. 
6.3 Limitations. Nothing herein shall require the Grantee to provide Cable Service to any Person who fails to abide by the Grantee's terms and conditions of Cable Service. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee's ability to offer or provide bulk rate discounts or promotions where applicable, to the extent permitted under Applicable Law. The Grantor acknowledges that the Grantee cannot control the dissemination of particular Cable Services beyond the point of demarcation at a multiple dwelling unit. Cable Service offered to Subscribers pursuant to this Agreement shall be conditioned upon the Grantee having legal access to any such Subscriber's dwelling unit or other units wherein such Cable Service is provided. 
6.4 New Development Underground. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the Grantor agrees to require as a condition of issuing a permit for open trenching to any developer or property owner that such developer or property owner give the Grantee at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such construction or development, and of the particular dates on which open trenching will be available for the Grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the Grantee's expense. The Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and dedication of Streets required to bring service to the development shall not be borne by the Grantee; provided, however that if the Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the written notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five (5) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the Grantee. 
6.5 Annexation. The Grantor shall promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its Affiliates. Such annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this Agreement upon sixty (60) days' written notice from the Grantor, subject to the conditions set forth below and Section 6.1 above. The Grantor shall also notify the Grantee in writing of all new street address assignments or changes within the Service Area. The Grantee shall within ninety (90) days after receipt of the annexation notice, pay to the Grantor the Franchise Fee on revenue received from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in any area annexed by the Grantor if the Grantor has provided a written annexation notice that includes the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area in an Excel format or in a format that will allow the Grantee to change its billing system; provided that if the Grantor is required to incur costs to provide the addresses in a specific format required by the Grantee, such costs shall be reimbursed by the Grantee within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice describing those costs. If the annexation notice does not include the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area, the Grantee shall pay the Franchise Fee within ninety (90) days after it receives the annexed addresses as set forth above. All notices due under this section shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the addresses set forth in Section 14.5 with a copy to the Director of Government Relations. The Franchise Fee shall be paid from the effective date of the annexation. In any audit of the Franchise Fee due under this Agreement, the Grantee shall not be liable for the Franchise Fee on annexed areas unless and until the Grantee has received notification and information that meets the standards set forth in this section. The Grantor shall additionally promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is not being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its Affiliates, and after such notice, the Grantee shall provide Cable Service to these areas if required by Section 6.1. 
SECTION 7 
Construction and Technical Standards 
7.1 Compliance with Codes. All construction practices and installation of equipment shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the National Electric Safety Code mid all other construction requirements of generally Applicable Law. 
7.2 Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the Grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head end and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices and performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel. 
7.3 Safety. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage. 
7.4 Cable System Design. As of the Effective Date, the Cable System in the Service Area has a minimum 750 MHz of bandwidth capacity, and utilizes a hybrid fiber-coaxial architecture. 
7.5 Technical Requirements. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable FCC rules and regulations applicable to the Cable System, including without limitation FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 76, Subpart K (Technical Standards), as may be amended from time to time. The Grantee shall take prompt corrective action if it finds that any facilities or equipment on the Cable System do not meet FCC technical standards. 
7.6 Performance Monitoring. 
A.  The Grantee shall, at the Grantee's sole expense, test the Cable System consistent with the FCC regulations and all other tests, as required by generally Applicable Law, reasonably necessary to determine compliance with technical standards adopted by the FCC at any time during the term of this Agreement. 
The Grantee shall maintain written records of all results of its Cable System tests, performed by or for the Grantee, for the period required by the FCC. Copies of such test results will be provided to the Grantor upon request. 
C.  As of the Effective Date, the FCC semi-annual testing is conducted in January/February and July/August of each year. If the Grantor contacts the Grantee at least sixty (60) days prior to the next FCC semi-annual test period (i.e., before November 1 and May 1 respectively of each year), the Grantee shall provide the Grantor with no less than thirty (30) days' prior written notice of the actual date(s) for FCC compliance testing, and representatives of the Grantor may witness such technical performance tests; provided, however, that such representatives shall not interfere with the testing. If the required FCC testing periods are changed during the term of this Agreement, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to amend the dates in this subsection to achieve the same result with respect to the parties' respective notice obligations. 
D.  The Grantee will comply with industry standards with respect to testing drops and related passive equipment during installations to assure that the drop and passive equipment can pass the full Cable System capacity. 
E.  The results of any tests required to be filed by the Grantee with the FCC shall upon request of the Grantor also be filed with the Grantor within ten (10) days of such request. 
7.7 Emergency Use. The Grantee shall comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") requirements of the FCC and State Applicable Law, including all testing requirements. If such requirements include the Grantor's activation of the EAS, then Grantor shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized Persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee's Cable System in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the Cable System. The Grantor's use of the EAS is subject to a heightened standard of care given the purpose of the EAS and as such, the Grantor shall exercise all necessary attention, caution and prudence to ensure that the EAS is only used properly, lawfully and as required to alert citizens of emergencies. 
SECTION 8 
Conditions on Street Occupancy 
8.1 General Conditions. Where the Grantee is able to obtain the right at commercially reasonable rates to utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities from the owners thereof, the Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property without obtaining all legally required permits of the Grantor. 
    8.2 Underground Construction. The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed underground in those portions of the Service Area where telephone and electric services are both already underground or being placed underground at the time of Cable System construction, and in accordance with Applicable Law. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of Cable System construction, the Grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are placed underground by the facilities owner, the Grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground. In the event that any telephone or electric utilities are reimbursed by the Grantor or any agency thereof for the placement of cable underground or the movement of cable, the Grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as any telephone, electric or other utilities; provided however that nothing herein shall require reimbursement to the Grantee or shall affect the Grantee's undergrounding obligation if the funds which are utilized for the reimbursement of other entities are restricted and preclude reimbursement to the Grantee. 
    8.3 Construction Codes and Permits. The Grantee shall obtain all permits required by Applicable Law before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the opening or disturbance of any Street within the Service Area. The Grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning codes of general applicability currently or hereafter governing construction, operation, maintenance, removal, abandonment, or relocation of the Cable System in the Service Area. 
    8.4 System Construction. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. Weather permitting, new underground cable drops shall be promptly buried in accordance with industry standards or as mutually agreed upon between the Grantee and the applicable Subscriber. The Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public, and in accordance with Applicable Law. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any Street by the Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such Street. The Grantee shall obtain authorization from the applicable private property owner prior to commencing work on private property that is not a Street, and all such work shall comply with Applicable Law. 
    8.5 Restoration of Streets. The Grantee shall, at its own expense, restore any damage or disturbance caused to the Streets as a result of its operation, construction, maintenance, removal, abandonment, or relocation of the Cable System to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Streets immediately prior to such damage or disturbance. 
    8.6 Removal in Emergency. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the Grantor to remove any of the Grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the Grantee against the Grantor for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the Grantor. 
    8.7 Tree Trimming. The Grantee or its designee shall have the authority, subject to Applicable Law, to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities. 
    8.8 Relocation for the Grantor. The Grantee shall, upon receipt of reasonable advance written notice, to be not less than ten (10) business days, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by the Grantor pursuant to its police powers. The Grantee shall be responsible for any costs associated with these obligations to the same extent all other users of the Streets are responsible for the costs related to the relocation of their facilities. 
    8.9 Relocation for a Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a lawful permit issued by the Grantor, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the Street as necessary any property of the Grantee, provided that the expense of such is paid by any such Person benefiting from the relocation and the Grantee is give reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. The Grantee may require such payment in advance. For purposes of this section, "reasonable advance written notice" shall be no less than ten (10) business days in the event of a temporary relocation and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation. 
    8.10 Locating Facilities. Prior to doing any work in the Streets, the Grantee shall give appropriate notices in compliance with C.R.S. Section 9-1.5-101, et seq., as such may be amended from time to time. 
    8.11 Grantor's Rights. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Grantor from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any Streets; constructing, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. 
    8.12 Discontinuing Use/Abandonment of Cable System Facilities. Whenever the Grantee intends to discontinue using any facility within the Streets, the Grantee shall submit for the Grantor's approval a complete description of the facility and the date on which the Grantee intends to discontinue using the facility. The Grantee may remove the facility or request that the Grantor permit it to remain in place. Notwithstanding the Grantee's request that any such facility remain in place, the Grantor may require the Grantee to remove the facility from the Streets or modify the facility to protect the public health, welfare, safety, and convenience, or otherwise serve the public interest. The Grantor may require the Grantee to perform a combination of modification and removal of the facility. The Grantee shall complete such removal or modification in accordance with a schedule set by the Grantor. Until such time as the Grantee removes or modifies the facility as directed by the Grantor, or until the rights to and responsibility for the facility are accepted by another Person having authority to construct and maintain such facility, the Grantee shall be responsible for all necessary repairs and relocations of the facility, as well as maintenance of the Street, in the same manner and degree as if the facility were in active use, and the Grantee shall retain all liability for such facility. If the Grantee abandons its facilities, the Grantor may choose to use such facilities for any purpose whatsoever. 
    8.13 Inspection of Construction and Facilities. The Grantor may inspect any of the Grantee's facilities, equipment or construction at any time upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice, or, in case of emergency as reasonably determined by the Grantor, upon demand without prior notice. In accordance with Applicable Law, if a dangerous condition is found to exist, the Grantor may take any legally permissible action. 
    8.14 Stop Work. On notice from the Grantor that any work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this Agreement, or in violation of the terms of any Applicable Law or permit granted pursuant to any Applicable Law, the work may immediately be stopped by the Grantor. The stop work order shall: 
A.  be in writing; 
B.  be given to the Person doing the work; 
C.  be sent to the Grantee by overnight delivery at the address given herein; 
D.  indicate the nature of the alleged violation or unsafe condition; and 
E.  establish conditions under which work may be resumed consistent with Applicable Law. 
8.15 Work of Contractors and Subcontractors. The Grantee's contractors and subcontractors shall be licensed and bonded in accordance with Applicable Law. Work undertaken by contractors and subcontractors is subject to the same restrictions, limitations and conditions as if the work were performed by the Grantee. The Grantee shall be responsible for all work performed by its contractors and subcontractors and others performing work on its behalf as if the work were performed by it, and shall ensure that all such work is performed in compliance with this Agreement and Applicable Law. It is the Grantee's responsibility to ensure that contractors, subcontractors or other Persons performing work on the Grantee's behalf are familiar with the requirements of this Agreement and the Applicable Laws governing the work performed by them. 
SECTION 9 
Customer Service and Rates 
9.1 Customer Service Standards and Consumer Protection. The Grantee shall comply with the Customer Service Standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, as may be amended from time to time. The Grantor reserves all rights under Applicable Law to adopt additional customer service standards that purport to apply to the Grantee, and the Grantee reserves all rights to challenge any such customer service standard that it believes is inconsistent with its contractual rights under this Agreement or Applicable Law, and all rights pursuant to Applicable Law to pass through the costs of complying with any such customer service standard to Subscribers. 
A.  Phone Service. The Grantee shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a phone service operated such that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
B.  Notification of Service Procedures. The Grantee shall furnish each Subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the Grantee's name, address and local telephone number. The Grantee shall give the Grantor thirty (30) days' prior notice of any rate increases, Channel lineup or other substantive service changes. 
C.  Continuity of Service. It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving Cable Service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored, and subject to the Grantee's rights under Section 14.1 of this Agreement. 
9.2 Rate Regulation. Grantor shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the Grantor. If and when exercising rate regulation, the Grantor shall abide by the terms and conditions set forth by the FCC or other Applicable Law. 
SECTION 10 
Franchise Fee 
10.1 Amount of Fee. The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor an annual Franchise Fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the annual Gross Revenue. The Grantee may, but is not required, to pass through to Subscribers the Franchise Fee as a line item on Subscriber bills or otherwise as the Grantee chooses, consistent with Applicable Law. The Grantee shall not deduct from the Franchise Fee any items listed under Section 622(g)(2) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 542(g)(2)). 
10.2 Payment of Franchise Fee. Payment of the Franchise Fee due the Grantor shall be made on a quarterly basis, within forty-five (45) days of the close of each quarter and transmitted by electronic funds transfer to a bank account designated by Grantor. The payment period and the collection of the Franchise Fee to be paid to the Grantor pursuant to the Agreement shall commence the Effective Date of the Agreement, or in the event that the Franchise Fee is different than the Franchise Fee imposed in the Grantee's prior Franchise agreement, within sixty (60) days after the Effective Date. In the event that a Franchise Fee payment or other sum due is not received by the Grantor on or before the date due, or is underpaid, the Grantee shall pay in addition to the payment, or sum due, interest from the due date at an annual rate equal to the lower of (A) the maximum rate permitted under State law, (B) eight percent (8%) and (C) that established by the State Bank Commissioner pursuant to C.R.S. 39-21-110.5 in effect as of the due date (which is the prime rate of interest as reported by the Wall Street Journal on July 1st of the previous calendar year, plus three percent (3%), rounded to the nearest full percent). All payments of the Franchise Fee shall be accompanied by a report showing the basis for the computation, certified as accurate by an authorized financial officer of the Grantee. 
10.3 Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have for additional sums payable as a Franchise Fee under this Agreement. 
10.4 Limitation on Recovery. The period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise Fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee was due. 
10.5 Review. All amounts paid by the Grantee to the Grantor under this Agreement shall be subject to review and recomputation by the Grantor. If such review indicates an underpayment of Franchise Fees of five percent (5%) or more, then the Grantee will reimburse the cost of such review up to a maximum of four thousand dollars ($4,000); provided, however, that such review will be conducted no more frequently than once every three (3) years. 
SECTION 11 
Transfer of Franchise Agreement 
11.1 Franchise Transfer or Change of Control. The Agreement granted hereunder shall not be assigned, sold, or transferred other than by operation of law or to an Affiliate of the Grantee, nor shall control of the Agreement or of the Grantee be assumed by another party who is not an Affiliate of the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Grantor, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to majority stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Agreement or Cable System to secure indebtedness. 
11.2 Notification and Application to Grantor. In accordance with federal law, the Grantee and the transferee shall make a written request of the Grantor for its consent to any actual or proposed (a) assignment, sale or transfer of this Agreement other than by operation of law or to an Affiliate of the Grantee, or (b) change of control of this Agreement or of the Grantee to another party who is not an Affiliate of the Grantee. Such request shall be accompanied by all information required by federal law. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a written request, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee, or any other information permitted by federal law. If the Grantor has not taken action on the Grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Grantor shall be deemed given, unless the Grantor and the Grantee have agreed to an extension of time. 
SECTION 12 
Records, Reports and Maps 
12.1 Reports Required. The Grantee's schedule of charges for regular Subscriber service, its policy regarding the processing of Subscriber complaints, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the Grantee's policy in connection with its Subscribers shall be filed with the Grantor upon request. 
12.2 Records Required. The Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
A.  A record of all written complaints received regarding interruptions or degradation of Cable Service, which record shall be maintained for one (1) year. 
B.  A full and complete set of plans, records and strand maps showing the location of the Cable System. 
C.  All financial and accounting records necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Agreement, including, without limitation, all records necessary to conduct the Franchise Fee review described in Section 10.5. 
12.3 Inspection of Records. The Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the Grantor, upon receipt of advance written notice, to examine during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis any and all of the Grantee's records maintained by the Grantee as is reasonably necessary to ensure the Grantee's compliance with the Agreement. Such notice shall specifically reference the subsection of the Agreement that is under review so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Grantor. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for Agreement compliance purposes longer than three (3) years, except for service complaints, which shall be kept for one (1) year as specified above. The Grantee shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551). The Grantor agrees to treat as confidential any books, records or maps that constitute proprietary or confidential information to the extent the Grantee makes the Grantor aware of such confidentiality. If the Grantor believes it must release any such confidential books or records in the course of enforcing this Agreement, or for any other reason, it shall advise the Grantee in advance so that the Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the Grantee requests that the Grantor continue to oppose such release, then until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Grantor agrees that, to the extent permitted by State and federal law, it shall deny access to any of the Grantee's books and records marked confidential, as set forth above, to any Person, and the Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all reasonable costs and attorneys' fees incurred in any legal proceedings related to same. If the Grantee does not request that the Grantor oppose such release, then the Grantor shall make an independent judgment with respect to such release, and the Grantee shall not be liable for any costs related to same. 
SECTION 13 
Enforcement or Revocation 
13.1 Notice of Violation. If the Grantor believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Agreement, the Grantor shall first informally discuss the matter with the Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance (the "Violation Notice"). 
13.2 The Grantee's Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the Violation Notice to (A) respond to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, (B) to cure such default, or (C) if, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Grantor of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. If (i) the Grantee fails to respond to the Violation Notice received from the Grantor, (ii) the Grantee responds to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of the noncompliance, but the Grantor disagrees with the Grantee's response, or (iii) if the default is not remedied within the thirty (30) day cure period set forth above, the Grantor may pursue any remedies available to it under this Agreement or under Applicable Law. The Grantee reserves all legal and equitable rights under Applicable Law to challenge or appeal any action or decision by the Grantor with respect to an alleged violation of this Agreement, and if the standard of review is not otherwise established by Applicable Law, the standard of review of the Grantor's action or decision shall be de novo. 
13.3 Revocation. 
A.  Prior to revocation or termination of the Agreement, the Grantor shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Agreement on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, upon one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Agreement, or if the Grantee has committed fraud upon the Grantor. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from such notice to either object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the alleged noncompliance. If the Grantor has not received a satisfactory response from the Grantee, it may then seek to revoke the Agreement at a public hearing. The Grantee shall be given at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Agreement. 
B.  The hearing shall be conducted as a quasi-judicial proceeding, similar to other quasi-judicial proceedings regularly undertaken by Colorado municipalities. At the hearing, the City Council shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses. The City staff may present its position and shall also be permitted to present evidence and question witnesses, after which the City Council shall determine whether or not the Agreement shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made available to the Grantee within ten (10) business days. The decision of the City Council shall be made in writing and shall be delivered to the Grantee. The Grantee reserves all legal and equitable rights under Applicable Law to challenge or appeal the Grantor's decision, and if the standard of review is not otherwise established by Applicable Law, the standard of review of the Grantor's decision shall be de novo. The Grantee may continue to operate the Cable System until all legal appeals have been exhausted. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Grantee does not waive any of its rights under federal law or regulation. 
D.  Upon revocation of the Agreement, notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this Agreement, the Grantee may remove the Cable System from the Streets of the Grantor, or abandon the Cable System in place with no cost to the Grantee. 
13.4 Alternative Remedies. No provision of this Agreement shall be deemed to bar the right of the Grantor to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the Agreement or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Agreement nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the Grantor to recover monetary damages for such violations by the Grantee, or to seek and obtain judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other remedy at law or in equity. 
SECTION 14 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
14.1 Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with the provisions of the Agreement, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their utility poles to which the Grantee's Cable System is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
14.2 Minor Violations. Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the Grantor's intention to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Agreement for violations of the Agreement where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the Service Area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweighs the benefit to be derived by the Grantor and/or Subscribers. 
14.3 Action of Parties. In any action by the Grantor or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
14.4 Equal Protection. The Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the Grantor reserves the right to grant one (1) or more additional Franchises or other similar lawful authorization to provide Cable Services within the Service Area. If the Grantor grants such an additional Franchise or other similar lawful authorization containing material terms and conditions that differ from the Grantee's material obligations under this Agreement, then the Grantor agrees that the obligations in this Agreement will, pursuant to the process set forth in this section, be amended to include any material terms or conditions that it imposes upon the new entrant, or provide relief from existing material terms or conditions, so as to insure that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are materially equivalent. "Material terms and conditions" include, but are not limited to: the Franchise Fee; Gross Revenue definition; insurance; Cable System build-out requirements; security instruments; customer service standards; required reports and related record keeping; level playing field (or its equivalent); audits; dispute resolution; remedies; and notice and opportunity to cure breaches. The parties agree that this provision shall not require word for word identical Franchise provisions so long as the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are materially equivalent. 
A.  The modification process of this Agreement as provided for in this section shall only be initiated by written notice by the Grantee to the Grantor regarding specified obligations. The Grantee's notice shall address the following: (1) identifying the specific terms or conditions in the competitive Franchise which are materially different from the Grantee's obligations under this Agreement; (2) identifying the Agreement terms and conditions for which the Grantee is seeking amendments; (3) providing text for any proposed Agreement amendments to the Grantor, with a written explanation of why the proposed amendments are necessary and consistent. 
B.  Upon receipt of the Grantee's written notice as provided in subsection 14.4A , the Grantor and the Grantee agree that they will use best efforts in good faith to negotiate the Grantee's proposed Agreement modifications, and that such negotiation will proceed and conclude within a ninety (90) day time period, unless that time period is reduced or extended by mutual agreement of the parties. If the Grantor and the Grantee reach agreement on the Agreement modifications pursuant to such negotiations, then the Grantor shall amend this Agreement to include the modifications. 
C.  If the parties fail to reach agreement in the negotiations as provided for in subsection 14.4B , the Grantee may, at its option, elect to replace this Agreement by opting into the Franchise or other similar lawful authorization that the Grantor grants to another provider of Cable Services, so as to insure that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are equivalent. If the Grantee so elects, the Grantor shall immediately commence proceedings to replace this Agreement with the Franchise issued to the other Cable Services provider. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed a waiver of any remedies available to the Grantee under Applicable Law, including but not limited to Section 625 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 545). 
E.  Should the Grantee seek an amendment to this Agreement or a replacement Franchise pursuant to this section, while the parties shall pursue the adoption of such amendments or replacement Franchise pursuant to subsections 14.4A through D , any such amendments or replacement Franchise shall not become effective unless and until the new entrant makes Cable Services available for purchase by Subscribers or customers under its agreement with the Grantor. 
14.5 Notices. Unless otherwise provided by federal, State or local law, all notices, reports or demands pursuant to this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be sufficiently given upon delivery to the Person at the respective addresses set forth below by hand delivery, by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, or by nationally or internationally recognized courier service such as Federal Express. The Grantee shall provide thirty (30) days' written notice of any changes in rates, programming services or Channel positions using any reasonable written means. 
If to Grantor: City of Sterling 
c/o City Manager 
421 N. 4th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751-0400 With a copy to: City of Sterling 
c/o City Attorney 
421 N. 4th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751-0400 If to Grantee: Bresnan Communications, LLC 
d/b/a Charter Communications 
VP/GM, KMA 
1860 Monad Road 
Billings, MT 59102 With a copy to: Charter Communications 
Attn: Vice President of Government Affairs 
12405 Powerscourt Drive 
St. Louis, MO 63131  
14.6 Public Notice. Minimum public notice of (A) any public hearings relating to this Agreement or (B) any grant of a Franchise by the Grantor to any other Person(s) to provide Cable Services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the Streets, shall be as provided by Applicable Law unless a longer period is otherwise specifically set forth in this Agreement. Grantor shall provide written notice to the Grantee within thirty (30) days of Grantor's receipt from any other Person(s) of an application or request for a Franchise(s) to provide Cable Services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the Streets. 
14.7 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Agreement is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Agreement. 
14.8 Entire Agreement. This Agreement and any Exhibits hereto constitute the entire agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee and supersede all prior or contemporaneous agreements, representations or understandings (whether written or oral) of the parties regarding the subject matter hereof. 
14.9 Administration of Agreement. This Agreement is a contract and neither party may take any unilateral action that materially changes the explicit mutual promises and covenants contained herein. Any changes, modifications or amendments to this Agreement must be made in writing, signed by the Grantor and the Grantee. 
14.10 Effective Date. The Agreement granted herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by the Grantee recorded on the signature page of this Agreement (the "Effective Date"). 
14.11 Publication Costs. This Agreement shall be published in accordance with Applicable Law. The Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all costs incurred in publishing this Agreement and any notices or ordinances in connection with its adoption if such publication is required by Applicable Law. 
14.12 Venue and Jurisdiction. The parties agree that any action arising out of this Agreement will be brought in the district court of Logan County or federal courts located in the State of Colorado, irrevocably submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of any such court and waive any objection that such party may now or hereafter have to the venue of any such action or proceeding in any such court or that such action or proceeding was brought in an inconvenient court and agree not to plead or claim the same. 
ORDINANCE NO. 14 Series of 2015 
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING A FRANCHISE AGREEMENT WITH KENTEC COMMUNICATIONS, INC. TO CONSTRUCT AND OPERATE A CABLE SYSTEM AND OFFER CABLE SERVICE AND OTHER SERVICES IN, ALONG, AMONG, UPON, ACROSS, ABOVE, OVER, UNDER, OR IN ANY MANNER CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC WAYS WITHIN THE CITY. 
    Introduced by Councilmember Flores 
    WHEREAS, the cable franchise previously granted to Kentec Communications, Inc. has expired; and 
    WHEREAS, Section 14-2 of the Charter of the City of Sterling provides that no franchise shall be granted except by ordinance; and 
    WHEREAS, the City has determined that Kentec Communications, Inc. has the financial, legal, and technical ability which is reasonably sufficient to provide services, facilities, and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STERLING, COLORADO: That the Franchise Agreement with Kentec Communications, Inc. in the form attached is hereby approved and the Mayor is authorized to execute it on behalf of the City of Sterling. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance adopted hereby is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance; the City Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days after its passage. 
    INTRODUCED, READ AND ORDERED PUBLISHED THIS 24Th DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2016. 
    PUBLISHED ON DECEMBER 1, 2, 3, 4, AND 5, 2015. 
    PUBLIC HEARING AND SECOND READING SCHEDULED FOR THE 12TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2016, AT 7:00 P.M. IN CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS, 421 NORTH FOURTH STREET, STERLING, COLORADO. 
/s/   
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk   REVIEWED BY CITY MANAGER: 
City Manager   ____________ 
APPROVED AS TO FORM & LEGALITY: 
/s/   
      City Attorney       ADOPTED AND APPROVED THIS 12Th DAY OF JANUARY 2016. 
/s/   
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 
    This Franchise Agreement (this "Agreement") is between the City of Sterling, Colorado hereinafter referred to as the "Grantor" and Kentec Communications, Inc., a Colorado corporation, hereinafter referred to as the "Grantee." 
    WHEREAS, the Grantor finds that the Grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the current Franchise under Applicable Law, and that the financial, legal and technical ability of the Grantee is sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community; and 
    WHEREAS, having afforded the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, Grantor desires to enter into this Agreement with the Grantee for the construction and operation of a Cable System on the terms set forth herein; and 
    WHEREAS, the Grantor and the Grantee have complied with all federal and State-mandated procedural and substantive requirements pertinent to the renewal of this Agreement. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the City of Sterling and the Grantee agree as follows: 
SECTION 1 
Definition of Terms 
1.1 Terms. For the purpose of this Agreement, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings when used herein with initial capital letters. Other defined terms are set forth throughout this Agreement, and shall have the meanings ascribed herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  The following terms shall be defined as set forth in the Section 602 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 522) - "Affiliate," "Cable Operator," "Cable Service," "Cable System," "Channel," "Franchise" and "Person" - and "Franchise Fee" shall be as defined in Section 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542). 
B.  "Applicable Law" shall mean any statute, ordinance, judicial decision, executive order or regulation having the force and effect of law, that determines the legal standing of a case or issue, provided, however that any statute, ordinance, order or regulation that has been preempted by a higher governmental or legal authority, which prior to preemption had the force and effect of law, shall no longer be considered Applicable Law. This definition shall not be considered a waiver of the right of any party to assert the position that a statute, ordinance, order or regulation has not been preempted. 
C.  "City Council" shall mean the governing body of the Grantor. 
D.  "Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended (47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et seq.). 
E.  "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any successor governmental entity thereto. 
F.  "Gross Revenue" means any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, received by the Grantee (or any Affiliate of the Grantee who is a Cable Operator providing Cable Services over the Cable System in the Service Area) from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in the Service Area, including but not limited to (1) late fees, (2) installation and reconnection fees, (3) upgrade and downgrade fees, (4) converter and remote control rental fees, (5) parental control device rental fees, (6) advertising revenue (less commissions paid to advertisers, but not internal commissions earned by employees of the Grantee or its Affiliates), (7) home shopping commissions, and (6) interactive guides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, "Gross Revenue" shall not include (A) any taxes, fees or assessments collected by the Grantee from Subscribers for pass-through to a government agency, including, without limitation, the FCC user fee, Franchise Fee, or any sales or utility taxes, (B) unrecovered bad debt, (C) credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers and (D) any exclusions available under Applicable Law. 
The parties acknowledge that the Grantee may need to allocate Gross Revenue between Cable Services (which are subject to the Franchise Fee) and non-Cable Services (which are not subject to the Franchise Fee but may be subject to other fees and/or taxes), when these two types of services are bundled together in a discounted package offered to Subscribers. The Grantee shall make such allocation in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, but in no event shall the Grantee allocate Gross Revenue between Cable Services and non-Cable Services where such services are bundled together in a discounted package offered to Subscribers for the purpose of evading its Franchise Fee obligations under this Agreement. 
G.  "Service Area" shall mean the geographic boundaries of the Grantor, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
H.  "Standard Installation" shall mean any Cable Service installation that can be completed using a drop of one hundred twenty five (125) feet or less. 
I.  "State" shall mean the State of Colorado. 
J.  "Street" shall include each of the following located within the Service Area: public streets, roadways, highways, bridges, land paths, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, circles, drives, easements, rights of way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, including but not limited to public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the Grantor in the Service Area, which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the Cable System. 
K.  "Subscriber" shall mean any Person lawfully receiving Cable Service from the Grantee. 
SECTION 2 
Grant of Franchise 
2.1 Grant. The Grantor hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, now in existence and as may be created or established during the term of this Agreement, any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a Cable System. This Agreement shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the Cable Services required by, and to fulfill the obligations set forth in, the provisions of this Agreement. 
2.2 Term. The Agreement and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall be for an initial term of five (5) years, commencing on the Effective Date of this Agreement as set forth in Section 14.10. The term may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. 
2.3 Police Powers and Conflicts with Agreement. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, this Agreement, the Grantor and the Grantee are subject to and shall be governed by Applicable Law, including but not limited to the Cable Act. The Grantee shall at all times during the term of this Agreement be subject to all lawful exercise of the Grantor's police power, and the Grantor's right to adopt and enforce generally applicable ordinances and regulations necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public; provided, however, that such hereinafter enacted ordinances and regulations shall be reasonable and not materially modify the terms of this Agreement. In the event of a conflict between a provision of this Agreement and a provision of Grantor police power reflected in a generally applicable local ordinance, rule or regulation, local law shall be controlling, provided, however, such local law has not been preempted by any federal or state laws, rules, regulations or orders. 
2.4 Cable System Franchise Required. No Cable System shall be allowed to occupy or use the Streets or be allowed to operate in the Service Area without a Franchise. 
SECTION 3 
Franchise Renewal 
3.1 Procedures for Renewal. The Grantor and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Grantor that relate to the renewal of this Agreement shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546), or any such successor statute. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the parties agree that at any time during the term of the then current Agreement, while affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, the parties may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current Agreement and the Grantor may grant a renewal thereof. The parties consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546). 
SECTION 4 
Indemnification and Insurance 
4.1 Indemnification. The Grantee shall, by acceptance of the Agreement granted herein, defend the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees for all claims for injury to any Person or property to the extent caused by the negligence of the Grantee in the construction or operation of the Cable System or in any way connected with the Grantee's operations, including the actions of its subcontractors, employees and agents, and in the event of a determination of liability, the Grantee shall indemnify and hold Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees harmless from any and all liabilities, claims, demands, or judgments growing out of any injury to any Person or property as a result of the negligence of the Grantee arising out of the construction, repair, extension, maintenance, operation or removal of its wires, poles or other equipment of any kind or character used in connection with the operation of the Cable System (including the actions of its subcontractors, employees and agents), provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Grantor within ten (10) business days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. The indemnification obligations of the Grantee set forth in this Agreement are not limited in any way by the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for the Grantee under Workers' Compensation, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this Agreement or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance held by the Grantee, provided, however, that the Grantee's obligations to indemnify pursuant to this section shall be reduced by any amounts paid by any third parties directly or indirectly to the indemnified parties related to the same claims, including insurance proceeds. In the event any such claim arises, the Grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee and the Grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the Grantor shall cooperate fully herein. If the Grantor determined in good faith that its interests cannot be represented by the Grantee, the Grantee shall be excused from any obligation to represent the Grantor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify the Grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Grantor or for the Grantor's use of the Cable System. 
4.2 Insurance. 
A.  The Grantee agrees to maintain continuous uninterrupted insurance coverage, in at least the amounts set forth below, for the duration of this Agreement and, in the ease of the Commercial General Liability, for at least one (1) year after expiration of this Agreement. 
Workers' Compensation Statutory Limits Commercial General Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence, Combined Single Liability (C.S.L.) $2,000,000 General Aggregate Auto Liability including coverage on all owned, non-owned hired autos $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L. Umbrella Liability $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.  
B.  The Grantor shall be added as an additional insured to the above Commercial General Liability, Auto Liability and Umbrella Liability insurance coverages. 
C.  The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with current certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage upon request. 
4.3 Letter of Credit. Except as expressly provided herein or as required by a generally Applicable Law, the Grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain a bond, letter of credit or other surety as a condition of this Agreement. The Grantor acknowledges that the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the Grantee are sufficient as of the Effective Date to afford compliance with the terms of this Agreement and the enforcement thereof. The Grantee and the Grantor recognize that the costs associated with bonds, letters of credit and other surety may ultimately be borne by Subscribers in the form of increased rates for Cable Service. In order to minimize such costs, the Grantor agrees to only require a letter of credit if there is a change in the Grantee's legal, financial or technical qualifications that would materially impair or prohibit its ability to comply with the terms of this Agreement. The Grantor further agrees that in no event shall it require a letter of credit in an amount greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000). In the event that a letter of credit is required in the future, the Grantor agrees to give the Grantee at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. The letter of credit may only be drawn upon by the Grantee in the event, following any notice and opportunity to cure periods provided in this Agreement or under Applicable Law: 
A.  The Grantee fails to pay the Grantor any amounts due under the terms of this Agreement; 
B.  The Grantee fails to reimburse costs borne by the Grantor to correct violations of this Agreement not corrected by the Grantee; or 
C.  The Grantee fails to pay any monetary remedies or damages assessed by a court of law against the Grantee and awarded to Grantor for a violation of this Agreement. 
The Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of any withdrawal under this Section 4.3 at the time of such withdrawal. 
SECTION 5 
Service Obligations 
5.1 No Discrimination. The Grantee shall not deny Cable Service, access to Cable Service, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers, Channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The Grantee shall comply at all times with all Applicable Laws relating to nondiscrimination. Subject to Section 6 and the Grantee's rights under Section 625 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 545), all residential structures in the Service Area shall have the same availability of Cable Services from the Grantee's Cable System under non-discriminatory rates, terms and conditions. 
5.2 Privacy. The Grantee shall fully comply with the privacy rights of Subscribers as contained in Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551). 
SECTION 6 
Service Availability 
6.1 Service Area. The Grantee shall continue to provide Cable Service to all residences within the Service Area where the Grantee currently provides Cable Service. Upon receipt of a request for Cable Service from a potential residential Subscriber(s) in an unserved portion of the Service Area, and a written commitment from such Subscriber(s) (or payment in advance if required by the Grantee) to pay any applicable non-Standard Installation charges associated with providing Cable Service (if applicable), the Grantee shall extend the Cable System to the Street in front of such residential dwelling unit(s), provided that the average density is equal to or greater than thirty (30) residential dwelling units per linear mile measured from the nearest active trunk or feeder portion of the Cable System. 
6.2 Subscriber Charges for Extensions of the Cable System. No potential Subscriber shall be refused Cable Service arbitrarily. However, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 6.1 above, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the Cable System to the Street in that area if the potential Subscribers are willing to share the capital costs of extending the Cable System and pay any applicable non-Standard Installation charges associated with providing Cable Service. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential Subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any Standard or non-Standard Installation charges to extend the Cable System from the tap to the residence. Such cost estimates shall be submitted to and accepted by the potential Subscriber(s) in writing before any Cable System extension or installation is required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the Cable System into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present Service Area of the Grantee, if the Grantee does not, at the time of annexation, have the legal authority to locate its Cable System in the areas necessary to reach such annexed parts of the Service Area. At such time as the Grantee has the legal authority to access the newly annexed areas, Cable Service shall be made available in accordance with the density requirements of this Section 6.2. 
6.3 Limitations. Nothing herein shall require the Grantee to provide Cable Service to any Person who fails to abide by the Grantee's terms and conditions of Cable Service. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee's ability to offer or provide bulk rate discounts or promotions where applicable, to the extent permitted under Applicable Law. The Grantor acknowledges that the Grantee cannot control the dissemination of particular Cable Services beyond the point of demarcation at a multiple dwelling unit. Cable Service offered to Subscribers pursuant to this Agreement shall be conditioned upon the Grantee having legal access to any such Subscriber's dwelling unit or other units wherein such Cable Service is provided. 
6.4 New Development Underground. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the Grantor agrees to require as a condition of issuing a permit for open trenching to any developer or property owner that such developer or property owner give the Grantee at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such construction or development, and of the particular dates on which open trenching will be available for the Grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the Grantee's expense. The Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching Costs of trenching and dedication of Streets required to bring service to the development shall not be borne by the Grantee; provided, however that if the Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the written notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five (5) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the Grantee. 
6.5 Annexation. The Grantor shall promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its Affiliates. Such annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this Agreement upon sixty (60) days' written notice from the Grantor, subject to the conditions set forth below and Section 6.1 above. The Grantor shall also notify the Grantee in writing of all new street address assignments or changes within the Service Area, The Grantee shall within ninety (90) days after receipt of the annexation notice, pay to the Grantor the Franchise Fee on revenue received from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in any area annexed by the Grantor if the Grantor has provided a written annexation notice that includes the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area in an Excel format or in a format that will allow the Grantee to change its billing system; provided that if the Grantor is required to incur costs to provide the addresses in a specific format required by the Grantee, such costs shall be reimbursed by the Grantee within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice describing those costs. If the annexation notice does not include the addresses that will be moved into the Service Area, the Grantee shall pay the Franchise Fee within ninety (90) days after it receives the annexed addresses as set forth above. All notices due under this section shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the addresses set forth in Section 14.5 with a copy to the Director of Government Relations. The Franchise Fee shall be paid from the effective date of the annexation. In any audit of the Franchise Fee due under this Agreement, the Grantee shall not be liable for the Franchise Fee on annexed areas unless and until the Grantee has received notification and information that meets the standards set forth in this section. The Grantor shall additionally promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is not being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its Affiliates, and after such notice, the Grantee shall provide Cable Service to these areas if required by Section 6.1. 
SECTION 7 
Construction and Technical Standards 
7.1 Compliance with Codes. All construction practices and installation of equipment shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the National Electric Safety Code and all other construction requirements of generally Applicable Law. 
7.2 Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the Grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head end and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices and performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel. 
7.3 Safety. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage. 
7.4 Cable System Design. As of the Effective Date, the Cable System in the Service Area has a minimum 750 MHz of bandwidth capacity, and utilizes a hybrid fiber-coaxial architecture. 
7.5 Technical Requirements. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable FCC rules and regulations applicable to the Cable System, including without limitation FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 76, Subpart K (Technical Standards), as may be amended from time to time. The Grantee shall take prompt corrective action if it finds that any facilities or equipment on the Cable System do not meet FCC technical standards. 
7.6 Performance Monitoring. 
A.  The Grantee shall, at the Grantee's sole expense, test the Cable System consistent with the FCC regulations and all other tests, as required by generally Applicable Law, reasonably necessary to determine compliance with technical standards adopted by the FCC at any time during the term of this Agreement. 
The Grantee shall maintain written records of all results of its Cable System tests, performed by or for the Grantee, for the period required by the FCC. Copies of such test results will be provided to the Grantor upon request. 
C.  As of the Effective Date, the FCC semi-annual testing is conducted in January/February and July/August of each year. If the Grantor contacts the Grantee at least sixty (60) days prior to the next FCC semi-annual test period (i.e., before November 1 and May 1 respectively of each year), the Grantee shall provide the Grantor with no less than thirty (30) days' prior written notice of the actual date(s) for FCC compliance testing, and representatives of the Grantor may witness such technical performance tests; provided, however, that such representatives shall not interfere with the testing. If the required FCC testing periods are changed during the term of this Agreement, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to amend the dates in this subsection to achieve the same result with respect to the parties' respective notice obligations. 
D.  The Grantee will comply with industry standards with respect to testing drops and related passive equipment during installations to assure that the drop and passive equipment can pass the full Cable System capacity. 
E.  The results of any tests required to be filed by the Grantee with the FCC shall upon request of the Grantor also be filed with the Grantor within ten (10) days of such request. 
7.7 Emergency Use. The Grantee shall comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") requirements of the FCC and State Applicable Law, including all testing requirements. If such requirements include the Grantor's activation of the EAS, then Grantor shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized Persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee's Cable System in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the Cable System. The Grantor's use of the EAS is subject to a heightened standard of care given the purpose of the EAS and as such, the Grantor shall exercise all necessary attention, caution and prudence to ensure that the EAS is only used properly, lawfully and as required to alert citizens of emergencies. 
SECTION 8 
Conditions on Street Occupancy 
8.1 General Conditions. Grantee shall be permitted to construct and/or install underground conduits or other facilities on public property after obtaining all legally required permits of the Grantor. Grantee shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles on public property if Grantee is able to obtain the right at commercially reasonable rates to utilize existing poles and other facilities from the owners thereof. 
8.2 Underground Construction. The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed underground in those portions of the Service Area where telephone and electric services are both already underground or being placed underground at the time of Cable System construction, and in accordance with Applicable Law. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of Cable System construction, the Grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are placed underground by the facilities owner, the Grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground. In the event that any telephone or electric utilities are reimbursed by the Grantor or any agency thereof for the placement of cable underground or the movement of cable, the Grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as any telephone, electric or other utilities; provided however that nothing herein shall require reimbursement to the Grantee or shall affect the Grantee's undergrounding obligation if the funds which are utilized for the reimbursement of other entities are restricted and preclude reimbursement to the Grantee. 
8.3 Construction Codes and Permits. The Grantee shall obtain all permits required by Applicable Law before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the opening or disturbance of any Street within the Service Area. The Grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning codes of general applicability currently or hereafter governing construction, operation, maintenance, removal, abandonment, or relocation of the Cable System in the Service Area. 
8.4 System Construction. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. Weather permitting, new underground cable drops shall be promptly buried in accordance with industry standards or as mutually agreed upon between the Grantee and the applicable Subscriber. The Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public, and in accordance with Applicable Law. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any Street by the Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such Street. The Grantee shall obtain authorization from the applicable private property owner prior to commencing work on private property that is not a Street, and all such work shall comply with Applicable Law. 
8.5 Restoration of Streets. The Grantee shall, at its own expense, restore any damage or disturbance caused to the Streets as a result of its operation, construction, maintenance, removal, abandonment, or relocation of the Cable System to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Streets immediately prior to such damage or disturbance. 
8.6 Removal in Emergency. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the Grantor to remove any of the Grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the Grantee against the Grantor for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the Grantor. 
8.7 Tree Trimming. The Grantee or its designee shall have the authority, subject to Applicable Law, to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities. 
8.8 Relocation for the Grantor. The Grantee shall, upon receipt of reasonable advance written notice, to be not less than ten (10) business days, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by the Grantor pursuant to its police powers. The Grantee shall be responsible for any costs associated with these obligations to the same extent all other users of the Streets are responsible for the costs related to the relocation of their facilities. 
8.9 Relocation for a Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a lawful permit issued by the Grantor, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the Street as necessary any property of the Grantee, provided that the expense of such is paid by any such Person benefiting from the relocation and the Grantee is give reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. The Grantee may require such payment in advance. For purposes of this section, "reasonable advance written notice" shall be no less than ten (10) business days in the event of a temporary relocation and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation. 
8.10 Locating Facilities. Prior to doing any work in the Streets, the Grantee shall give appropriate notices in compliance with C.R.S. Section 9-1.5-101, et seq., as such may be amended from time to time. 
8.11 Grantor's Rights. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Grantor from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any Streets; constructing, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. 
8.12 Discontinuing Use/Abandonment of Cable System Facilities. Whenever the Grantee intends to discontinue using any facility within the Streets, the Grantee shall submit for the Grantor's approval a complete description of the facility and the date on which the Grantee intends to discontinue using the facility. The Grantee may remove the facility or request that the Grantor permit it to remain in place. Notwithstanding the Grantee's request that any such facility remain in place, the Grantor may require the Grantee to remove the facility from the Streets or modify the facility to protect the public health, welfare, safety, and convenience, or otherwise serve the public interest. The Grantor may require the Grantee to perform a combination of modification and removal of the facility. The Grantee shall complete such removal or modification in accordance with a schedule set by the Grantor. Until such time as the Grantee removes or modifies the facility as directed by the Grantor, or until the rights to and responsibility for the facility are accepted by another Person having authority to construct and maintain such facility, the Grantee shall be responsible for all necessary repairs and relocations of the facility, as well as maintenance of the Street, in the same manner and degree as if the facility were in active use, and the Grantee shall retain all liability for such facility. If the Grantee abandons its facilities, the Grantor may choose to use such facilities for any purpose whatsoever. 
8.13 Inspection of Construction and Facilities. The Grantor may inspect any of the Grantee's facilities, equipment or construction at any time upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice, or, in case of emergency as reasonably determined by the Grantor, upon demand without prior notice. In accordance with Applicable Law, if a dangerous condition is found to exist, the Grantor may take any legally permissible action. 
8.14 Stop Work. On notice from the Grantor that any work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this Agreement, or in violation of the terms of any Applicable Law or permit granted pursuant to any Applicable Law, the work may immediately be stopped by the Grantor. The stop work order shall: 
A.  be in writing; 
B.  be given to the Person doing the work; 
C.  be sent to the Grantee by overnight delivery at the address given herein; 
D.  indicate the nature of the alleged violation or unsafe condition; and 
E.  establish conditions under which work may be resumed consistent with Applicable Law. 
8.15 Work of Contractors and Subcontractors. The Grantee's contractors and subcontractors shall be licensed and bonded in accordance with Applicable Law. Work undertaken by contractors and subcontractors is subject to the same restrictions, limitations and conditions as if the work were performed by the Grantee. The Grantee shall be responsible for all work performed by its contractors and subcontractors and others performing work on its behalf as if the work were performed by it, and shall ensure that all such work is performed in compliance with this Agreement and Applicable Law. It is the Grantee's responsibility to ensure that contractors, subcontractors or other Persons performing work on the Grantee's behalf are familiar with the requirements of this Agreement and the Applicable Laws governing the work performed by them. 
SECTION 9 
Customer Service and Rates 
9.1 Customer Service Standards and Consumer Protection. The Grantee shall comply with the Customer Service Standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, as may be amended from time to time. The Grantor reserves all rights under Applicable Law to adopt additional customer service standards that purport to apply to the Grantee, and the Grantee reserves all rights to challenge any such customer service standard that it believes is inconsistent with its contractual rights under this Agreement or Applicable Law, and all rights pursuant to Applicable Law to pass through the costs of complying with any such customer service standard to Subscribers. 
A.  Phone Service. The Grantee shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a phone service operated such that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
B.  Notification of Service Procedures. The Grantee shall furnish each Subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the Grantee's name, address and local telephone number. The Grantee shall give the Grantor thirty (30) days' prior notice of any rate increases, Channel lineup or other substantive service changes. 
C.  Continuity of Service. It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving Cable Service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored, and subject to the Grantee's rights under Section 14.1 of this Agreement. 
9.2 Rate Regulation. Grantor shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the Grantor. If and when exercising rate regulation, the Grantor shall abide by the terms and conditions set forth by the FCC or other Applicable Law. 
SECTION 10 
Franchise Fee 
10.1 Amount of Fee. The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor an annual Franchise Fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the annual Gross Revenue. The Grantee may, but is not required, to pass through to Subscribers the Franchise Fee as a line item on Subscriber bills or otherwise as the Grantee chooses, consistent with Applicable Law. The Grantee shall not deduct from the Franchise Fee any items listed under Section 622(g)(2) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 542(g)(2)). 
10.2 Payment of Franchise Fee. Payment of the Franchise Fee due the Grantor shall be made on a quarterly basis, within forty-five (45) days of the close of each quarter and transmitted by electronic funds transfer to a bank account designated by Grantor. The payment period and the collection of the Franchise Fee to be paid to the Grantor pursuant to the Agreement shall commence the Effective Date of the Agreement, or in the event that the Franchise Fee is different than the Franchise Fee imposed in the Grantee's prior Franchise agreement, within sixty (60) days after the Effective Date. In the event that a Franchise Fee payment or other sum due is not received by the Grantor on or before the date due, or is underpaid, the Grantee shall pay in addition to the payment, or sum due, interest from the due date at an annual rate equal to the lower of (A) the maximum rate permitted under State law, (B) eight percent (8%) and (C) that established by the State Bank Commissioner pursuant to C.R.S. 39-21-110.5 in effect as of the due date (which is the prime rate of interest as reported by the Wall Street Journal on July 1st of the previous calendar year, plus three percent (3%), rounded to the nearest full percent). All payments of the Franchise Fee shall be accompanied by a report showing the basis for the computation, certified as accurate by an authorized financial officer of the Grantee. 
10.3 Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have for additional sums payable as a Franchise Fee under this Agreement. 
10.4 Limitation on Recovery. The period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise Fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee was due. 
10.5 Review. All amounts paid by the Grantee to the Grantor under this Agreement shall be subject to review and recomputation by the Grantor. If such review indicates an underpayment of Franchise Fees of five percent (5%) or more, then the Grantee will reimburse the cost of such review up to a maximum of four thousand dollars ($4,000); provided, however, that such review will be conducted no more frequently than once every three (3) years. 
SECTION 11 
Transfer of Franchise Agreement 
11.1 Franchise Transfer or Change of Control. The Agreement granted hereunder shall not be assigned, sold, or transferred other than by operation of law or to an Affiliate of the Grantee, nor shall control of the Agreement or of the Grantee be assumed by another party who is not an Affiliate of the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Grantor, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to majority stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Agreement or Cable System to secure indebtedness. 
11.2 Notification and Application to Grantor. In accordance with federal law, the Grantee and the transferee shall make a written request of the Grantor for its consent to any actual or proposed (a) assignment, sale or transfer of this Agreement other than by operation of law or to an Affiliate of the Grantee, or (b) change of control of this Agreement or of the Grantee to another party who is not an Affiliate of the Grantee. Such request shall be accompanied by all information required by federal law. Within thirty (30) days of receiving such a written request, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee, or any other information permitted by federal law. If the Grantor has not taken action on the Grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Grantor shall be deemed given, unless the Grantor and the Grantee have agreed to an extension of time. 
SECTION 12 
Records, Reports and Maps 
12.1 Reports Required. The Grantee's schedule of charges for regular Subscriber service, its policy regarding the processing of Subscriber complaints, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the Grantee's policy in connection with its Subscribers shall be filed with the Grantor upon request. 
12.2 Records Required. The Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
A.  A record of all written complaints received regarding interruptions or degradation of Cable Service, which record shall be maintained for one (1) year. 
B.  A full and complete set of plans, records and strand maps showing the location of the Cable System. 
C.  All financial and accounting records necessary to demonstrate compliance with this Agreement, including, without limitation, all records necessary to conduct the Franchise Fee review described in Section 10.5. 
12.3 Inspection of Records. The Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the Grantor, upon receipt of advance written notice, to examine during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis any and all of the Grantee's records maintained by the Grantee as is reasonably necessary to ensure the Grantee's compliance with the Agreement. Such notice shall specifically reference the subsection of the Agreement that is under review so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Grantor. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for Agreement compliance purposes longer than three (3) years, except for service complaints, which shall be kept for one (1) year as specified above. The Grantee shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551). The Grantor agrees to treat as confidential any books, records or maps that constitute proprietary or confidential information to the extent the Grantee makes the Grantor aware of such confidentiality. If the Grantor believes it must release any such confidential books or records in the course of enforcing this Agreement, or for any other reason, it shall advise the Grantee in advance so that the Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the Grantee requests that the Grantor continue to oppose such release, then until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Grantor agrees that, to the extent permitted by State and federal law, it shall deny access to any of the Grantee's books and records marked confidential, as set forth above, to any Person, and the Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all reasonable costs and attorneys' fees incurred in any legal proceedings related to same. If the Grantee does not request that the Grantor oppose such release, then the Grantor shall make an independent judgment with respect to such release, and the Grantee shall not be liable for any costs related to same. 
SECTION 13 
Enforcement or Revocation 
13.1 Notice of Violation. If the Grantor believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Agreement, the Grantor shall first informally discuss the matter with the Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance (the "Violation Notice"). 
13.2 The Grantee's Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the Violation Notice to (A) respond to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, (B) to cure such default, or (C) if, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Grantor of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. If (i) the Grantee fails to respond to the Violation Notice received from the Grantor, (ii) the Grantee responds to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of the noncompliance, but the Grantor disagrees with the Grantee's response, or (iii) if the default is not remedied within the thirty (30) day cure period set forth above, the Grantor may pursue any remedies available to it under this Agreement or under Applicable Law. The Grantee reserves all legal and equitable rights under Applicable Law to challenge or appeal any action or decision by the Grantor with respect to an alleged violation of this Agreement, and if the standard of review is not otherwise established by Applicable Law, the standard of review of the Grantor's action or decision shall be de novo. 
13.3 Revocation. 
A.  Prior to revocation or termination of the Agreement, the Grantor shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Agreement on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, upon one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Agreement, or if the Grantee has committed fraud upon the Grantor. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from such notice to either object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the alleged noncompliance. If the Grantor has not received a satisfactory response from the Grantee, it may then seek to revoke the Agreement at a public hearing. The Grantee shall be given at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Agreement. 
B.  The hearing shall be conducted as a quasi-judicial proceeding, similar to other quasi-judicial proceedings regularly undertaken by Colorado municipalities. At the hearing, the City Council shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses. The City staff may present its position and shall also be permitted to present evidence and question witnesses, after which the City Council shall determine whether or not the Agreement shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made available to the Grantee within ten (10) business days. The decision of the City Council shall be made in writing and shall be delivered to the Grantee. The Grantee reserves all legal and equitable rights under Applicable Law to challenge or appeal the Grantor's decision, and if the standard of review is not otherwise established by Applicable Law, the standard of review of the Grantor's decision shall be de novo. The Grantee may continue to operate the Cable System until all legal appeals have been exhausted. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Grantee does not waive any of its rights under federal law or regulation. 
D.  Upon revocation of the Agreement, notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this Agreement, the Grantee may remove the Cable System from the Streets of the Grantor, or abandon the Cable System in place with no cost to the Grantee. 
13.4 Alternative Remedies. No provision of this Agreement shall be deemed to bar the right of the Grantor to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the Agreement or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Agreement nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the Grantor to recover monetary damages for such violations by the Grantee, or to seek and obtain judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other remedy at law or in equity. 
SECTION 14 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
14.1 Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with the provisions of the Agreement, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their utility poles to which the Grantee's Cable System is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
14.2 Minor Violations. Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the Grantor's intention to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Agreement for violations of the Agreement where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the Service Area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweighs the benefit to be derived by the Grantor and/or Subscribers. 
14.3 Action of Parties. In any action by the Grantor or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
14.4 Equal Protection. The Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the Grantor reserves the right to grant one (1) or more additional Franchises or other similar lawful authorization to provide Cable Services within the Service Area. If the Grantor grants such an additional Franchise or other similar lawful authorization containing material terms and conditions that differ from the Grantee's material obligations under this Agreement, then the Grantor agrees that the obligations in this Agreement will, pursuant to the process set forth in this section, be amended to include any material terms or conditions that it imposes upon the new entrant, or provide relief from existing material terms or conditions, so as to insure that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are materially equivalent. "Material terms and conditions" include, but are not limited to: the Franchise Fee; Gross Revenue definition; insurance; Cable System build-out requirements; security instruments; customer service standards; required reports and related record keeping; level playing field (or its equivalent); audits; dispute resolution; remedies; and notice and opportunity to cure breaches. The parties agree that this provision shall not require word for word identical Franchise provisions so long as the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are materially equivalent. 
A.  The modification process of this Agreement as provided for in this section shall only be initiated by written notice by the Grantee to the Grantor regarding specified obligations. The Grantee's notice shall address the following: (1) identifying the specific terms or conditions in the competitive Franchise which are materially different from the Grantee's obligations under this Agreement; (2) identifying the Agreement terms and conditions for which the Grantee is seeking amendments; (3) providing text for any proposed Agreement amendments to the Grantor, with a written explanation of why the proposed amendments are necessary and consistent. 
B.  Upon receipt of the Grantee's written notice as provided in subsection 14.4A , the Grantor and the Grantee agree that they will use best efforts in good faith to negotiate the Grantee's proposed Agreement modifications, and that such negotiation will proceed and conclude within a ninety (90) day time period, unless that time period is reduced or extended by mutual agreement of the parties. If the Grantor and the Grantee reach agreement on the Agreement modifications pursuant to such negotiations, then the Grantor shall amend this Agreement to include the modifications. 
C.  If the parties fail to reach agreement in the negotiations as provided for in subsection 14.4B , the Grantee may, at its option, elect to replace this Agreement by opting into the Franchise or other similar lawful authorization that the Grantor grants to another provider of Cable Services, so as to insure that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are equivalent. If the Grantee so elects, the Grantor shall immediately commence proceedings to replace this Agreement with the Franchise issued to the other Cable Services provider. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed a waiver of any remedies available to the Grantee under Applicable Law, including but not limited to Section 625 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 545). 
E.  Should the Grantee seek an amendment to this Agreement or a replacement Franchise pursuant to this section, while the parties shall pursue the adoption of such amendments or replacement Franchise pursuant to subsections 14.4A through D , any such amendments or replacement Franchise shall not become effective unless and until the new entrant makes Cable Services available for purchase by Subscribers or customers under its agreement with the Grantor. 
14.5 Notices. Unless otherwise provided by federal, State or local law, all notices, reports or demands pursuant to this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be sufficiently given upon delivery to the Person at the respective addresses set forth below by hand delivery, by U. S. certified mail, return receipt requested, or by nationally or internationally recognized courier service such as Federal Express. The Grantee shall provide thirty (30) days' written notice of any changes in rates, programming services or Channel positions using any reasonable written means. 
If to Grantor: City of Sterling 
c/o City Manager 
421 N. 4th Street 
Sterling, CO 80751-0400 With a copy to: City of Sterling 
City Attorney 
421 N. 4th Street 
Box 4000 
Sterling, CO 80751 If to Grantee: Kentec Communications, Inc. 
710 West Main Street 
Sterling, CO 80751  
14.6 Public Notice. Minimum public notice of (A) any public hearings relating to this Agreement or (B) any grant of a Franchise by the Grantor to any other Person(s) to provide Cable Services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the Streets, shall be as provided by Applicable Law unless a longer period is otherwise specifically set forth in this Agreement. Grantor shall provide written notice to the Grantee within thirty (30) days of Grantor's receipt from any other Person(s) of an application or request for a Franchise(s) to provide Cable Services utilizing any system or technology requiring use of the Streets. 
14.7 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Agreement is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Agreement. 
14.8 Entire Agreement. This Agreement and any Exhibits hereto constitute the entire agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee and supersede all prior or contemporaneous agreements, representations or understandings (whether written or oral) of the parties regarding the subject matter hereof. 
14.9 Administration of Agreement. This Agreement is a contract and neither party may take any unilateral action that materially changes the explicit mutual promises and covenants contained herein. Any changes, modifications or amendments to this Agreement must be made in writing, signed by the Grantor and the Grantee. 
14.10 Effective Date. The Agreement granted herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by the Grantee recorded on the signature page of this Agreement (the "Effective Date"). 
14.11 Publication Costs. This Agreement shall be published in accordance with Applicable Law. The Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all costs incurred in publishing this Agreement and any notices or ordinances in connection with its adoption if such publication is required by Applicable Law. 
14.12 Venue and Jurisdiction. The parties agree that any action arising out of this Agreement will be brought in the district court of Logan County or federal courts located in the State of Colorado, irrevocably submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of any such court and waive any objection that such party may now or hereafter have to the venue of any such action or proceeding in any such court or that such action or proceeding was brought in an inconvenient court and agree not to plead or claim the same. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1961 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1961 Code, as updated through August 13, 1985, which are included herein. Sections of the 1961 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1961 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-3 1-7 1-4 1-14 1-5 1-11 1-6, 1-7 1-15, 1-16 1-9 2-1 1-11 1-9 1-12 2-2 1-13 2-137 1-14 2-31 2-56 2-1 2-271 2-1.1 19-181 2-1.2 2-272 2-2, 2-3 14-131, 14-132 2-5-2-9 2-86-2-90 2-9, 2-10 2-91, 2-92 2-11, 2-12 2-94, 2-95 2-15 2-97 2-16-2-19 2-296-2-299 2-21 2-96 2-22 2-93 2-22.1 2-151 2-22.2 2-153 2-22.3 2-152 2-23-2-25 2-191-2-193 2-26 2-206-2-209 2-28 2-194 2-29-2-31 2-241-2-243 2-31.1, 2-31.2 2-244, 2-245 2-32-2-34 14-51-14-53 2-35 14-92, 14-93 2-36 14-94 2-37 14-91 2-38 14-95 2-40 14-73 2-53-2-55 2-71-2-73 3-6 9-8 3-9 12-17 3A-1-3A-3 9-296-9-298 3A-4 9-302 3A-5-3A-7 9-299-9-301 4-1 3-2 4-2 3-42, 3-43 4-3-4-10 3-44-3-51 4-11 3-4 4-12 3-52 4-14-4-22 3-77-3-85 4-24 3-86 4-25 3-9 4-26 3-5, 3-6 4-27, 4-28 3-7, 3-8 4-29 3-12 4-30, 4-31 3-10, 3-11 4-48, 4-49 3-112, 3-113 4-50 3-111 4-51-4-54 3-114-3-117 4-55 3-3 6-1 9-58 6-2 9-56 6-3 9-59 6-4 9-57 9-60-9-62 6-5 9-65 6-6 9-63 7-1 204(a) 7-2 5-33 7-3 5-56 7-4 7-101, 7-102 7-5 5-106 7-7, 7-8 5-1, 5-2 8-1 6-1 8-3-8-6 6-2 8-7 6-3 11-1 7-26 7-41 11-2 7-27 11-3-11-6 7-29-7-32 11-8 7-33 11-9, 11-10 7-37, 7-38 11-11, 11-12 7-38 11-13 7-39 11-14 7-36 11-15 7-40 11-16 7-34 11-18 7-35 11-19, 11-20 7-126, 7-127 11-23 7-85 11-24 7-87, 7-88 11-25 7-89 11-26 7-82 11-27 7-1 11-28 7-83 11-30 7-66 13-1 16-26 13-3-13-5 16-27-16-29 13-5.1 16-30 13-6-13-8 16-31-16-33 13-9-13-11 16-35-16-37 15-1, 15-2 9-2, 9-3 15-6 9-7 16-1 15-1 16-2-16-18 15-36-15-52 16-19-16-21 15-126-15-128 16-22-16-28 15-128 16-29 15-129 16-30-16-51 15-81-15-102 16-52 15-2 16-53 15-103 16-54-16-58 15-53-15-57 16-59, 16-60 15-3, 15-4 16-61-16-63 15-130-15-132 17-1 10-26 17-2 12-3 17-3, 17-4 10-28, 10-29 17-4.1, 17-4.2 10-46, 10-47 17-5-17-9 10-66-10-70 17-11 10-71 18-1-18-4 11-54-11-57 18-5, 18-6 11-52, 11-53 18-7 11-51 19-6.1 17-1 19-6.2, 19-6.3 12-18, 12-19 19-8 12-7 19-10 12-6 19-11 12-8 19-15 12-12 19-16, 19-17 12-20, 12-21 19-19 12-15 19-20 12-11 19-24 12-3 19-27 17-3 19-32 12-9 19-33 12-16 19-36 12-10 19-37 11-6 19-37(a), 19-37(b) 11-4, 11-5 19-37(d)-19-37(g) 11-7-11-10 19-37(h) 11-3 19-37(i), 19-37(j) 11-1, 11-2 19-38, 19-39 12-13, 12-14 22-1 17-101 22-3, 22-4 17-102, 17-103 22-5 17-106 22-6 17-105 22-7 17-107 22-8 17-109 17-118 22-9 17-110 22-10 17-112 22-12 17-111 22-13, 22-14 17-114, 17-115 22-15 17-113 22-16, 22-17 17-116, 17-117 22-19-22-24 17-119-17-124 22A-2, 22A-3 19-116, 19-117 22A-4-22A-7 19-119-19-122 22A-8 19-125 22A-9(a) 19-118 22A-9(b) 19-124 22B-1 9-211 22B-2-22B-5 9-246-9-249 22B-6 9-217 22B-7-22B-10 9-219-9-222 22B-11 9-214 22B-12 9-218 22B-15 9-223 22B-16 9-215 22B-18, 22B-19 9-212, 9-213 22B-20 9-216 23-1, 23-2 21-116, 21-117 23-3 21-119 23-4, 23-5 21-124, 21-125 23-6 21-181 23-7 21-129 23-8 21-182 23-9 21-131 23-10-23-12 21-183 23-13, 23-14 21-184, 21-185 23-15 21-130 23-16 21-186 21-206 23-17-23-22 21-155-21-160 23-23 21-153 21-164 23-24 21-161 23-25 21-163 23-26 21-162 23-28 21-165 23-29 21-154 23-30, 23-31 21-126, 21-127 23-32 21-118 23-33 21-128 23-34 21-151 23-35 21-213 23-37, 23-38 21-219, 21-220 23-39-23-41 21-208-21-210 23-42 21-221 23-43 21-207 23-44-23-49 21-214 23-50-23-52 21-212 23-53 21-123 23-54 21-217 23-55 21-222 23-57 21-218 23-58 21-211 23-59 21-223 23-60 21-216 23-61 21-215 23-62 21-120 21-152 23-63, 23-64 21-121, 21-122 24-1 17-23 24-2 17-22 24-3 17-49 24-5 17-5 24-7 17-2 17-21 24-8 17-4 24-9 17-48 24-11, 24-12 9-101, 9-102 24-14, 24-15 9-103, 9-104 24-16-24-18 9-116-9-118 24-19, 24-20 17-41, 17-42 24-21 17-76 24-22 17-82 24-23, 24-24 17-78, 17-79 24-25 17-83 24-27 17-80 24-28 17-44 24-29 17-81 24-30 17-84 24-31 17-77 24-32 17-85 24-33 17-53 24-34 17-52 24-35, 24-36 17-46, 17-47 24-38, 24-39 17-50, 17-51 24-40 17-56 20-31 24-41 17-55 24-42 17-58 24-43 17-54 24-44 17-45 24-45 17-59 24-46 17-43 17-57 24B-1-24B-3 19-81-19-83 24B-4 19-85, 19-86 24B-5 19-80 24B-6-24B-8 19-76-19-78 24B-9 19-87 24B-10 19-79 24B-11 19-84 25-1 20-26 25-2-25-7 20-51-20-56 25-8-25-12 20-76-20-80 25-13 20-27 25-14 20-29 25-15-25-36 20-96-20-117 25-36 20-118 25-38 20-32 25-39 20-28 25-41, 25-42 20-33, 20-34 25-43 20-30 25A-2 19-142 25A-4 19-145 25A-5 19-147 25A-6 19-143 25A-7 19-159 26-1 21-61 26-2, 26-3 21-68, 21-69 26-4 21-94 26-5 21-70 26-6 21-95 21-97 26-7 21-92 26-8 21-96 26-9 21-93 26-10, 26-11 21-65, 21-66 26-12 21-64 26-13 21-62 26-14 21-67 26-15 21-71  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1961 Code, as updated through August 13, 1985, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1961 Code, as supplemented. This table contains the adopted date and the effective date of the ordinance. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Effective 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 1-1986  2-11-86  2-14-86 2-6 2-87 2-1986  2-11-86  2-24-86 1-15 2-3 10-1986 10-20-86  1- 1-87 3 19-123 10-28-86  1- 1-87 2 19-122 11-1986 10-28-86  1- 1-87 2 19-142 2, 3 19-145, 19-146 12-1986  1-13-87  1-23-87 1 19-121 2 19-147 3 19-121 4-14 19-148-19-158 15 19-160 16 19-144 17 19-161 13-1986  1-13-87  1-23-87 1, 2 10-1 2-1987  2-10-87  2-23-87 2-151-2-153 3-1987  3-10-87  3-23-87 2-32-2-34 14-51-14-53 2-35 14-92 2-37 14-91 2-39 14-73  3-25-87 2-35, 2-36 14-93, 14-94 2-38 14-95 4-1987  3-24-87  3-23-87 16-64 15-5 5-1987  3-24-87  4- 6-87 14-1 11-26 14-2-14-4 11-29-11-31 14-5 11-27 14-6 11-32 9-1987  4-28-87  5-11-87 1-15 11-1987  6- 9-87  6-12-87 13A-1 19-51 13A-2-13A-4 19-55-19-57 13A-4 19-58 13A-6 19-54 13A-7 19-59 13A-8 19-53 13A-9 19-52 12-1987  6-23-87  7- 6-87 17-2 12-3 16-1987  9- 8-87  9-29-89 13-11 16-37 17-1987  9- 8-87  9-21-87 19-38 12-13 18-1987  9- 8-87  9-21-87 19-39, 19-40 12-14 19-1987  9-22-87 10- 5-87 4-12 3-52 4-24 3-86 20-1987 10-13-87 10-26-87 2-80 2-222, 2-223 2-81-2-83 2-224-2-226 2-84 2-221 25-1987 12- 8-87 App. B, §§ 
1.0-19.2 26-1987 12- 8-87 12-21-87 11-5 27-1987 12- 8-87 12-21-87 3-3 28-1987 12- 8-87 12-21-87 19-25 12-4 1-1988  1-26-88  2- 8-88 1-3 19-182 2-1988  3- 8-88  3-21-88 10-1 9-271 10-2 9-273 10-3 9-272 4-1988  4-12-88  4-25-88 11-7 11-10 5-1988  4-12-88  4-25-88 14-4 11-31 14-5 11-27 14-6 11-32 7-1988  4-26-88  5- 9-88 2-29 2-241 9-1988  5-24-88  6- 6-88 1, 2 2-167, 2-168 3 9-141 22-26 4 2-168 5(a), 5(b) 22-28, 22-29 6 22-56 7 22-36 8(3) 22-34 8(a)-8(c) 22-34 8(c)(1) 22-35 8(c)(2) 22-34 8(c)(4), 8(c)(5) 22-30, 22-31 9 22-33 10(a)-10(c) 9-157-9-159 10(d) 9-143 10(e), 10(f) 9-160, 9-161 10(g) 9-142 10(h) 9-156 11, 12 9-162, 9-163 13 22-57 14, 15 22-59, 22-60 16 22-58 17 22-27 18 22-61 13-1988  8-23-88  9- 5-88 4-3 3-44 4-5, 4-6 3-46, 3-47 4-15 3-78 4-17, 4-18 3-80, 3-81 4-25 3-9 4-26 3-6 4-30, 4-31 3-10, 3-11 18-1988 11-22-88 12- 5-88 5-1 4-1 5-2(a)-5-2(e) 4-6-4-10 5-3 4-12 5-4 4-11 5-5 4-13 5-6 4-5 5-7-5-10 4-41-4-44 5-11-5-13 4-81-4-83 5-14 4-86 5-15, 5-16 4-84, 4-85 5-17 4-4 5-18-5-23 4-56-4-61 5-24, 5-25 4-65, 4-66 5-26-5-28 4-62-4-64 5-29-5-31 4-141-4-143 5-32 4-111 4-146, 4-147 5-33, 5-34 4-144, 4-145 5-35, 5-36 4-126, 4-127 5-37, 5-38 4-2, 4-3 1-1989  3-28-89 App. A, §§ 
101-1407 2-1989  3-14-89  3-17-89 19-23 12-2 19-26 12-5 19-39 12-14 19-40 12-1 3-1989  3-14-89  3-17-89 19A-1 13-2 19A-3 13-1 13-3 19A-4 13-23 19A-4(a) 13-22 19A-4(b), 19A-4(c) 13-24, 13-25 19A-4(d), 
19A-4(e) 13-27, 13-28 19A-4(f) 13-26 19A-5 13-46 19A-6 13-5 19A-7-19A-9 13-47-13-49 19A-10 13-54 19A-11, 19A-12 13-56, 13-57 19A-13 13-52 19A-14, 19A-15 13-60, 13-61 19A-16 13-51 19A-17 13-62 19A-18 13-55 19A-19(a), 
19A-19(b) 13-29 19A-19(b) 13-30 19A-20 13-59 19A-21-19A-23 13-65-13-67 19A-24, 19A-25 13-63, 13-64 19A-26 13-53 19A-27 13-50 19A-28 13-58 19A-29 13-4 6-1989  4-11-89 App. A, § 1109  4-14-89 App. A, § 713 7-1989  9-26-89  9-29-89 26-3 21-69 26-4 21-94 26-6 21-95 21-97 26-7 21-92 26-8 21-96 26-9 21-93 26-16 21-91 26-17 21-63 8-1989  4-11-89  4-14-89 16A-2 9-186, 9-187 9-1989  6-13-89 App. A, § 905 10-1989  8-22-89  9- 4-89 24A-1-24A-8 18-2-18-9 24A-9, 24A-10 18-11, 18-12 24A-11 18-10 24A-12, 24A-13 18-1 24A-14(a)- 
24A-14(d) 18-31-18-34 24A-15-24A-19 18-35-18-39 24A-20-24A-23 18-56-18-59 24A-24 18-76 24A-25(a), 
24A-25(b) 18-77, 18-78 24A-26 18-79 24A-27(a) 18-80 19-201 24A-27(b), 
24A-27(c) 18-81, 18-82 24A-28-24A-36 18-101-18-109 11-1989  8-22-89  8-25-89 11A-1, 11A-2 8-2, 8-3 11A-3 8-1 11A-4(a)-11A-4(f) 8-4-8-9 11A-5(a)-11A-5(c) 8-36-8-38 11A-5(d)(1), 
11A-5(d)(2) 8-39, 8-40 11A-6(a), 
11A-6(b) 8-66, 8-67 12-1989  8-22-89  8-25-89 App. A, § 302 14-1989  9-15-89 4-2 3-42, 3-43 4-5-4-8 3-46-3-49 4-17 3-80 15-1989  9-26-89  9-29-89 23-1 21-116 23-17 21-155 23-23 21-153 21-164 23-28 21-165 23-29 21-154 23-34 21-151 23-62 21-152 23-63-23-65 21-120-21-122 16-1989  9-26-89  9-29-89 13-1 16-26 13-5 16-29 13-5.1 16-30 13-7 16-32 13-10 16-36 17-1989  9-26-89  9-29-89 22-26 17-104 18-1989  9-15-87 App. A, § 905 20-1989 12-27-89  1- 1-90 25C-1, 25C-2 21-27, 21-28 25C-3 21-26 25C-3(a)(3) 21-30 25C-4 21-40 25C-5(a), 25C-5(b) 21-30, 21-31 25C-5(c) 21-34 25C-6, 25C-7 21-35, 21-36 25C-8(a) 21-38 25C-8(b)-(d) 21-39 25C-9 21-37 25C-10, 25C-11 21-41, 21-42 25C-12 21-32 25C-13 21-43 25C-14 21-33 25C-15 21-29 26-1 21-61 21-1989 12-27-89  1- 1-90 13-3, 13-4 16-27, 16-28 13-5.1 16-30 13-6 16-31 13-8 16-33 13-9 16-35 22-1989 12-27-89  1- 1-90 23-6 21-181 23-23 21-153 21-164 23-1989 12-27-89  1- 1-90 26-3 21-69 26-7 21-92 26-8 21-96 1-1990  3-27-90  3-30-90 App. A, § 402 2-1990  4-10-90  4-23-90 24A-23 18-59  4-13-90  4-23-90 24A-17 18-37 3-1990  5- 8-90  5-11-90 11A-3 8-1 11A-6 8-67 4-1990  5-22-90  7-30-90 4-25 3-9 4-26 3-6 4-30 3-10, 3-11 5-1990  6-12-90  6-15-90 21-34 6-1990  6-26-90  6-29-90 12-22 7-1990  7-10-90  7-13-90 App. A, § 402 9-1990  8-28-90  8-31-90 16-29 16-33, 16-34 10-1990  8-28-90  8-31-90 4-5 3-46 11-1990  8-28-90  8-31-90 App. A, § 402 App. A, § 713 12-1990 10- 9-90 10-22-90 5.5-1-5.5-43 14-1990 11-13-90 11-26-90 1-15, 2-241 15-1990 11-13-90 11-26-90 2-243 17-1990  1- 8-91  1-11-91 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii 4-1991  3-26-91  4- 8-91 3-115(d) 5-1991  4- 9-91  4-22-91 App. A, § 1207 9-1991  9-24-91  9-27-91       Rpld 21-116-21-131, 21-151-21-165, 21-181-21-186, 21-206-21-223       Added 21-116-21-141, 21-161-21-175 10-1991  9-24-91  9-27-91       Added 21-201-21-222 11-1991  7- 9-91  7-22-91 App. A, § 703.4(A)(2), (3) 15-1991  8-27-91  9- 9-91 2-105-2-113 16-1991  9-24-91 App. C, 
§§ 1.0-10.2 19-1991 10-22-91  1- 1-92 14-72 20-1991 12-10-91 12-23-91 2-32 21-1991 11-26-91  1- 1-92 11-5(15) 23-1991 12-10-91 12-23-91 10-27(6) 25-1991  1-14-92  1-27-92       Rpld App. A, 
§§ 901-915       Added App. A, 
§§ 901-913 26-1991  1-14-92  1-27-92 App. A, 
§§ 402(36), (145)-(147), 707, 708.2, 708.3 27-1991 12-23-91 12-27-91       Rpld App. A, 
§§ 1101-1110       Added App. A, 
§§ 1101-1109 3-1992  2-25-92 1-3 2-116 4-1992  2-25-92  3- 9-92       Rpld 2-105-2-113 8-1992  3-24-92  4- 6-92 3-5       Rnbd 3-6       as 3-5(c)       Rpld 3-10(c), (d)       Rnbd 3-7-3-10       as 3-6-3-9       Added 3-10, 3-13 10-1992  3-24-92  4- 6-92 App. A, § 703.1(B)(1), (4), (10) 11-1992  4-14-92  4-27-92 App. A, §§ 302, 403.1, 403.2, 403.3 12-1992  4-14-92  4-27-92 5-16, 5-31, 5-32       Rpld 5-33 5-43, 5-56 14-1992  5-12-92  5-25-92 3-46(8), 3-50, 3-80(8), 3-84 15-1992  5-12-92  5-25-92       Rpld 12-12 17-1992  6-23-92  6-26-92       Added 2-4 2-137(a), (b)       Added 2-137(c)       Rltd 2-137(c)       as 2-137(d) 18-1992  6- 9-92  6-22-92       Rpld App. A, 
§§ 1001-1010       Added App. A, 
§§ 1001-1009 19-1992  6-23-92  7- 6-92 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 20-1992  6-23-92  7- 6-92 5-121 21-1992  7-28-92  7-31-92 5-31 24-1992  7-28-92  8-10-92 12-14(a) 25-1992  7-28-92  8-10-92 3-43, 3-46(9), 3-47, 3-80, 3-81, 3-87 27-1992  8-11-92  8-14-92 7-1, 7-36, 7-66, 7-81, 7-82, 7-85, 7-101 30-1992 10-13-92 10-26-92 2-33 31-1992  9-22-92 10-26-92 19-181(c), (d) 33-1992 11-24-92 App. A, § 407 1-1993  2- 9-93 App. A, § 710 7-1993  7-27-93 2-241 13-1993  9-28-93 10- 8-93 App. A, §§ 112, 502, 503, 913, 1009, 1203, 1205, 1307 18-1993 10-12-93 10-22-93 5.5-44-5.5-52 2-1994  2- 8-94 10-27(10) 10-28 3-1994  3- 8-94 14-53 4-1994  3-22-94  4- 1-94 9-64 6-1994  5-10-94  5-20-94 3-47(10) 3-53 9-1994  6-14-94  6-24-94 12-2 12-4 13-1994  7-26-94 12-31-94 2-272 9-59 9-103 9-187 9-218 9-248 9-302 14-1994  7-26-94  8- 5-94       Rpld 9-8 15-1994  7-26-94  1- 1-95 10-47 18-1994  9-27-94 10- 7-94 14-72 19-1994  9-27-94 10- 7-94 21-66 31-1994  1-10-95 App. A, § 1103 1-1995  2-28-95  3-10-95 App. A, § 1005.2 2-1995  3-28-95 21-201-21-222 4-1995  4-11-95       Rpld 9-160 13-1995  7-25-95  8- 4-95 App. A, §§ 302, 402 14-1995  8- 8-95  8-21-95       Added 2-310-2-327 15-1995  8- 8-95  8-18-95       Rpld 15-1-15-5 15-36-15-57 15-81-15-103       Added 15-1-15-5 18-1995  9-12-95  9-22-95 12-14 24-1995 11-14-95 11-24-95 2-297(note) 26-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95 5-16 5-31       Dltd 5-32 5-56 5-121 27-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95 7-81, 7-82 7-85       Dltd 7-101, 7-102 28-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95 9-59-9-61 9-63-9-65 29-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95 12-13 30-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95       Added 19-231-19-238 31-1995 11-28-95 12- 8-95 21-206(c) 34-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95 21-26, 21-27 21-30, 21-31 21-33, 21-34 21-38-21-42       Dltd 21-43 36-1995 12-12-95  1- 1-96 10-26-10-29 37-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95 3-13 38-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 4-14 39-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 7-2 40-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 11-11 41-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 12-23 42-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 13-6 43-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Added 16-1 45-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95 App. A, § 604.3A., G. 46-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95 App. A, § 606B. 47-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95 18-102(b)(1) 48-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Rpld 18-108 49-1995 12-12-95 12-22-95       Rpld 21-66 50-1995  1- 2-96 10-29 3-1996  2-13-96  2-23-96 App. A, § 302 4-1996  2-13-96  2-23-96 App. A, § 403.1 5-1996  2-13-96 App. A, § 402 6-1996  2-13-96  2-23-96       Added 7-82(e) 13-1996  3-26-96  4- 5-96 4-6 14-1996  4- 9-96  4-19-96       Added 10-27(11) 18-1996  4-23-96  5- 3-96 2-206 19-1996  4-23-96  5- 3-96 14-74(a) 26-1996  7-23-96  8- 2-96       Added 3-14 28-1996  8-27-96  9- 6-96       Added 11-5(16) 35-1996 10-22-96 11- 1-96 App. A, § 402(91) 36-1996 11-12-96 11-22-96       Added 2-246 38-1996 12-10-96 12-20-96 4-59 39-1996 12-10-96 12-20-96 22-56 2-1997  1-28-97  2- 7-97 19-145 19-147 8-1997  3-11-97  3-21-97 12-10 10-1997  4- 8-97  4-18-97 App. A, § 302 11-1997  4- 8-97  4-18-97       Rpld App. A, § 713 12-1997  4- 8-97  4-18-97 App. A, § 402(36) 13-1997  4- 8-97  4-18-97 App. A, § 804 21-1997  4-22-97 1-5 21-231-21-235 22-1997  5-13-97  5-23-97 12-7 23-1997  5-13-97  5-23-97 12-8 24-1997  5-27-97  6- 6-97 App. A, § 302 25-1997  5-27-97  6- 6-97 App. A, § 402(8a) 26-1997  5-27-97  6- 6-97       Rpld 9-186, 9-187 27-1997  5-27-97  6- 6-97       Rpld 13-64 32-1997  7-22-97  8- 1-97 App. A, § 708.3 35-1997  8-12-97  8-22-97       Added 10-27(11)g 40-1997  8-26-97  9- 5-97 App. A, § 402(100) 41-1997  8-26-97  9- 5-97 App. A, § 1002 42-1997  8-26-97  9- 5-97       Added App. A, § 1005.8 48-1997  9- 9-97  9-19-97       Dltd 3-43       Rnbd 3-44       As 3-43       Added 3-44 3-46-3-50 3-80, 3-81 3-84 3-87 49-1997  9-23-97 10- 3-97       Added 10-27(11)h 52-1997  9-23-97 10- 3-97 18-37(a)(1)d 54-1997 10-14-97 10-24-97       Added 3-113(10), 3-114(10) 55-1997 10-28-97 11- 7-97 App. A, § 302 56-1997 10-28-97 11- 7-97 App. A, § 402(19a) 62-1997 12- 9-97 12-19-97 19-81 65-1997 12-23-97  1- 2-98 App. A, § 402(25) 6-1998  3-24-98  4- 3-98 App. A, § 804 16-1998  5-26-98  6- 5-98 7-127 19-1998  7-14-98  7-24-98       Added 12-12 25-1998  8-11-98  8-21-98       Added 10-27(11)i 28-1998  8-11-98  8-21-98 12-14(a) 37-1998  9- 8-98 15-1       Added 15-6 39-1998  9-22-98 10- 2-98 App. A, § 1303 49-1998 11-24-98 12- 4-98 App. A, § 302 50-1998 11-24-98 12- 4-98 App. A, § 402 51-1998 11-24-98 12- 4-98 App. A, § 302  3-1999  2-23-99  3- 2-99 3-10(b)  4-1999  4-27-99  5- 7-99 App. A, § 302  5-1999  4-27-99  5- 7-99 App. A, § 402  9-1999  5-25-99  6- 4-99 12-12 11-1999  7-13-99  7-23-99       Added App. A, § 904.1 App. A, § 907 12-1999  7-13-99  7-23-99 App. A, § 402 14-1999  7-27-99  8- 6-99 18-32 15-1999  8-10-99  8-20-99 2-31 16-1999  8-10-99  8-20-99 10-27 19-1999  9-14-99  9-24-99       Added 3-15 21-1999  9-28-99 10- 8-99 App. A, § 402 23-1999  9-28-99 10- 8-99 2-4 26-1999 11- 9-99 11-19-99       Added App. A, § 708.12 32-1999 12-14-99 12-24-99 10-27 33-1999 12-14-99 12-24-99 14-93 15-2000  4-25-00  5- 5-00 21-64 21-2000  6-13-00  6-23-00 App. A, § 402.16 26-2000  8-22-00  9- 1-00       Added 10-27(1)c., 10-27(42)(c) 27-2000  8-22-00  9- 1-00       Rpld 11-1-11-11, 11-26-11-32, 11-51-11-57       Added 11-1-11-20, 11-26-11-34, 11-40-11-45 28-2000  8-22-00  9- 1-00 10-27(2)b. 31-2000  9-26-00 10- 6-00 19-116-19-118       Added 19-118.1, 19-118.2 19-119-19-125       Added 19-126-19-137 32-2000 10-10-00 10-20-00       Added App. A, § 706.2.2       Rnbd App. A, § 706.2.2-11       as App. A, § 706.2.3-12       Added App. A, § 706.4.2(c) 35-2000 11-14-00 11-24-00       Added App. A, § 703.7 36-2000 11-14-00 11-24-00 App. A, § 402.46  8-2001  4-10-01  4-20-01 12-7  9-2001  4-10-01  4-20-01 12-8 10-2001  4-10-01  4-20-01 1 1-15 11-2001  4-24-01  5- 4-01       Added 2-169 24-2001  8-28-01  9- 7-01 App. A, § 203 29-2001 10- 9-01 10-19-01 App. A, § 911 30-2001 10-23-01 11- 2-01 App. A, § 302 31-2001 10-23-01 11- 2-01 App. A, § 402 34-2001 12-11-01 12-21-01 5-121 33-2001 11-13-01 11-23-01       Added 1-15(c) 36-2001 12-11-01 12-21-01 19-134(7)  3-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 19-121(a)  4-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 7-1-7-13  5-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 Ch. 9, Art. IX(tit.)       Added 9-303  6-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 Ch. 5, Art. III(tit.) 5-31  7-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 Ch. 5, Art. IV(tit.) 5-43  8-2002  2-26-02  3- 8-02 Ch. 5, Art. V(tit.) 5-56  9-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, §§ 205, 206 10-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, § 402 11-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, § 403 12-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, § 904, 906 13-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, Table 10.1 14-2002  3-12-02  3-22-02 App. A, § 1103 18-2002  5-28-02  6- 8-02 App. A, § 703.1 19-2002  5-28-02  6- 8-02 § 21-206(a) 26-2002  9-10-02  9-20-02 § 5-32 27-2002 10-15-02 10-25-02 App. A. § 402 28-2002 10-15-02 10-25-02 App. A. § 302  6-2003  4- 8-03  4-18-03       Added 5-140  8-2003  4-22-03  5- 2-03       Added 21-80 17-2003  9- 9-03  1- 4-04 19-124 18-2003  9- 9-03  9-19-03 9-272 19-2003  9-23-03 10- 3-03       Added 10-27(11)k. 20-2003  9-23-03 10- 3-03       Added 12-10.5 23-2003 12- 9-03 12-19-03       Added 3-46(9)       Added 3-80(7) 11-2004  7-27-04  8- 6-04 2-4(c) 12-2004  8-10-04  8-20-04 10-27(1)(c) 10-27(4) 20-2004  9- 7-04  9-17-04 19-123 24-2004  9-28-04 10- 8-04       Added 21-66  2-2005  1-25-05  2- 4-05 4-2  3-2005  2- 8-05  2-18-05 App. A, § 402(12)  5-2005  2- 8-05  2-18-05       Added 19-138 11-2005  3-11-05  3-21-05 5-121 14-2005  4-26-05  5- 6-05 19-147(4) 18-2006  8- 8-06  8-18-06 21-206(a) 19-2006  9-26-06 10- 6-06 10-26 20-2006  9-26-06 10- 6-06 7-5 23-2006 11-28-06 12- 8-06 4-42  2-2007  2-13-07  2-23-07 18-59  3-2007  2-13-07  2-23-07 14-53  6-2007  3-13-07  3-23-07 App. A, § 1002 12-2007  6-12-07  6-22-07 4-1 4-6 4-8 4-10       Dltd 4-13       Added 4-15, 4-16 4-44 4-62       Dltd 4-63 4-81 15-2007  7-24-07  8- 3-07 3-46 
3-80 16-2007  8-14-07  8-24-07 3-1       Added 3-16-3-18 17-2007 10- 9-07 10-19-07 22-34(d) 18-2007 10- 9-07 10-19-07 App. A, § 1309 20-2007 11-13-07 11-23-07       Rpld App. B, Arts. I-XIX       Added App. B, Arts. 1-18 22-2007 11-27-07 12- 7-07 14-73       Dltd 14-74-14-77 23-2007  1- 8-08  1-18-08       Added 14-73(d)(6) 1-2008  3-25-08  4 3-08       Rpld App. C, Arts. I-X       Added App. C, 
§§ 1-14 2-2008  2-26-08  3- 7-08 12-14 3-2008  2-26-08  3- 7-08 21-30 7-2008  6-24-08  7- 4-08 4-86 4-147 8-2008  7- 8-08  7-18-08 19-121 9-2008  9- 9-08  9-19-08 1 App. A, § 302 2 App. A, § 402 15-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 App. A, § 904 16-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 5-31 17-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 5-43 18-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 5-56 19-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 5-140 20-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08 7-6 21-2008 10-14-08 10-24-08       Rpld 5-106, 5-107       Added 5-106 30-2008 12-23-08  1- 2-09 11-20 2-2009  1-27-09  2- 6-09 5-16 3-2009  2-24-09  3- 6-09 App. A, § 905 4-2009  2-24-09  3- 6-09 App. A, § 402 5-2009  2-24-09  3- 6-09 App. A, § 704 7-2009  2-24-09  3- 6-09       Added 9-304-9-318 10-2009  3-24-09  4- 3-09 21-31 11-2009  4-28-09  5- 8-09 2-71-2-73 12-2009  4-28-09  5- 8-09 18-102(a)(4) 16-2009  6- 9-09  6-19-09       Added 2-118-2-120 20-2009  9-22-09 10- 2-09       Rpld 2-310-2-327       Added 2-310-2-317 21-2009  9- 8-09  9-18-09 App. A, § 402 22-2009  9- 8-09  9-18-09 12-10.5 24-2009 10-13-09  1- 1-10       Rpld 19-124 31-2009 12-22-09  1- 1-10       Rpld App. A, § 706.4 K. 3-2010  3-23-10  4- 2-10 App. A, § 302       Added App. A, 
§ 402 148. 4-2010  5-11-10  5-21-10 App. A, § 302 App. A, § 402 5. 5-2010  5-11-10  5-21-10 19-142 19-143(b) 19-145 7-2010  7-13-10  7-13-10       Added 9-331 11-2010  9-14-10  9-24-10 19-146 12-2010 10-12-10 10-22-10 19-137 14-2010 11- 9-10 11-19-10 3-46 15-2010 11- 9-10 11-19-10 19-147  1-2011  2- 8-11  2-18-11 3-15 11-2011 11- 8-11 11-18-11 19-181(d) 14-2011 12-27-11 12-27-11       Added 19-239-19-256  3-2012  6-12-12  6-22-12       Added 10-27(5) 11-2013  7- 9-13  7-19-13       Added 10-72-10-76 17-2013  9-24-13 10- 5-13 10-72-10-74 18-2013  9-24-13 10- 5-13 18-59 19-2013 10-22-13 10-22-13       Rpld 8-1-8-9, 8-36-8-40, 8-66, 8-67       Added 8-1-8-5, 8-21, 8-31-8-38, 8-51-8-55, 8-71-8-78 3-2014  1-28-14  1-28-14 App. A, § 714 6-2014  2-25-14  2-25-14       Added 2-180-2-183 9-2014 10-14-14 10-14-14 21-116 21-118-21-120 21-124 21-126 21-128(a) 21-131       Rpld 21-132 21-133, 21-134       Rpld 21-135 21-137, 21-138       Rpld 21-139 21-141 21-166 21-168(b), (d) 21-169-21-171       Rpld 21-172 21-173 21-175 10-2014 10-14-14 10-14-14       Rpld 21-201-21-222       Added 21-201-21-225 16-2014 11-25-14 App. A, § 402 2-2015  3-24-15  4- 3-15 3-12 13-47 13-2015  1-12-16  1-22-16       Rpld App. C, 
§§ 1-14       Added App. C, 
§§ 1-14 14-2015  1-12-16  1-22-16       Added App. C, 
§§ 1-14 2-2016  4-12-16  4-22-16 21-202 5-2016  4-12-16  4-22-16       Rpld 2-169 6-2016  6-14-16  6-24-16       Added 17-24 1-2017  2-28-17  3-10-17       Added 2-105-2-114 3-2017  3-28-17  4- 7-17 2-31 4-2017  4-25-17  5- 5-17 2-106(a) 11-2017 11-28-17 12- 8-17 App. A, § 402 17. 13-2017 11-28-17 12- 8-17 App. A, § 302       Added App. A, § 402 46a. 4-2018  3-13-18  3-23-18       Rpld 14-51-14-53 14-73 14-93 11-2018  9-12-18  9-22-18 4-15 12-2018 10- 9-18 10-19-18 4-1 13-2018 10- 9-18 10-19-18       Added 4-6.5 17-2018 11-13-18 11-23-18 4-62  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
C.R.S. Section  
this Code 1-40-115, 1-40-116 Char., § 13-8 1-45-108 2-314 Rule 6 1-2 6-7-101-6-7-105 5-106 6-7-105 5-107 6-7-106 5-106 9-1-101 Ch. 5 11-35-101(1) 19-135.1 19-160(a) 19-255 12-22-301 et seq. 9-318 12-28-101 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. IV 7-126 7-126(6) 12-28-101(8) 12-8 tit. 12, art. 46 2-111, 2-112, 3-10(a)(4)a. 12-46-101 et seq. Ch. 3 Ch. 3, Art. III 3-2(b) 3-3(a)(2), 3-3(a)(3) 13-47 12-46-103(4) 2-105 12-46-105 3-2(b) 12-46-106.5 3-84(b) 12-46-107 3-86, 3-87 12-46-117 Ch. 3 tit. 12, art. 47 2-111, 2-112, 3-10(a)(4)a. 12-47-101 et seq. Ch. 3 Ch. 3, Art. II 3-2(a) 13-47 12-47-103(9) 2-105 12-47-105 3-2(a) 12-47-106 3-47 12-47-106.5 3-50(b) 12-47-110 3-52 12-47-128 3-6 3-9 12-47-128(5)(a)(I) 3-7 12-47-128(b) 3-11 12-47-128(n)(I) 3-8 12-47-135 Ch. 3 Ch. 3, Art. II 3-46 12-47-139 3-47 12-47-301(10) 3-1 3-16(a) 3-18(a) 12-47-311 3-16(e) 12-47-402 3-18(c) 12-47-403 3-17(b) 3-18(c) 12-47-601 3-18(b) tit. 12, art. 43.3 9-331 tit. 12, art. 48 2-111, 2-112, 3-10(a)(4)a. tit. 12, art. 60 4-6 13-6-310 2-242 tit. 13, art. 10 2-241 13-10-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 2-191 13-10-102(3) 2-191 13-10-105 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 13-21-107 1-15 tit. 16, art. 3 7-36(c)(2) 18-1-101 et seq. Ch. 12 18-1-901(3)(p) 4-42 18-4-511 11-5 18-4-512 10-27(2)e. 18-4-701 et seq. 12-18 18-7-101 9-318 18-8-111 12-2 18-9-106 12-7 18-9-111 12-7 18-9-201 et seq. Ch. 4 18-9-201(2.5) 4-8 18-9-202.5(1)(c) 4-1 18-9-204 4-42 4-6 18-9-205 4-42(a) tit. 18, art. 12 12-10 18-12-105.1 12-10(3) tit. 19 1-15 tit. 24, art. 18 2-315 tit. 24, art. 68 18-38(d) 18-38(g) 24-6-203 2-314 24-32-3101 et seq. 5-121 24-33.5-701 et seq. Ch. 6 24-33.5-1101 et seq. Ch. 6 24-33.5-1203 Ch. 7 24-53-101 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 14-131 24-72-201 et seq. 2-271 21-212 24-72-205 2-272 24-72-301 et seq. 2-272 tit. 25, art. 10 21-124, 21-130 25-1-101 et seq. Ch. 11 25-4-601 et seq. Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. II, Div. 3 4-5 tit. 25, art. 5, part. 4 4-16 25-5-410(1)(i)(11) 3-10(c)(2) 25-8-608(1) 21-220(b) tit. 29, art. 2 19-118 29-2-101 et seq. 19-116 29-2-105 19-120 19-120(a) 19-121 19-121(a) 29-2-106.1(3) 19-135.2 19-161(1), 19-161(2) 29-2-106.1(3), 
29-2-106.1(8) 19-161(4), 19-161(5) 29-2-106.1(3)-(7) 19-135.2 29-2-106.1(8) 19-135.2 29-2-109 19-121 19-145 tit. 29, art. 11 2-116(b), (c) ch. 30, rule 201 et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. V ch. 30, rule 241 2-245 2-245(a) 30-14-105 4-2 30-15-104 4-2 tit. 31, art. 16 13-60 tit. 31, art. 16, pt. 1, tit. 31, art. 16, pt. 2 10-26(a) ch. 31, art. 23 App. A, § 104 31-12-101 17-22 31-12-101 et seq. Ch. 21, Art. III 31-15-601 et seq. Ch. 7 31-16-201 Ch. 5 31-16-201 et seq. Ch. 7 31-16-206 1-1 2-303 5-16 5-106 31-23-203 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 31-23-301 Ch. 8 31-23-304 18-38(b) 31-25-101 et seq. Ch. 15 tit. 33 4-6 tit. 35, art. 7 4-6 tit. 35, art. 10 4-6 tit. 35, art. 80 4-6.5 35-10-101 et seq. 9-156(2) 35-26-101 et seq. 9-156(1) tit. 35, art. 43 4-6 35-43-126 4-6 35-44-101 et seq. Ch. 4 tit. 35, art. 80 4-1 tit. 39, art. 21 19-118 39-21-110.5 19-57 19-157 39-21-111 19-161(6) tit. 39, art. 26 19-118 39-26-101 et seq. 19-119 39-26-101 et seq. 19-120 19-120(a)-19-120(c) 19-125 39-26-102 19-117 39-26-103 19-119 39-26-201 19-141 39-26-208 19-143(a) 42-3-115.5(5)(a)(ll) 10-27(11)i 42-3-121(1) 10-27(11)i 42-3-138 11-12 42-4-101 et seq. Ch. 10 42-4-111 10-27(1)c. 42-4-1010(3) 10-27(1)c. 42-4-1801 et seq. 10-27 42-6-137(2) 10-1(a), 10-1(b) 10-1(b)(1) 10-1(b)(3) 42-6-137(4) 10-1(b) 43-2-135 10-27(1)c.  
