CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.


ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.


Section:

1-1 Designation and citation of Code.

1-2 Definitions.

1-3 Rules of construction.

1-4 Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Sections, and Subsections; headings and catch lines.

1-5 Reference to Sections.

1-6 Prospective effect of Code; repealed ordinances not revived.

1-7 Territorial applicability.

1-8 General penalty; subsequent violation; suspension or revocation of license.

1-9 Continuing offense.

1-10 Same offense punishable by different Sections of Code; City Attorney's option.

1-11 Judgments and sentences to run consecutively.

1-12 Severability of parts of Code.

1-13 Location of Code.

1-14 Certified copy of Code admissible into evidence.

1-15 Certified copies of documents.

1-16 Fees for inspection, copying and photographing of public records.

1-17 Altering Code prohibited.

1-18 Franchises and special privileges; deposit for costs.

1-19 Franchises and special privileges; violations; termination.

1-20 City seal.

1-20-1              Description.



ARTICLE 2. INSPECTIONS.


1-21 Inspections; when entry authorized.

1-22 Types of inspections authorized.


ARTICLE 3. SERVICE OF PROCESS .


1-23 Personal service.

1-24 Manner of proof of service.

1-25 Refusal to accept.

1-26 Service upon attorney representing party to whom notice is addressed.


ARTICLE 4. ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE.


1-27 Definitions.

1-28 Adoption of codes by reference; title.

1-29 Procedure for adoption.

1-30 Adopting ordinance; adoption of penalty clauses by reference prohibited.

1-31 Publication of ordinance.

1-32 Filing of public record; sale of copies.

1-33 Amendments.

1-34 Use as evidence.


ARTICLE 5. MUNICIPAL LIENS.


1-35 Creation of Municipal Liens.
1-36 Discharge of Municipal Liens.



































CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.

Section 1-1 Designation and citation of Code.

The ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, embraced in this and the following Chapters shall constitute and be designated, "The Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Trinidad City Code" or, in the provisions which follow, as "this Code". (Ord. 1958, Sec. 1-1.)


Section 1-2 Definitions.

(1) Alley shall mean a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban areas and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.


(2) Building Inspector(s) shall mean such officers, inspectors, deputies and assistants in the Inspection Division of the Department of Public Works who may be authorized to enforce specific provisions of this Code.


(3) Charter shall mean the Charter of the City of Trinidad.


(4) City, or this City shall be construed as if "of Trinidad" followed them and shall extend to and include the several officers, agents and employees of the City of Trinidad.


(5) City Council , Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Trinidad.


(6) City Engineer shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(7) City Manager or Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Trinidad.


(8) City Clerk; City Clerk-Treasurer, City Treasurer shall mean the City Clerk-Treasurer of Trinidad.


(9) Code shall mean this Code.


(10) County shall mean the County of Las Animas.


(11) C.R.S., appearing in this Code, refer to and designates the Colorado Revised Statutes.


(12) District Court shall mean the District Court sitting in and for the County of Las Animas.


(13) Month shall mean a calendar month.


(14) Oath shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be

substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.


(15) Owner , applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.


(16) Person shall extend and be applied to organizations, associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, copartnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals, any combination of individuals acting as a unit.


(17) Personal property shall include every species of property except real property.


(18) Preceding; following shall mean next before and next after, respectively.


(19) Property shall include personal, real and fixed property.


(20) Public place shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access, and includes but is not limited to highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities.


(21) Real property shall mean land, including land under water, buildings, structures, fixtures and improvements on land; any property appurtenant to or used in connection with land; and every estate, interest, privilege, leasehold, easement, license, franchise, right-of-way, and other right in land, legal or equitable, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, rights-of-way, terms for years, and liens, charges, or encumbrances by way of judgement, mortgage or otherwise, and the indebtedness secured by such liens.


(22) Roadway shall mean those portions of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.


(23) Sidewalk or sidewalk area shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.


(24) State or this State shall mean the State of Colorado.


(25) Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.


(26) Tenant; occupant , applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.


(27) Year shall mean a calendar year.


Section 1-3. Rules of construction .

In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the City Council or the context clearly indicates otherwise:


(1) Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.


(2) Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation.


(3) Conflicting provisions. If a general provision of the Code conflicts with a more specific provision of the Code and such conflict is irreconcilable, the more specific provision shall prevail as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general provision prevail. If it cannot be determined which conflicting provision is more specific, the provision most recently adopted shall prevail.


(4) Definitions. The definitions contained in Section 1-2 of this Code shall apply to those terms whenever they are used in the Code unless otherwise expressly provided. Definitions provided within a given chapter, shall be applicable only within such chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.


(5) Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter as well as masculine.


(6) Heretofore and hereafter. Whenever the word heretofore appears in any Section, it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day when that Section shall take effect; whenever the work hereafter appears, it shall be construed to mean the time after the Section takes effect.


(7) Number. Words importing a singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular.


(8) Or; and. “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or” if the sense requires it.


(9) Shall; must; may. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.


(10) Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall include the future as well as the present or past.


(11) Writing; written. The words “writing” and “written” shall include printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures.


Section 1-4. Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Sections and Subsections; headings and catch lines.

All headings of Chapters, Articles or Divisions and all catch lines of Sections and Subsections are unofficial and intended only for convenience in arrangement and as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Sections and Subsections. They shall not be deemed to be part of the contents of the Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Sections or Subsections; nor shall the headings and catch lines alter the otherwise intended meaning of any provision of this Code.


Section 1-5. Reference to Sections.

Wherever in this Code or the ordinances of this City a reference is made to several Sections and the Section numbers given in the reference are connected by the word "to", the reference includes both Sections whose numbers are given and all intervening Sections.


Section 1-6. Prospective effect of Code; repealed ordinances not revived.

This Code shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, any penalty incurred, any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending, or the tenure of office of any person holding office, at the time when it takes effect, nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving an ordinance theretofore repealed or superseded, or the effect of preventing any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or of interfering with any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.


Section 1-7. Territorial applicability.

This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside this City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any Constitutional provision or any law.


Section 1-8. General penalty; subsequent violation; suspension or revocation of license.

(1) Whenever, in this Code or in any ordinance of the City, or rule, regulation or order promulgated by any law officer or agency of the City under authority duly vested in him/her or it, any act or failure to do a required act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or any rule, regulation or order as aforesaid shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the City Jail or other place of legal incarceration for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.


(2) If the penalty for a particular offense is limited by State statute, then such limitation shall be applicable notwithstanding the provisions of this section.


(3) The suspension or revocation of any license, certificate or other privilege conferred by the City shall not be regarded as a penalty for the purposes of this Code but shall be in addition thereto.


Section 1-9. Continuing offense.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, each day any violation of this Code occurs or continues to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.


Section 1-10. Same offense punishable by different Sections of Code; City Attorney’s option.

In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different Sections of this Code, the City Attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one (1) action shall be taken against the same person for the same offense.


Section 1-11. Judgments and sentences to run consecutively.

All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the Municipal Court of the City shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the Judge of such Court. (Ord. 1958, Sec. 1-10.)


Section 1-12. Severability of parts of Code.

The Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or Section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and Sections of this Code.


Section 1-13. Location of Code.

This Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in loose leaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by him/her to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of this Code when the same has been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the City Council. A copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it.


Section 1-14. Certified copy of Code admissible into evidence.

Any copy of the Trinidad City Code or any copy of any addition, amendment or supplement thereto adopted, published and certified according to law shall be received in evidence in any court for the purpose of proving the ordinances therein contained with like force and effect and for the same purpose as the original ordinances would be received.


Section 1-15. Certified copies of documents.

The City Clerk is authorized to prepare copies of official records and documents of the City and certify the same as being true and correct copies of the original from which they were copied, and to furnish the same to the person applying therefor upon presentation of receipt of payment by the Director of Finance showing cost of such service has been paid.


Section 1-16. Fees for inspection, copying and photographing of public records.

In addition to the twenty-five cents ($.25) per page fee provided for in Title 24, C.R.S., 24-72-205(1), the City Clerk shall charge and collect in advance:

(1) The sum of Three Dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for furnishing a certified copy of any document, instrument or paper on file, in addition to twenty-five cents ($.25) per page, for document, instrument or paper furnished (Ord. 1834, Sec. 1-16(1), 7/17/07)

(2) The sum of Ten Dollars ($10.00) per hour when it shall be necessary to search for and retrieve any public records in response to any private person's request for such public records.


(3) The sum of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) for the reproduction of tape recordings.


Section 1-17. Altering Code prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.


Section 1-18. Franchises and special privileges; deposit for costs.

Any person requesting any special privileges, grants or franchises from the City, is required to deposit with the City Clerk such sum of money as the Council may deem sufficient to defray all expenses incident to the procuring of such franchises or special privileges; provided, if any money remains after payment of all expenses, it shall be refunded to the party paying it to the Clerk.


Section 1-19. Franchises and special privileges; violations; termination.

Any violations of the duties and obligations imposed and prescribed to be done and performed by grantees of any franchise or grant of special privilege, or of the conditions of such franchise or grant or of relevant provisions of this Code, shall terminate and end all rights granted such franchise or grant.


Section 1-2 0 . City seal.

The City of Trinidad Municipal Seal shall be:

City Seal - 2017.png

Image of City of Trinidad Municipal Seal

Section 1-20-1.   Description.

The City of Trinidad Municipal Seal shall be on a navy blue circle with bronze detail. The primary focal point shall be a white “T” in the middle of the shield in representation of the first letter in Trinidad’s name. Above the shield shall be the word Trinidad in white. The shield top shall have the distinct modern variation of the upper most bluff of Fisher’s Peak and a small bronze circle, representing the rising sun over the signature natural landmark near the City of Trinidad; this represents the new era of prosperity that Trinidad is embarking on. Outward from the shield and T, are the detailed lines indicating the Greek Ionic inspiration for the Victorian architecture of our downtown. Below the shield is the word Colorado in white. (Ord. 2047, Repealed and re-enacted, eff. 12-01-17)



ARTICLE 2. INSPECTIONS.

Section 1-21. Inspections; when entry authorized.
The proper City inspection authority or its authorized agent shall have the right to make an inspection of any premises in the City in order to determine the existence of violations of any provisions of this Code pertaining to the health, welfare and safety of the public. Such inspector shall have the right to enter any premises in the City for such inspection purposes, without a warrant, if any of the following circumstances exist:


(1) Entry with permission. Entry is by permission or at the request of the owner or occupant of the premises; or


(2) Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger to health, welfare of safety exists; or


(3) Danger from accident. Following an accident where an immediate inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health, safety or welfare exists; or


(4) Any other emergency inspection, or in any other case where warrants are not presently required by law.


Section 1-22. Types of inspections authorized.

The following types of inspections may be conducted by the proper City inspection authority or its authorized agent:


(1) Routine inspection. The inspection of the designated premises is part of a routine area inspection being conducted.


(2) Spot check. The inspection of the designated premises is part of a spot check being conducted within a designated area.


(3) Knowledge of violation. The inspector has knowledge of a violation or knowledge of facts which would indicate a violation of any provision of this Code pertaining to health, safety or welfare of the public.


(4) Inspection after alteration, remodeling or improvements. The inspection is for the purpose of inspecting, during the course, or upon completion of alteration, remodeling or improvements in the premises.


(5) Checking conditions after accident. The inspection is for the purpose of checking the conditions existing in the premises following an accident or casualty therein where an inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health and safety exists.


(6) Licensing of buildings and structures. The inspection is for the purpose of checking the conditions existing in any building or structure requiring a license before occupancy upon application for or renewal of such license.



ARTICLE 3. SERVICE OF PROCESS.

Section 1-23. Personal service.

Wherever in this Code, service of any notice shall or may be by personal service, such personal service shall be as follows:


(l) Upon a natural person over the age of eighteen (18) years by delivering a copy thereof to him/her, or by leaving a copy at his/her usual place of abode, with some member of his/her family over the age of eighteen (18) years, or by leaving a copy in a conspicuous place at his/her usual place of business, or by delivering a copy to an agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process.


(2) Upon a natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years by delivering a copy thereof to him/her and a copy thereof to his/her father, mother or guardian, or if there be none in the City, then by delivering a copy thereof to any person in whose care or control he/she may be, or with whom he/she resides, or in whose service he/she is employed.


(3) Upon a person from whom a conservator or representative has been appointed, by delivering a copy thereof to such conservator or representative.


(4) Upon a partnership, or other unincorporated association, by delivering a copy thereof to one (1) or more of the partners or associates, or a managing or general agent thereof.


(5) Upon a private corporation, by delivering a copy thereof to any officer, manager, general agent, or agent for process. If no such officer or agent can be found in the City, such copy may be delivered to any stockholder, agent, member or principal employee found in the City. If such service be upon a person other than an executive officer, the secretary, general agent, or agent for process, then the City Clerk shall mail a copy thereof to the corporation at its last known address at least fifteen (15) days before the time stated in the notice on which or within which the corporation to whom it is directed shall do or accomplish that which it is the purpose of the notice to command it to do.


(6) Upon a public corporation or other public agency subject to notice, by delivering a copy thereof to the principal officer, chief clerk or other executive employee thereof.


Section 1-24. Manner of proof of service.

(1) If served by a police officer or City employee, by his/her certificate with a statement as to date, place and manner of service.


(2) If by any person, by his/her affidavit thereof, with a statement as to date, place and manner of service.


(3) If by mail, by the certificate of the City Clerk showing the date of the mailing; and the return receipt, showing the date of receiving the notice.


(4) If by publication, by the affidavit of publication, together with the certificate of the City Clerk as to the mailing of the notice where mailing is required.


(5) By the written admission or waiver of service by the person to be served, duly signed and acknowledged. Acknowledgment of such admission or waiver of service may be taken before a Notary Public.


Section 1-25. Refusal to accept.

If the person to be served refuses to accept a copy of the notice, service shall be sufficient if the person serving it shall state the general nature of the notice and offer to deliver a copy thereof.


Section 1-26. Service upon attorney representing party to whom notice is addressed.

Whenever under any ordinance, order, resolution or directive service of a notice is required or permitted to be made upon a party represented by an attorney, the service shall be made upon the attorney unless service upon the party himself/herself is directed by the ordinance, order, resolution or directive or is ordered by the City Council. Service upon the attorney may be made by delivering a copy to him/her personally or by mailing it to him/her at his/her address as given to the City Clerk or the department charged with giving such notice. Delivery of a copy within this Subsection means handing it to the attorney; or leaving it at his/her office with his/her clerk or other person in charge thereof; or, if there is no one in charge, leaving it in a conspicuous place therein; or, if the office is closed or the attorney to be served has no office, leaving it at his/her dwelling, house or usual place of abode with some member of the family over the age of eighteen (18) years residing therein. Service by mail is complete upon mailing.





ARTICLE 4. ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE.

Section 1-27. Definitions.

As used herein:


(1) Primary code shall mean any code which is directly adopted by reference in whole or in part by any ordinance passed pursuant to this Article.


(2) Published shall mean issued in printed, lithographed, multi graphed, mimeographed or similar form.


(3) Secondary code shall mean any code which is incorporated by reference, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, in any primary code or in any secondary code.


Section 1-28. Adoption of codes by reference; title.

If all the procedures and requirements of this Article are complied with, the City is authorized to enact any ordinance which adopts any code by reference, in whole or in part; and such primary code, thus adopted, may in turn adopt by reference, in whole or in part, any secondary codes duly described therein. However, every primary code which is incorporated in any such adopting ordinance, shall be specified in the title of the ordinance.


Section 1-29. Procedure for adoption.

The procedure for adoption of all ordinances adopting codes by reference shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.6 of the Charter. In addition to the notice and publication requirements of Section 5.6 (d) of the Charter, the published notice shall also state that copies of the primary code and copies of the secondary code, if any, being considered for adoption, are on file with the City Clerk and are open to public inspection.


Section 1-30. Adopting ordinance; adoption of penalty clauses by reference prohibited.

After the hearing, the Council may amend, adopt or reject the adopting ordinance in the same manner in which it is empowered to act in the case of other ordinances; provided, nothing in this Article shall be deemed to permit the adoption by reference of any penalty clauses which may appear in any code which is adopted by reference. Any such penalty clauses may be enacted only if set forth in full, and published, in the adopting ordinance. It is further provided that all changes or additions to any code made by the Council shall be published in the manner which is required for ordinance.


Section 1-31. Publication of ordinance.

Nothing contained in this Article shall be deemed to relieve the City from the requirement of publishing in full the ordinance which adopts any such code, and all provisions applicable to such publication shall be fully carried out. The adopting ordinance shall contain the name of the code, the year of the publication and the name and address of the publisher, and where copies of the code are kept.


Section 1-32. Filing of public record; sale of copies.
At least one copy of each primary code adopted by reference, of each secondary code pertaining thereto, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing on the adopting ordinance, and shall be kept there for public inspection while the ordinance is in force.


Section 1-33. Amendments.
If at any time any code, which the City has previously adopted by reference, shall be amended by the agency or municipality which originally promulgated, adopted or enacted it, then the Council may adopt such amendment by reference through the same procedure as required for the adoption of the original code; or an ordinance may be enacted in regular manner, setting forth the entire text of such amendment.


Section 1-34. Use as evidence.

Copies of such codes in published form, duly certified by the Clerk and Mayor shall be received without further proof as prima facie evidence of the provisions of such codes or public records in all courts and administrative tribunals of this State.



ARTICLE 5. MUNICIPAL LIENS

Section 1-35. Creation of Municipal Liens. ( Ord. 1883, Sec. 1-35 enacted, eff. 5/15/09)

(1) Any amount of money owed to the City for services, taxes, or assessments which concern or benefit the real property of the obligor shall automatically become a lien upon such real property. Such automatic liens will not be available where the payment obligation to the City is not directly related to the use, maintenance, improvement, or taxation of, or other service to, the real property involved. These liens shall become first and prior liens upon the property in question. These liens shall be in the nature of a municipal tax, and, as such, shall be perpetual and continuing liens. The procedure contained in this Article shall be followed in enforcing such municipal liens, except in those instances where a different procedure is prescribed by another section of this Code.


(2) If payments due the City have not been otherwise collected, the Director of Finance may certify the amount due to the county treasurer. The county treasurer, upon receipt of the statement of the Director of Finance establishing the amount owed, shall collect the amount owed, together with a ten percent (10%) penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection, in the same manner as municipal taxes are collected; provided, however, that upon notice to the county treasurer by the City that the City intends to pursue judicial foreclosure of the lien so established, the county treasurer shall refrain from attempting to collect the amount due.


(3) The procedure contained in this Article is not intended to establish an exclusive method for collection of amounts owed to the City, and nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from pursuing other methods of collection, including judicial foreclosure of municipal liens.


Section 1-36. Discharge of Municipal Liens . ( Ord. 1883, Sec. 1-36 enacted, eff. 5/15/09)
Within thirty (30) days of payment of the full amount owed to the City, the Director of Finance shall notify the county treasurer that the amount due the City has been paid, and that any liens resulting from that debt shall be discharged.

CHAPTER 2.  ADMINISTRATION.


ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Sections:


2-1                      Oath of officers.

2-2                      Disbursement of money.

2-3                      Annual audit of accounts.

2-4                      Public works - Authorization.

2-5                      Public works - Necessity determined by Council; assessment.

2-6                      Contracts - Approval by Council; letting.

2-7                      Venue of action on contract.

2-8                      Contract modifications - Authorization by City Manager.

2-9                      Contracts

2-10                    Interdepartmental services.


ARTICLE 2.  THE MAYOR.


2-11                 Mayor as Official head of City; duties; civil process.

2-12                 Mayor - Salary.


ARTICLE 3.  THE CITY COUNCIL.


DIVISION 1.  COUNCIL MEETINGS.


2-13                 Council Meetings - Time and place.

2-14                 Special Council meetings - Notice.

2-15                 Council meetings - Rules and order of business.


DIVISION 2.  IN GENERAL.


2-16                 Council officers.

2-17                 Council members - Salary

2-18                 Administrative officers; departmental and personnel charts.


ARTICLE 4.  THE CITY MANAGER.


2-19                 City Manager - Duties generally.

2-20                 City Manager - Supervision and approval of public works.

2-21                 City Manager - Liaison among levels of government.

2-22                 City Manager - Ex-officio member of all City agencies.

2-23                 Assistant City Manager; appointment; duties.

2-24                 City Manager - Director of Budget; procedure for budget adoption.



ARTICLE 5.  THE CITY CLERK.


2-25                 City Clerk - Duties.

2-26                 City Clerk to maintain office hours.


ARTICLE 6.  THE CITY ATTORNEY .


2-27                 City Attorney - Duties; special counsel.

2-28                 City Attorney - Prosecution of suits and execution of judgments.

2-29                 City Attorney - Appeal of cases.

2-30                 City Attorney - Right to be heard on motions before Council.


ARTICLE 7.  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, BOULEVARDS AND RECREATION.


2-31                 Department of Parks, Boulevards and Recreation - Superintendent in charge


ARTICLE 8.  LIBRARY DEPARTMENT.


2-32                 Library Department.


ARTICLE 9.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.


2-33                 Department of Public Safety - Director in charge.


DIVISION 1.  POLICE DEPARTMENT.


2-34                 Creation; composition.

2-35                 Departmental rules and regulations.

2-36                 Appointment, powers, and duties of Chief.

2-37                 Duties of Police Officers.

2-38                 Oath.

2-39                 Uniforms.

2-40                 Duty of citizens to aid.

2-41                 Extraterritorial duty.

2-42                 Reserve Police; appointment; powers.


DIVISION 2.  FIRE DEPARTMENT.


2-43                 Fire Department - Chief in charge.

2-43.1              Firemen’s pension.

2-43.2              Additional benefits for firemen.


ARTICLE 10.  MUNICIPAL UTILITY DEPARTMENTS.


2-44                 Utility Departments.

2-45                 Power and Light Department.

2-46                 Water and Sewer Departments.


ARTICLE 11.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.


2-47                 Department of Public Works - City Engineer as director.


DIVISION 1.  STREET AND BRIDGE DIVISION.


2-48                 Street and Bridge Division - Supervisor in charge.


DIVISION 2.  INSPECTION DIVISION.


2-49                 Inspection Division - Building Inspector in charge.


DIVISION 3.  GENERAL MAINTENANCE DIVISION.


2-50                 General Maintenance Division - Supervisor in charge.


ARTICLE 12.  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING.


2-51                 Department of Finance and Accounting - Finance Director in charge.

2-52                 Duties of Finance Director.

2-53                 Finance Director's report to Council

2-54                 Description of bills and payroll; authorization by City Council; action; utilization of  signature facsimile.

2-55                 Purchasing Agent - Duties.

2-56                 Withdrawal of supplies from City storerooms.


ARTICLE 13.  AGENCIES, BOARDS, BUREAUS AND COMMISSIONS.


2-57                 Library Advisory Board.

2-58                 Establishment of a Park and Recreation Advisory Board.

2-59                 Other agencies may be created by Council.

2-59.1              Arts and Culture Advisory Commission.

2-60                Corazon de Trinidad Historic Main Street Board established.
2-60.1              Space to Create Commons Oversight Board established.


ARTICLE 14.  RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS.


2-61                 Repealed


ARTICLE 15.  CONFISCATED, STOLEN, LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.


2-62                 Definitions.

2-63                 Director deemed custodian.

2-64                 Property held as evidence.

2-65                 Notification of owner.

2-66                 Disposal of unclaimed property when.

2-67                 Reclaiming property.

2-68                 Failure to claim property.

2-69                 Advertisement.


ARTICLE 16. OTHER PERSONNEL REGULATIONS


2-70                 Response-time requirement for emergency services personnel


ARTICLE 17. CODE OF CONDUCT AND CODE OF ETHICS


2-71                 City of Trinidad Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics



ARTICLE 18. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING


2-74                 Procedure of Bargaining Units – elections and recognition


CHAPTER 2.  ADMINISTRATION.



ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Section 2-1. Oath and bond of officers.


Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the City Manager, City Attorney, Municipal Judge, and such other officers and employees as the Council may require, shall each take and subscribe to the oath of office to support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and to faithfully discharge the duties of their offices to the best of their skill and ability.

Section 2-2. Disbursement of money.


(1) All claims and demands against the City, together with all supporting documentation, shall be submitted to and audited by the Finance Director.  No money shall be drawn on any City Account except upon warrant checks signed by the City Manager and the City Clerk and countersigned by the Mayor.  Every warrant check shall specify the fund from which it is payable and the bank account on which it is drawn.  No warrant check shall be drawn which will overdraw the cash balance of the fund from which it should be paid.


(2) REPEALED (Ord. 1684, eff. 3/29/02)

Section 2-3. Annual audit of accounts.


Not later than thirty (30) days after the close of each fiscal year, the City Council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the accounts of all funds of the City by certified public accountants.  Such audit shall be conducted in accordance with procedures and guidelines set by the State.

Section 2-4. Public works - Authorization.


The Council may authorize any public work or public improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after competitive bidding.  The Council may also authorize any public work or any public improvement to be done under any legally constituted plan in which the labor is furnished by any other governmental unit, department or agency of the United States or the State of Colorado, and the necessary supplies and materials therefor provided by the City.

Section 2-5. Public works - Necessity determined by Council; assessment.


When the Council shall so direct by resolution upon its own initiative or when an advisory petition shall be presented to it requesting the making of any local or public improvement, it shall be referred to the City Manager, who shall report thereon to the Council, which shall determine by resolution the necessity of doing such work or making such improvement.  If the Council determines in favor of the work or any part thereof, it may fix the limits of the special assessment and the district or districts therefor which shall include all the lots and premises fronting, touching, or abutting thereon and in case of sidewalks, pavement or other improvements, such as parking lots, shall include such lots, blocks or premises lying contiguous to each other as will, in the opinion of the Council, be benefitted thereby.

Section 2-6. Contracts - Approval by Council; letting.


Whenever it becomes desirable for the City to enter into a contract for public improvement with a second party, such instrument shall be drawn and approved as to form and content by the City Attorney.  Each contract shall provide for public liability and property damage insurance; and worker's compensation insurance required by the laws of the State of Colorado; and performance and payment bonds.  The letting and making of such contracts is hereby vested in the Council.  The Council, in its discretion, shall have the power to reject any or all bids, provided, that except in the case of emergency, all contracts calling for an expenditure of more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), for public improvement, shall be by bid only.  Copies of all contracts shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.

Section 2-7. Venue of action on contract.

(1) Any contract entered into by the City and a second party shall contain the clause:  "Venue of any action in law or equity brought under the terms of this contract shall be in the District Court sitting in and for the County of Las Animas, State of Colorado, and by the signing of this agreement, the parties consent hereto that the said venue shall be Las Animas County, Colorado."


(2) Any contract which does not contain the clause described in subsection (1) above shall nevertheless be a valid obligation of the City, even though said clause was otherwise required and regardless of the date upon which said contract was entered into. (Ord. 1211, Sec. 2-7 (2), enacted eff. 8/18/81)

Section 2-8. Contract modifications - Authorization by City Manager.


When it becomes necessary, in the prosecu tion of any work or improvement done under contract, to make alterations or modifications to such contract, such alterations or modifications shall be made only upon authorization of the City Manager.  No such alteration or modification shall be effective until the price to be paid for the material and/or work under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the City Manager.  A copy thereof shall be attached by the City Clerk to the original contract on file in his/her office.

Section 2-9. Contracts.


The City shall not make any contract with any person who is in default to the City. (Ord. 1797, Sec. 2-9 repealed and reenacted eff. 8/26/05)

Section 2-10. Interdepartmental services.


Each department of the City shall be charged with providing service to other City departments in like manner as the same is being rendered to the general public.



ARTICLE 2.  THE MAYOR.
Section 2-11. Mayor as Official head of City; duties; civil process.


(1)  The Mayor shall serve as official head of the City and shall serve as Chairperson of the City Council.


(2)  The Mayor shall perform all the ceremonial duties as official head of the City.


(3)  The Mayor may accept service of civil process on behalf of the City.

Section 2-12. Mayor - Salary.


Beginning on January 2, 2008, the salary of the Mayor shall be Eight Hundred Fifty Dollars ($850.00) per month as and for full compensation for services rendered as Mayor of the City. (Ord. 1832, Sec. 2-12, enacted eff. 7/3/07)


State law references :  As to power of Council to establish salaries, see C.R.S. 1973 Section 31-3-218.



ARTICLE 3.  THE CITY COUNCIL.

DIVISION 1.  COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Section 2-13. Council meetings - Time and place.


The City Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. The regular place of meetings shall be the Council Chambers in the City Hall. However, when any such meeting might fall upon any legal holiday or on the date of the State general election, the Primary election, or the City's regular election, the meeting shall be held on the following evening at the same hour.  This section shall not preclude the City Council from re-scheduling a regular meeting due to other reasonable circumstances that merit the change. (Ord. 1999, Sec. 2-13 repealed and reenacted, eff. 3-15-16)

Section 2-14. Special Council meetings - Notice.


Whenever a special meeting of the City Council of the City of Trinidad is called, a written notice shall be given to each member of the Council by the City Clerk, of the time and place of such special meeting.  The notice shall be served at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when such special meeting shall be held.  The notice may be served personally or left at the Council member's usual place of residence.  Notice of such meeting shall be posted in two (2) public places. (Ord. 1462, Sec. 2-14 enacted eff. 3/1/94)

Section 2-15. Council meetings - Rules and order of business.


The following rules and order of business shall govern at Council meetings:

(1) Meeting nights. The City Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays

of each and every month at 6:00 p.m., except as set forth in Section 2-13;

(2) Rules of procedure. The rules of procedure and order of business shall be strictly adhered to by the City Council, unless they shall be temporarily suspended by a vote of the majority of the members present;

(3) Special meetings. The City Clerk shall call special meetings of the Council upon written request of the Mayor or any two (2) members of the Council, as provided by the Home Rule Charter;

(4) Mayor as Mayor of the Council. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall be entitled to a vote as other members of the Council. In the case of the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside, and have the same power as the Mayor;

(5) What constitutes a quorum. At any regular or special meeting of the City Council a majority of the entire membership shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a minority may adjourn from day to day;

(6) Order of business. At the hour appointed for the meeting, the members shall be called to order by the Mayor. The City Clerk shall proceed to call the roll. Upon determining the presence of a quorum, the Council shall then proceed to the business before it, which shall be conducted in the following order:

(a) First – Policy Items.

(b) Second - Presentation of petitions, written and oral; communications to the City Council.

(c) Third - Consent Agenda approval.  Consent agenda items are those that are mundane and non-controversial action items requiring formal approval but no discussion.  Items may be on a consent agenda only if all Council members agree; if even one member considers a specific item to need discussion, it shall be removed and placed on the regular agenda for separate consideration.

(d) Fourth – Public hearings.

(e) Fifth - Unfinished business.

(f) Sixth – Miscellaneous business. Any items removed from the consent agenda for separate consideration shall be considered under Miscellaneous Business.

(g) Seventh – Council Reports.

(h) Eighth – Reports by City Manager and City Attorney.

(i) Ninth - Adjournment.

(7) Mayor to decide questions of order. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall decide all questions of order;

(8) No member may leave. While the Mayor is putting the question, no member may leave the Council meeting;

(9) Manner of addressing Mayor. Every member, previous to his/her speaking, shall address himself/herself to the Mayor, and say "Mr. Mayor," but shall not proceed with his/her remarks until recognized and named by the Mayor;

(10) Duties and privileges of members. No member shall speak more than twice to the general question, nor more than once on a previous question, without leave of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council, nor more than once in any case until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken, and no member shall be permitted to leave the chambers while the Council is in session, except by permission of the Mayor;

(11) Private discourse prohibited. While any member is speaking, no member shall entertain private discourse;

(12) Suspension of remarks. A member called to order shall immediately suspend his/her remarks, unless permitted to explain. If there is no appeal, the decision of the Mayor shall be conclusive, but if the member appeals to the Council from the decision of the Mayor, the Council shall decide on the case without debate;

(13) Order of motions. Motions upon the subject under discussion shall have precedence in the following order: First, to lay on the table; second, to postpone; third, to commit; fourth, to amend;

(14) Motions reduced to writing. All motions or resolutions shall be reduced to writing if required by the Mayor or a member, and, when seconded and stated by the Mayor, shall be open for consideration, and no motion or resolution can be withdrawn after it shall have been amended or decided;

(15) Adjournment. A motion to adjourn shall be in order and shall have precedence over all others, and shall be decided without debate;

(16) Yeas and nays. Every member who is present when a question is called for by the Mayor, shall vote thereon, unless excused by the Council or unless he/she is directly or indirectly interested in the question, in which case he/she shall not vote. The yeas and the nays may be called for by any member, in which case the names of the members voting shall be recorded in the minutes.

(17) Division of question. If the question in debate contains several distinct propositions any member may have the same divided;

(18) When amendment and debate not in order. A motion for a previous question, to lay the previous question on the table, or to commit until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments and debates on the main question, and a motion to postpone a question indefinitely or adjourn it to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all amendments to the first question;

(19) Previous question. The previous question shall be as follows: "Shall the main question now be put?"

(20) Journal. The Council shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept and maintained by the City Clerk, which shall be available at all reasonable times for public inspection;

(21) Amendment of rules. These rules may be amended at any meeting of the City Council, by consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present; provided, however, any rule or rules amended shall not take effect as amended until the next regular meeting.  (Ord. 1999, Sec. 2-15 repealed and reenacted, eff. 3-15-16)


DIVISION 2.  IN GENERAL.
Section 2-16. Council officers.


The Council officers shall consist of the City Manager, City Attorney and Municipal Judge, who shall be appointed and serve in accordance with the provisions of the Home Rule Charter. (Ord. 1463, Sec 2-16 eff. 3/1/94)

Section 2-17. Councilmen - Salary. (Ord. 1832, Sec. 2-17 repealed and reenacted eff. 7/13/07)


(1) The salary of those Council members elected to terms commencing on January 2, 2008, shall be Five Hundred Fifty Dollars ($550.00) per month as compensation for services beginning on January 2, 2008.


(2) The salary of those Council members elected to terms commencing January 5, 2010, shall be Five Hundred Fifty Dollars ($550.00) per month as compensation for services, beginning on January 5, 2010.

Section 2-18.   Administrative officers; departmental and personnel charts. (Ord. 1597, Sec. 2-18 repealed and reenacted eff. 12/12/98)


(1) The administrative officers of the City shall consist of the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, if so appointed, City Clerk, Finance Director, Director of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Superintendent of Parks, Boulevards and Recreation, and the Superintendents of City Utilities.  Additional administrative officers may be designated or existing administrative officers may be deleted pursuant to Subsection (2) of this Section.  The administrative officers in the performance of their respective duties shall be subordinate to and under the sole direction of the City Manager and shall be appointed by him/her.


(2) Notwithstanding the other provisions in Chapter 2 of this Code, the City Manager with the consent of the City Council shall have the authority to reorganize the administration of the City or any portion thereof, changing the responsibilities and functions of any administrative department or administrative officer, eliminating or adding any administrative position or department to adapt to the changing needs of the City and its citizens, and changing financial circumstance of the City, and to provide for a more effective and efficient City government without the necessity of an ordinance, provided such administrative reorganization does not violate the City Charter or other applicable law.  This subsection and any administrative reorganization lawfully adopted pursuant to it shall supercede any provision of this Code in conflict with it.


(3) The department chart, as updated to reflect changes made to the administrative organization, shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk, and shall indicate the major services to be supplied by the City and the administrative and supervisory personnel required to administer the same.


ARTICLE 4.  THE CITY MANAGER.
Section 2-19. City Manager - Duties generally.


The duties of the City Manager shall be as set forth in the Home Rule Charter. (Ord. 1463, Sec. 2-19 eff 3/1/94)

Section 2-20. City Manager - Supervision and approval of public works.


The City Manager shall have the responsibility for the preparation of plans and specifications, estimating cost, advertising for bids, supervision and approval of any public work or special improvement.

Section 2-21. City Manager - Liaison among levels of government.


It shall be the duty of the City Manager to establish and maintain proper relationships with other levels of government and public service agencies and conduct all business negotiations between them and the City, the nature of which does not require the personal attention of the elective officers of the City.

Section 2-22. City Manager ex-officio member of all City agencies.


There shall be created, established and maintained the agencies, boards, commissions and bureaus set forth in this Chapter, exercising the duties and functions as more particularly set forth in the respective laws and ordinances constituting such agencies.  The City Manager shall be ex-officio member of all agencies, boards, commissions and bureaus.

Section 2-23. Assistant City Manager; appointment; duties.


The City Manager may appoint an Assistant City Manager who shall perform such functions and duties as shall be assigned to him/her and who shall perform the duties of City Manager in the absence or disability of the City Manager.

Section 2-24. City Manager Director of Budget; procedure for budget adoption. (Ord. 1474, Sec. 2-24 eff. 6/21/94)


(1)  The City Manager shall be the Director of the Budget.  He/she shall submit to the Council the proposed budget, and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents hereinafter provided.  For such purpose, not later than August 1 of each year, he/she, or an officer designated by him/her, shall obtain from the head of each office, department or agency, detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditures, and such other supporting data as he/she may request, together with an estimate of all capital projects pending or which such department head believes should be undertaken within the budget year, and, within the four (4) fiscal years thereafter.  In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates, and may revise such estimates as he/she may deem advisable.  He/she shall submit his/her budget and budget message to the City Council on or before the first Tuesday in October of each budget year.  The budget estimates as submitted by the City Manager shall contain the following:


(a)  A brief and concise budget summary showing the estimated receipts of each fund and the total for all funds.


(b)  A statement of the detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each fund, itemized for each department and activity by objects of expenditures showing parallel columns, the expenditures for the preceding year, the appropriation and expenditures for the current year and the recommendations of the City Manager as to the appropriations to be made for the ensuing year, including an appropriation for contingencies, and showing the increases or decreases in the recommended appropriations from the expenditures for the current year.  Expenditures for the current year shall be computed as the actual expenditures to and including the eighth (8th) month of the current fiscal year, plus the estimated expenditures for the next four (4) months.


(c)  Detailed statements of estimates of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than current taxes and borrowing, compared with the amounts received by the City from each of the same sources for the preceding year.  Receipts for the current year shall be computed as the actual receipts to and including the eighth (8th) month of the annual fiscal year plus the estimated receipts for the next four (4) months.


(d)  A statement of the estimated financial condition of each City fund reflecting the estimated surplus or deficit in each such fund, which shall also show the actual or estimated surpluses or deficits from prior years.


(e)  A statement of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City showing the amount required in the ensuing year for retirement of principal and interest on the debt, and for a sinking fund or funds for term bonds if such a fund or funds be required, and showing all proposed expenditures or capital projects to be undertaken or executed during the budget year.


(f)  A statement of outstanding delinquent taxes and special assessments which have been levied during the current and preceding fiscal years of the City and an estimate of the amount thereof which may reasonably be expected to be collected or realized during the next fiscal year.


(g)  An estimate of the amount of money proposed to be raised by taxation and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with the estimated income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.


(h)  Such other information as may be required by the council.


(2)  As a part of the budget message or as a separate report attached thereto, the City Manager shall also present a program of proposed capital projects for the ensuing year and the four (4) fiscal years thereafter.  Estimates of the cost of such projects shall be submitted together with suggested methods of financing the same.  In order to facilitate the carrying out of the capital budget plan, the City shall maintain a capital reserve fund to pay for capital projects.


(3)  The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the City Clerk, open to public inspection by anyone.  The City Manager shall cause sufficient copies of the budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons.  The Council, shall within fourteen (14) days after the submission of the budget estimates, set a time for public hearings on the annual budget and capital budget estimates.  These hearings may be held on the same day.  Council shall cause notice of such public hearings to be given by publication at least seven (7) days prior to the dates on which hearings are to be held.


(4)  At the times so advertised, the Council shall hold public hearings on the annual budget and capital budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard on any or all items and estimates in the proposed budgets.  After such hearings, the Council may insert any additional item or items, and make any increases or decreases, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also increase the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures.


(5)  The budget shall be adopted by ordinance by the favorable votes of at least a majority of the entire Council.  The budget shall be finally adopted by the last day of December of each year.  Should the budget ordinance not be finally adopted prior to the end of the fiscal year, ninety percent (90%) of the several amounts of the appropriation ordinance of the last previous year shall be deemed to be reappropriated for the several objects and purposes specified in the last appropriation ordinance.


(6)  Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year.  A copy of the budget, as formally adopted, shall be certified by the City Manager and City Clerk and filed in the office of the Director of Finance.  The budget, so certified, shall be printed, photocopied or otherwise reproduced, and sufficient copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and the use of interested persons and civic organizations.  From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.


Cross reference :  As to provisions pertaining to disbursement of money, see Sec. 2-2; as to department of Finance and Accounting, see Article 12 of this Chapter.

State law reference :  As to local government budget law, see C.R.S. 1973, Secs. 29-1-101 et seq.


ARTICLE 5.  THE CITY CLERK.
Section 2-25. City Clerk – Duties.

The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City archives and records and shall be clerk of the Council.  He/she shall attend all meetings of the City Council and keep the minutes of all the proceedings and record the same in the journal to be kept in his/her office.  He/she shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Council.  He/she shall be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same.  He/she shall also be custodian of all papers, titles, documents, contracts and agreements pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for.  He/she shall certify by his/her signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council, and perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by the City Manager.

Section 2-26. City Clerk to maintain office hours.


The City Clerk shall keep an office in City Hall and maintain and keep office hours therein from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. of each day, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.



ARTICLE 6.  THE CITY ATTORNEY.
Section 2-27. City Attorney – Duties; special counsel.


(1)  The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to and attorney for the City Council and all its members in matters relating to their official duties.  He/she shall give legal advice to any official or department of the City when requested by the Council or the City Manager, and shall file a copy of any written opinion so provided, with the City Clerk.  He/she shall represent the City in all cases in all courts, and before all legally constituted tribunals whenever the City is a party thereto, except as set forth in paragraph (2) of this Section. He/she shall prepare, or officially pass upon, all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing, in which the City is concerned, and shall certify, before execution, as to their legality and correctness of form.  He/she shall file in the office of the City Clerk the original copy of all franchises granted by the City, all contracts and agreements entered into by or on behalf of the City, and all contracts and agreements entered into by or in behalf of the City, and all papers constituting a part of the proceedings in all courts or legally constituted tribunals to which the City is a party, together with the proper data and information concerning the same.  He/she shall be charged with the responsibility of calling to the attention of the Council and the City Manager all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting the City.  He/she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code or by the Council.


(2)  Upon recommendation of the City Attorney, or upon its own motion, Council may retain special counsel to handle any matter to which the City is a party or in which the City has an interest, or to assist as co-counsel with the City Attorney herein.

Section 2-28. City Attorney - Prosecution of suits and execution of judgments.


It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute for the City all suits for the recovery of fines and penalties which may be brought in any court and to cause executions to be issued on judgments which may be recovered and attend to their prompt collection.  All money which may be received by him/her on account of the City shall be paid into the City treasury.

Section 2-29. City Attorney - Appeal of cases.


The City Attorney is authorized and empowered to take appeals in all cases, where, in his/her opinion, the interests of the City require it, and to prosecute and defend the same in all courts, and for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Section, he/she is authorized to make the necessary affidavits and to make and execute, in the name of the City, the necessary appeal or other bonds, signing the same as Attorney for the City.

Section 2-30. City Attorney - Right to be heard on motions before Council.


The City Attorney shall have the right to be heard on all questions of motion before the City Council amending, repealing or in any manner affecting any ordinance in force or to be enacted by the City Council.



ARTICLE 7.  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, BOULEVARDS AND RECREATION.
Section 2-31. Department of Parks, Boulevards and Recreation - Superintendent in charge. (Ord. 1548, Sec. 2-31 repealed and reenacted eff. 12/27/96)


(1)  There is established a Department of Parks, Boulevards and Recreation under the direction of a Parks, Boulevards and Recreation Superintendent Who shall have the following duties:


(a) Conditioning, maintaining and caring for all City parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, youth centers and other recreational facilities, and all boulevards in the City, including landscaping, planting and care of all lawns, shrubbery, trees and flowers and other measures to enhance the scenic beauty and aesthetic values of the City;


(b) Organize and direct a recreational program for all age groups, and initiate and maintain a program for use of all City recreational facilities;


(c) Prepare a departmental budget and reports, and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Manager or prescribed by ordinance adopted by the City Council


(2)  The City Council in its discretion or the City Manager with the approval of City Council may divide the Department of Parks, Boulevards and Recreation into separate Department of Parks and Boulevards, and Sports and Recreation, each with a superintendent or director in charge, with the Department of Sports and Recreation performing those duties set forth in Subsection (1)(b) above, without the necessity of adopting an ordinance, if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Trinidad, and if adequate funds are available to do so.


ARTICLE 8. LIBRARY DEPARTMENT.
Section 2-32. Library Department


There is established a Library Department within the City of Trinidad for purposes of administering and operating the City’s public library, with such administration and operation to be with the advice and recommendations of the Library Advisory Board.  Through the creation of a separate Library Department within the City of Trinidad, it is the express desire and intent of the City Council that the library remain, at all times, an independent learning facility available for the educational benefit of the public at large.  All personnel of the Library Department shall be personnel subject to the terms and provisions of personnel policies adopted and/or amended from time to time by the City Council.  The City Manager shall have sole and exclusive authority over all Library Department personnel. (Ord. 1548, Sec. 2-32, repealed and reenacted eff. 12/27/96)



ARTICLE 9.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
Section 2-33.   Department of Public Safety - Director in charge.


The City Manager may in his/her discretion establish a Department of Public Safety under the direction of a Safety Director.  Such department would consist of the Police Division and Fire Division.


DIVISION 1.  POLICE DIVISION.
Section 2-34.  Creation; composition.


There is hereby created a Police Department for the City of Trinidad which shall consist of one Chief of Police and as many police personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the City.

Section 2-35.  Departmental rules and regulations.


The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be established by the Department.

Section 2-36.  Appointment, powers and duties of the chief .


The City Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Police Department.  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to:


(1)   See that the ordinances of the City are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department obeyed, and to perform such duties as may be required by the City Manager.


(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof.


(3)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his/her duties, and receipts as may be required by the City Manager and keep the records of his/her office open to inspection by the City Manager at any time.


(4)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he/she will support the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, Constitution of the United States and ordinances of the City of Trinidad, and that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he/she is about to enter.

Section 2-37.  Duties of Police Officers.


All members of the police department shall have power and duties as follows:


(1)  They shall perform all duties required of police officers.


(2)  They shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, apprehend all disorderly persons in the City, and shall pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the state.


(3)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the City and shall see that the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State of Colorado are complied with.  They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in the violation in their presence of any provision of this Code or the law of the State.  Upon such arrest they shall forthwith convey such offenders before the proper office to be dealt with according to law; provided, that they may incarcerate any person whom they shall arrest at a late and unusual hour of the night until the following morning, and provided further that in the special cases relating to traffic offenses they may release an arrested person upon his/her written promise to appear in court.


(4)  They shall observe the condition of the streets, sidewalks and alleys of the City, and of any obstruction, nuisance, or impediments therein, and shall take necessary measures to cause the removal or the abatement of the same.

Section 2-38.  Oath.


Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, each police officer shall take and subscribe to an oath that he/she will support the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, the Constitution of the United States, and the ordinances of the City of Trinidad, and that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he/she is about to enter.

Section 2-39.  Uniforms.


Every police officer shall wear at all times while on duty, a uniform of the type and quality prescribed by the Department.

Section 2-40.  Duty of citizens to aid.


It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by any police officer, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the discharge of his/her duties.

Section 2-41.  Extraterritorial duty.


The Chief of Police may in his/her discretion, upon request of the County Sheriff, Colorado State Patrol or the Chief of Police or person exercising the functions thereof in any other jurisdiction, assign police officers under his/her control together with such equipment as he/she shall deem to be proper, to perform temporary duty in the requesting jurisdiction.

Section 2-42.  Reserve Police; appointment; powers.


The Police Chief may upon any emergency, riot, pestilence, invasion or at any time he/she shall deem it necessary for the peace, good order or health of the City, appoint Reserve Policemen for a specified time, not exceeding two (2) days, without the approval of the City Council.  He/she may also, with the approval of a majority of the City Council, appoint such number of Reserve Policemen as may be agreed upon by the City Council, to serve upon days of election, public celebration and holidays, and said Reserve Policemen shall have and possess all the powers and privileges of regular policemen during the time for which they may be appointed.


DIVISION 2.  FIRE DIVISION.
Section 2-43.  Fire Department - Chief in charge.


There shall be a Chief of the Fire Department who shall be charged with the responsibility of inaugurating a fire prevention, detection and extinguishing program which will use all possible means to guard against the occurrence of fire, and to protect the property and persons of the inhabitants of the City against damages and accidents resulting therefrom, and to furnish information to the public relative to fire hazards, illegal practices and dangerous situations, and to perform such other duties as will promote the public safety and welfare.

Section 2-43.1.  Firemen's pension.


Every officer, member or employee of the paid Fire Department of the City, retired under the laws of the State, shall be entitled to receive monthly pension plus such additional benefits as provided in Section 139-50-8, Chapter 364, 1969 Session Laws of Colorado, such benefits being one-half (1/2) of any increase in salary and additional pay based on length of service granted by the City during the period of retirement to the rank occupied by said officer, member or employee. (Ord. 1748, Sec. 2-43.1 eff. 4/16/04)

Section 2-43.2.  Additional benefits for firemen.


The City Council authorizes such additional benefits as provided in Section 139-50-8, Chapter 364 of the 1969 Session Laws of Colorado, and incorporates herein by reference the provision of said Section. (Ord. 1748, Sec. 2-43.2 eff. 4/16/04)



ARTICLE 10.  MUNICIPAL UTILITY DEPARTMENT.
Section 2-44. Utility Departments.


The Municipal Utility Departments shall consist of the Power and Light Department, the Natural Gas Department, the Sewer Department and the Water Department.  The Power and Light Superintendent shall be in charge of the Power and Light Department.  The Gas Superintendent shall be in charge of the Natural Gas Department.  The Wastewater Superintendent shall be in charge of the Sewer Department.  The Water Superintendent shall be in charge of the Water Department.  One person may be superintendent of two or more utility departments, in the discretion of the City Manager, who shall appoint the utility superintendents.

Section 2-45.  Power and Light Department.


The Superintendent of the Power and Light Department shall be charged with the responsibility for the production, transmission and distribution of electric light and power requirements of the homes, businesses and industries of the City, and such other responsibilities as may be required in connection therewith.

Section 2-46.  Water and Sewer Departments.


The Superintendent(s) of the Water and Sewer Departments shall be charged with the responsibility of supplying and maintaining a safe and adequate water supply for the homes, businesses and industries of the City, and for the proper and safe disposal of the sewage therefrom, and such other responsibilities as may be required in connection therewith.


ARTICLE 11.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
Section 2-47.   Department of Public Works - City Engineer as Director.


(1)  There is established a Department of Public Works, under the direction of the City Engineer.  The Department shall consist of the Street and Bridge Division, Inspection Division, General Maintenance Division and Engineer's Office.


(2)  It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to organize and direct a public works program; prepare departmental budgets and reports; plan and lay out work schedules; initiate and maintain a street maintenance, refuse disposal, and general maintenance program; establish equipment requirements and aid in its purchase; aid in preparing specifications for public works supplies and material; lay out the plans for the construction or repair of pavements, curbs, sidewalks, culverts, bridges, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers; propose detailed costs estimates of new projects; keep a record of departmental activities and perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the City Council and City Manager.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 2-48.)


State law references: As to public works contractor's bond, see C.R.S. 1973 Secs. 38-26-105 et seq.; as to public works labor, see Secs. 8-17-101 et seq.



DIVISION 1.  STREET AND BRIDGE DIVISION.
Section 2-48.   Street and Bridge Division - Supervisor in charge.


There shall be a Supervisor of the Street and Bridge Division who shall be charged with the responsibility of keeping the streets, sidewalks and bridges in a safe and traversable condition at all times.  In pursuance of these duties, he/she shall carry on operations in repairs, grading, graveling, flushing, sweeping, snow removal and other measures in proper season to insure adequate year round traffic conditions.  He/she shall also prepare, install and maintain all traffic signs, markers and safety devices for the instruction and protection of those who use the public thoroughfares.


DIVISION 2.  INSPECTION DIVISION.
Section 2-49.  Inspection Division - Building Inspector in charge.


There shall be a Building Inspector who shall be charged with the responsibility of inaugurating a program to inspect plans and specifications of buildings for compliance with structural, electrical and plumbing regulations, to inspect buildings during the process of construction and upon completion, to inspect premises for garbage and rubbish violations, to inspect sewer and septic tanks, to inspect and condemn unsafe and unsanitary buildings and to issue various permits.  The Inspector shall make necessary reports and furnish information to the public relative to building practices and regulations contained in the zoning ordinances, Building Code and State laws, and perform such other duties as will promote the public safety and welfare.


DIVISION 3.  GENERAL MAINTENANCE DIVISION.
Section 2-50.   General Maintenance Division - Supervisor in charge.


There shall be a Supervisor of the General Maintenance Division who shall be charged with the responsibility of maintaining all the City buildings, lands, and other properties in a clean sightly condition, including the heating, lighting, plumbing and ventilation of the buildings in use.  He/she shall also be charged with the operations of the City garage and for maintaining, lubricating, fueling, protecting and repairing all the City machinery, tools and automotive equipment.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 2-51.)


ARTICLE 12.  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING.
Section 2-51.  Department of Finance and Accounting - Finance Director in charge.


(1)  There is created a Department of Finance and Accounting under the direction of the Finance Director.


(2)  The functions of the department shall consist of Finance and Accounting, Purchases and Supplies, and Utility Billing and Receipts.

Section 2-52.  Duties of the Finance Director.


(1)  He/she shall be the custodian of all evidences of value belonging to or held in trust by the City.


He/she shall collect and receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the City, including license fees, taxes, assessments and other charges belonging and payable to the City, and shall in all cases give a receipt therefor.  He/she shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine.  He/she shall report the same in detail to the City Manager.  He/she shall apportion and collect special assessments, as are authorized and levied by the Council.


(2)  He/she shall keep books of account of the receipts and expenditures of the City.


(3)  He/she shall keep accurate detailed accounts of:


(a)  All taxes assessed by the City and all moneys due the City from any source.


(b)  Moneys received and the several sources from which received.


(c)  All funds of the City and disbursements made therefrom.


(4)  He/she shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the City except claims for unliquidated damages.  He/she shall not issue or sign any draft, check or warrant until he/she has verified the correctness of the account from which the same is issued; neither shall he/she allow the payment of any account unless the money has been appropriated therefor; nor shall he/she issue or sign any draft, check or warrant for any account against the City unless sufficient money is in the fund on which it is drawn.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of registered warrants in accordance with law.

(5)  At the close of the fiscal year, and at any time upon direction of the Council he/she shall examine and audit all books of account kept by any official, board or department; provided, however, that he/she shall examine all books of account of the Municipal Court at least once each month.  All books of accounts of the City shall be balanced at the end of each calendar month, and a report made thereon by the Finance Director to the City Manager.  The Finance Director, in the performance of duties relative to the City accounts, shall perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by the City Manager.

Section 2-53.  Finance Director's report to Council.


The Finance Director shall at the close of each fiscal year, and more often if requested by the City Council, make and deliver to the City Council a full and complete report of his/her transactions during the preceding year, stating the amount of moneys received and for what purpose received, and exhibiting all credits allowed by law and the ordinances of the City.

Section 2-54.  Description of bills and payroll; authorization by City Council action; utilization of signature facsimile.


(1)  Presentation of bills owing by the City shall be made in summarized form to City Council for consideration at any regular or special meeting.  Expenses shall be identified by account type, vendor name, check number, invoice number and purchase order number, if any, description of service or product purchased and dollar amount of each payment.  Payroll for City employees shall also be made on a departmental basis reflecting the time period and gross wage amounts and the appropriate department and account to what such payroll shall be charged.


(2)  Authorization of payment of bills or payroll shall require a motion, second and affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum present at such meetings of City Council.  Only upon City Council's action authorizing such payments, shall the signature of the Mayor, City Manager and City Clerk be affixed to such payments by check drawn upon the appropriate bank and account of the City.  The exceptions to this paragraph are as follows:


(a) The Finance Director, upon the City Manager’s consent, is authorized to issue payment for the monthly natural gas invoices, prior to their approval by City Council, when a savings incentive will be realized by the City of Trinidad.  Such payments will be identified within the semi-monthly reports for City Council approval; and


(b) The Finance Director, upon the City Manager’s consent, is authorized to pay invoices or bills prior to City Council approval if the approval at the next City Council meeting would result in a finance or late fee charge.  Such payments will be identified within the semi-monthly reports for City Council approval. (Ord. 1819, Sec. 2-54(2), repealed and reenacted eff. 9/26/06)

(3)  In the alternative, a signature facsimile bearing the signatures of the aforesaid City officials may be used in the process of endorsement of any check for payment of such bills or payroll so long as such bills or payroll were properly authorized for payment by City Council action.  The City Clerk and City Finance Director shall each have custody of one (1) key of a two-key system providing access to a security box containing the control key to the signature facsimile machine.  In the anticipated absence of either the City Clerk or the City Finance Director, said City Clerk or Finance Director shall surrender his/her key to the Mayor or City Manager for the time period of his/her absence.


(4)  A complete register shall be maintained reflecting each check endorsed manually or by use of a signature facsimile which register shall be audited annually or as frequently as determined by City Council, by an independent financial auditor.

Section 2-55.   Purchasing Agent – Duties.


Pursuant to rules and regulations approved by City Council, the Purchasing Agent shall purchase all supplies, materials and equipment required by any department, office or agency of the City government.  He/she shall have the following powers and duties:


(1)  To establish and enforce, with the approval of the City Manager and after consultation with the heads of the departments concerned, standard specifications for all supplies, materials and equipment required by the City government.


(2)  To prescribe the time of making requisitions for such supplies, materials and equipment, and the future period which said requisitions are to cover;


(3)  To inspect, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of such supplies, materials and equipment, and to cause tests to be made when necessary in order to determine the quality and conformance with specifications;

(4)  To supervise and control central storerooms to serve the several departments, offices or agencies;


(5)  To supervise the transfer of materials, supplies and equipment between departments or agencies, as needed, after consultation with the department or agency heads concerned;


(6)  To sell those surplus materials that are no longer of use to the City before their value is lost through obsolescence, deterioration or spoilage, and to sell all scrap metals, materials or equipment.

Section 2-56.  Withdrawal of supplies from City storerooms.


Withdrawals of materials and supplies from City storerooms shall be by requisition, which shall be approved by the department head and which shall be charged to the proper account, subject to such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Purchasing Agent.  It shall be the responsibility of the department head approving the withdrawal of the material from the City storeroom and the Finance Director to certify that there is to the credit of the office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, materials or equipment which are to be withdrawn from the storeroom.


ARTICLE 13.  AGENCIES, BOARDS, BUREAUS AND COMMISSIONS.
Section 2-57.  Library Advisory Board. (Ord. 1912, Sec. 2-57 repealed and reenacted eff. 3/11/11)

(1) Library Advisory Board Created .  There is created an advisory board, to be known as the Library Advisory Board (hereinafter, the “Board”), consisting of five (5) members who shall serve in advising the City concerning the operations of the City’s public library.


(2) Membership .  The City Council shall appoint five (5) members to the Board.  The terms of office of two (2) of the members so appointed shall expire on the first Monday in January, 2012; the terms of office of two (2) of the members so appointed shall expire on the first Monday in January, 2013; and the term of office of the other member so appointed shall expire on the first Monday in January, 2014.  Each year thereafter, there shall be appointed, in a similar fashion, a member or members to fill the expiring terms. The new term of each appointee appointed in 2012 and thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years.  Each member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed.  The City Council shall appoint a successor to fill any vacancy occurring in the Board’s membership and to serve for the balance of the unexpired term.


(3) Meetings; officers .  The Board shall hold one (1) regular meeting each month at such time and place as it may provide by resolution, and such special meetings as it may from time to time determine necessary, provided that all such meetings shall comply with the Colorado Sunshine Act as set forth in § 24-6-101 et seq ., C.R.S.  On an annual basis, the Board shall elect from its membership a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary.  A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum and all action by the Board shall be taken by a majority thereof and not otherwise.


(4) Powers and duties .  The Board shall have the following powers and duties:


(a)       In all cases, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this Subsection, the Board shall act as advisor to the Library Director, the City Manager, and the City Council on matters associated with the library.


(b)       In cooperation with the Library Director, the Board shall compile and edit comments, complaints, suggestions, and other information from the users of the library, as concerns the operation, management, and use of the library facility; with that information to be edited and forwarded to the City Manager for consideration.


(c)       The Board shall establish in writing, subject to approval by City Council, a formal procedure by which complaints or objections from citizens concerning the type of and/or content of materials available to the public at the library are received, reviewed, and given a fair and impartial hearing.  The Board shall have exclusive authority to determine whether such materials shall be retained.


(d)       The Board shall make a written annual report to the City Council, not later than July 31 st of each calendar year, in which the Board shall:


(i)        Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the library’s service to the community;


(ii)       Make recommendations on short- and long-term goals that will improve library service;


(iii)      Make prioritized recommendations on capital improvements needed to improve the library; and


(iv)      Recommend such other policies, programs, procedures, or guidelines which, if

adopted, would enhance the operation of the library.


(e)       If requested by the City Manager or Library Director, the Board may assist in the selection process for screening of applicants for various professional positions within the library staff.


(f)        If requested by the Library Director, the Board may assist the Library Director in establishing a fine schedule for overdue books and materials.


(g)       Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Board may establish the library’s hours of operation.


(5) Limitations of powers .


(a)       All budgetary powers, expenditures, and revenues shall be exclusively controlled by the City Council.  However, it is hereby recognized that the Board may, on a case-by-case basis, exercise control over non-monetary donations to the library and/or charitable organizations associated with the library.


(b)       All personnel matters shall be exclusively controlled by the City Manager.


(c)       Except as provided in Subsection (4) herein, all other actions of the Board are restricted to matters of an advisory nature, and in the manner of recommendation.


(6) Legal advisor .  The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Board and render all legal services required by the Board without additional compensation, unless such additional compensation is first authorized by the City Council.


(7) Liaison .  The City Council may, at its option, appoint from its membership a liaison to the Board to facilitate communications between the City Council and the Board.  A liaison shall not have a vote in any matters being considered by the Board.


(8) Library Personnel .  Except as provided in Subsection (4) herein, neither the Board nor any of its members shall direct or request that it take part in the employment or removal of library personnel.  Violation of this Subsection by a member of the Board shall constitute misconduct and may subject him or her to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1912, 3/11/11)

Section 2-58.  Establishment of a Park and Recreation Advisory Board.


(1)  There is established a Park and Recreation Advisory Board.


(2) The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be comprised of seven (7) members who meet the qualifications as set forth in Section 8.3 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Trinidad, to be appointed by the entire City Council.  The terms of the members of the Board shall be for four (4) years and shall be made to ensure the overlapping of terms.  The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Recording Secretary. (Ord 1749. Sec. 2-58(2) repealed and reenacted eff., 4/16/04)


(3) The Park and Recreation Advisory Boards shall develop a master plan and overview of all of the parks and recreational facilities owned by the City, and of the recreational programs which use the City’s parks and recreational facilities, and submit this plan to City Council on an annual basis by August 1 st of each year. (Ord. 1586, Sec. 2-58(3) repealed and reenacted eff. 5/2/98)


(4) The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall hold at least one meeting every three months.  The calling and holding of all meetings of the Board shall be in accordance with the Colorado Open Meetings Law, as currently set forth in Section 24-6-402 of the Colorado Revised Statutes as it pertains to local public bodies. (Ord. 1586, Sec. 2-58(4) eff. 5/2/98)


(5) Vacancies on the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term.  In the event that an unexpired term is for a period of less than six (6) months, the Council may appoint a replacement for the regular term plus the unexpired portion of the vacated term.  Members of board shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the Council.  Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive absences.  Absences by members of the board of three consecutive meetings or three meetings in a rolling six month period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal.  The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a letter so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised. (Ord. 1706, eff., 10-25-02, Ord 1749, Sec. 2-58(5) repealed and reenacted eff., 4-16-04)

Section 2-59.  Other agencies may be created by Council.


There shall be created such other agencies, boards, commissions and bureaus as the Council may, from time to time, deem necessary for the proper conduct of City functions.

Section 2-59.1.  Arts and Culture Advisory Commission. (Ord. 1750, Sec. 2-59.1 eff. 4/16/04)


(1) There is hereby created an Arts and Culture Advisory Commission to advise City Council on means and methods of coordination of artistic and cultural entities within the community to enhance tourism within the community.


(2) The Arts and Culture Advisory Commission shall be comprised of seven (7) members who meet the qualifications as set forth in Section 8.3 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Trinidad, to be appointed by the entire City Council.  The terms of the members of the Board shall be for a duration of four (4) years and shall be made to ensure the overlapping of terms.  The Commission shall choose a chair person and shall periodically meet for the purpose of developing recommendations to the Trinidad City Council on issues of arts and culture.  The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Recording Secretary.


(3) Funds can be expended to acquire public art for placement on public property within the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(4) Depending on the allocation of funds, the Arts and Culture Advisory Commission may fund a performance by a performer(s) from outside the Trinidad/Las Animas County geographical area.


(5) No funds shall be expended for a fund-raising event unless the amount of money provided by the Arts and Culture Advisory Commission for fund-raising purposes is refunded in total to the City promptly after the fund-raising event has taken place.  If fund-raising is used to defray the costs of acquiring public art, the funds raised for such purpose shall be kept in a separate account for that purpose, and an accounting shall be provided to the City Manager.


(6) Vacancies on the Arts and Culture Advisory Commission shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term.  In the event that an unexpired term is for a period of less than six (6) months, the Council may appoint a replacement for the regular term plus the unexpired portion of the vacated term.  Members of commission shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the Council.  Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive absences.  Absences of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six-month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal.


(7) The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a letter so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised.

Section 2-60.  Corazon de Trinidad Historic Main Street Board established. (repealed and re-enacted, Ord. 2072, eff. 3/1/19)



(1) There is established a Corazon de Trinidad Historic Main Street Board as an initiative of the Department of Local Affairs Colorado Main Street Program.


(2) The Corazon de Trinidad Historic Main Street Board shall be comprised of seven (7) members who meet the qualifications as set forth in Section 8.3 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Trinidad and who are owners or lessees of commercial property located in the City of Trinidad, or agents or representatives of such owners, to be appointed by the entire City Council. The terms of the members of the Board shall be for four (4) years and shall be made to ensure the overlapping of terms. The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Recording Secretary.


(3) The function of the Board shall be to advise City Council on matters relevant to the activation and revitalization of the downtown and other commercial areas of the City of Trinidad in accordance with the National and Colorado Main Street Programs.


(4) The Board shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations governing the conduct of its meetings and its other operations.


(5) At its organizational meeting each year, the Board shall select from its members a Chairperson, who shall preside over all meetings, a Vice-Chairperson, who shall preside in the absence of the Chairperson, and a Recording Secretary who shall be responsible for taking the minutes of each meeting and presenting them to the Board for adoption. Officer terms shall be for a period of one year.


(6) The City shall furnish administrative and legal services to the Board for the purpose of meeting all requirements to qualify for inclusion into the National and Colorado Main Street Programs. City staff shall be available to assist the Board in carrying out its duties.


(7) The Board shall meet on a monthly basis and shall report to the City Council at least once a year on its activities, accomplishments and recommendations.


(8) The Board shall have the authority to apply for and receive grants for the purpose of directly or indirectly revitalizing the downtown area or other commercial areas of the City.


(9) Vacancies of the Corazon de Trinidad Historic Main Street Board shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. In the event that an unexpired term is for a period of less than six (6) months, the Council may appoint a replacement for the regular term plus the unexpired portion of the vacated term. Members of Board shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the Council. Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive unexcused absences. Unexcused absences by members of the board of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six-month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal. The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a citizen interest form so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised.
 

Section 2-60.1. Space to Create Commons Oversight Board established.


(1) There is established a Space to Create Commons Oversight Board for the purpose of overseeing the planning, development and operation of the approximately 20,000 square foot Community Space in the Space to Create Block on Main Street in Trinidad.


(2) The Space to Create Commons Oversight Board (Board) shall be comprised of seven (7) to nine (9) members who meet the qualifications as set forth in Section 8.3 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Trinidad. All members will be appointed by the entire City Council. The initial board shall be the members of the Corazon de Trinidad Creative District Board. The terms of the members of the Board shall be for four (4) years with the exception of the initial board which will have staggered terms as defined in this paragraph. The Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Recording Secretary. The first order of business during the first meeting of the board will be dedicated to members selecting terms by lot with two members receiving one year terms, two members receiving two year terms, one or two members receiving three year terms, and one or two members receiving four year terms.


(3) The Board shall work with City staff to select and recommend contracting an architect for the renovation project, plan the renovation of the Community Space, work with City Staff to bid and select the contractor for the renovation project, oversee renovation activities, and when complete, oversee the management of Community Space including, but not limited to leases, events, and other activities. Oversee the City staff member’s activities as they relate to the Community Space.


(4) Work with Artspace and its onsite manager to ensure the Community Space is designed and operated to complement the live/work spaces and creatives in the building.


(5) The Board shall have the authority to promulgate bylaws governing the conduct of its meetings and its other operations.


(6) The City shall furnish administrative, staffing and legal services to assist the Board in carrying out its duties. City staff assigned to this project will serve as the primary point of contact with Artspace and its partners, the primary point of contact for commercial tenants, the primary point of contact with the local community and the media, and the development of a business plan for the operation of the Commercial Space under the direction of the Board.


(7) The Board shall meet on a regular basis and shall report to the City Council from time to time regarding its accomplishments and activities.


(8) Vacancies of the Space to Create Community Space Oversight Board shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. In the event that an unexpired term is for a period of less than six (6) months, the Council may appoint a replacement for the regular term plus the unexpired portion of the vacated term. Members of Board shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the City Council. Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive unexcused absences. Unexcused absences by members of the board of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six-month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal. The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a citizen interest form so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised. (Ord. 2082, Sec. 2-60.1, eff. 8/30/19)




ARTICLE 14.  RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS.
Section 2-61. Repealed – (Ord. 1748,  Sec. 2-61 amended by being renumbered as follows 60 is now 2-43.1 Firemen’s pension and 61 is now 2-43.2 Additional benefits for firemen. eff. 4/16/04)


ARTICLE 15.  CONFISCATED, STOLEN, LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.
Section 2-62.  Definitions.


The following words have the meanings hereinafter set forth:


(1) Custodian shall mean the Chief of Police, or his/her successor in office, or his/her designee, and his/her successor in office;


(2) Director shall mean the Chief of Police of the City.


(3) Owner shall mean a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than the City of Trinidad, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City;


(4) Unclaimed property shall mean any tangible or intangible property, other than a motor vehicle, including any income or increment derived therefrom less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than sixty (60) days after it became payable or distributable.  (Ord. 1424, Sec. 1, 06/23/92.)

Section 2-63.  Director deemed custodian.


Director, (Chief of Police) of the City is designated the official custodian of each and every article or object of personal property lost, stolen, confiscated, or abandoned within the City, which property is not in the lawful custody of any other person or Court.

Section 2-64.  Property held as evidence.


The custodian shall keep in his/her custody all articles of personal property seized or held as evidence for use in any pending or prospective trial, unless otherwise ordered by the Court, until final disposition of any pending charges, including appeals or the lapse of time for final appeal. Thereafter, unless ordered by the Court to the contrary, the custodian shall make disposition of such property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth.

Section 2-65.  Notification of owner.


The custodian shall examine any such property, and if the identity of the owner appears from such examination, or if the identity of the owner is readily available to the custodian from public records available to him/her, or otherwise known to him/her, the custodian shall notify the apparent owner by postcard, mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such apparent owner, describing the property and stating that the same is held by the custodian and may be sold or otherwise disposed of unless claimed within thirty days of mailing such notice.


Section 2-66.  Disposal of unclaimed property when.


If any such property remains unclaimed sixty days after the same is no longer required to be held in evidence pursuant to 2-64 above or sixty (60) days after the same has come into the possession of the custodian, or thirty (30) days after the mailing of any postcard notice provided for in 2-65 above whichever is the longer time, such property may be disposed of from time to time by the Director or his/her designee as hereinafter set forth:


(1)  Bicycles, tricycles or other articles made for use by children may be sold as hereinafter provided, or may, in the alternative, be given to poor or needy or institutionalized children as the Director may order, either directly or by making the same available for distribution through religious, charitable, civic or other organizations, or institutions; provided, however, that at least ten days prior to any such disposition, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, together with a description thereof, and the rightful owner may claim any such article within the period between final publication and donation, upon satisfactory proof of identity and ownership.


(2)  Any such property may be sold at public sale, provided that the custodian shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than ten days before such sale, a Notice setting forth a description of each article to be sold, the time, date and place of sale, and that any person who claims to be the owner of or claims any interest in any article so described may appear at the Police Department before the time and date set for sale, to reclaim the same upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identity and ownership of such article.


(3)  Such property which consists of jewelry, gems, watches, precious metals, or other property having a unique value, including firearms, or which in the judgment of the Director may bring a higher price if sold on sealed bids, may, in the discretion of the Director, be sold either at public sale as heretofore provided, or to the highest bidder, after solicitation of sealed bids from at least three regular dealers in the particular type of property.  No such sale shall be conducted until there shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City, a Notice setting forth a description of each article to be sold, the time, date and place of bid opening, and that any person who claims to be the owner of or claims any interest in any article so described may appear at the Police Department before the time and date set for the opening of such bids, to reclaim the same upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identity and ownership.  Any person desiring to submit a sealed bid may do so, and such bids and all bids may be rejected if deemed too low, or for any other reason.  Sales of firearms shall be made only to properly licensed dealers.


(4)  Intangible property shall become the sole property of the City and shall be credited to the City's General Fund to be used in the same manner as other funds in the General Fund.  (Ord. 1424, Sec. 2, 06/23/92.)

Section 2-67.  Reclaiming property.


All such property may be reclaimed by the lawful owner, upon proof of identity and ownership satisfactory to the Director, if claimed before donation or sale thereof.

Section 2-68.  Failure to claim property.


Failure to make claim of ownership within the time limits prescribed in this Ordinance, and before sale or donation of any article, shall forever bar the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the owner from making subsequent claim of ownership.

Section 2-69.  Advertisement.


If any property is advertised for sale or donation, the same may be destroyed, abandoned, donated, kept or used by the City, without further Notice, if claim of ownership is not made within the time limit prescribed in the second such Notice; and the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the owner shall thereafter be barred from making any claim of ownership to such property.


ARTICLE 16. OTHER PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
Section 2-70    Response-time requirement for emergency services personnel.


All employees of the City’s Police Department, and all employees of the City’s Fire Department, shall within six (6) months of commencement of employment, reside within a distance of City Hall whereby that employee could reach City Hall within 20 minutes under typical driving conditions.  All sworn Police Department employees and all employees of the Fire Department who commenced employment after May 31, 2002 (the original effective date of the Residency Requirements Ordinance #1688) shall be required to comply with this Ordinance.  Existing sworn Police personnel and all Fire Department personnel who reside outside the corporate limits of the City as of May 31, 2002 may not move to another location outside the City’s corporate limits which would result in them being incapable of achieving a 20-minute response time from their place of residence to City Hall.  Existing sworn Police personnel and all Fire Department personnel who reside within the City’s corporate limits as of May 31, 2002 shall not move to a location outside the City’s corporate limits after May 31, 2002 that would preclude them from responding within 20 minutes from their residence to City Hall. (Ord 1855, eff., 6/27/08)


ARTICLE 17. CODE OF CONDUCT AND CODE OF ETHICS
Section 2-71. Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics

(1)       Introduction, Scope and Framework.

This code is implemented to help ensure the highest levels of civility, transparency, integrity and ethical behavior in the conduct of governmental affairs and decision making by Trinidad board and commissions, and Trinidad board and commission members.   This is done not only to maintain the highest level of ethical standards amongst Trinidad Board and Commission members, but also to instill confidence in the public at large as to the deliberative processes and decision making associated with Trinidad Municipal affairs.      


This code shall apply to municipal board and commission members, in their official capacity as such, in their individual dealings and affairs having to do with their serving as a board or commission member, and in their own individual affairs and dealings, insofar as those dealings impact or effect their serving or being able to serve honorably and ethically as a board and/or a commission member.             


(2)       Definitions.

As used in this Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meaning:

(a)  Board or Commission:  means any appointive board, commission, committee or other appointed body established pursuant to State law, City ordinance, popular initiative, or a combination of any of the above.  This includes City Council.  This shall include all City boards or commissions entrusted with or empowered to carry out or conduct the business of the City of Trinidad.

(b)  Board or Commission Member:  a current voting or ex officio member, of an existing municipal board or commission, including City Council.   

(c)  Board of Ethics:  the Board of Ethics shall be made up of the Mayor and the then sitting members of City Council, but shall exist as the Board of Ethics after having been so convened.  The Board of Ethics shall conduct hearings, advisements, reading of charges, and imposition of punitive sanctions pertaining to matters associated with the filing of an ethics complaint. 

(d)  City Council:  the duly elected, then sitting and governing board for the City of Trinidad.  Members of the City Council, including the Mayor, shall comprise the Board of Ethics, and the Board of Ethics in this code may be used interchangeably with the term Trinidad City Council as the ethics board and the board entrusted with enforcing and carrying out the provisions of this code.  The sole distinction being that the Board of Ethics is the Trinidad City Council convened as the Board of Ethics.     

(e)  Complaint in Ethics:  a complaint against the Mayor or a member of City Council, or a board or commission member, alleging a violation of the Code of Conduct or the Ethics Code which shall, if not undertaken for the purposes of harassment, intimidation, or is not otherwise baseless or groundless, initiate a proceeding in ethics.

(f)  Criminal conviction:  a judgment, jury verdict, guilty plea, or other adjudication or determination of guilt in a court of law, which shall include all U.S. and Colorado District and County Courts, as well as Trinidad Municipal Court, or other Colorado municipal courts. 

(g)  Petitioner:  the person filing a complaint in ethics.

(h)  Respondent:  the person complained against in an ethics proceeding.    


(3)       Advisory Opinions. 

A member of City Council, or a board or commission member, or a board or commission collectively, may submit a request for an advisory opinion per this Ethics Code, the Code of Conduct, or any other legal question or matter to the City Attorney.  Likewise, any board or commission member, or board or commission collectively, can always ask a policy question of the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager or the City Attorney.  It should be made clear that legal advice can only be obtained from the City Attorney, but advice with respect to policy matters can and generally should be obtained from the other offices specified herein.  Advisory opinions with respect to legal or policy matters are encouraged, as it is far better to seek advice on such matters in advance of acting on a matter than to be wrong.  When seeking advice from the City Attorney, one should be mindful of the fact that legal advice cannot be given to a board or commission or a board or commission member that would in any way be adverse, against, or detrimental to the City as a whole.   


Advisory opinions from the City Attorney can and shall remain confidential provided that a request for an advisory opinion does not present a conflict with the City Attorney’s role as the legal advisor for the City.  Further, if the City Attorney cannot assure confidentiality of a matter, the board or commission member may withdraw their request for an advisory opinion and have the matter remain confidential.         


(4)       Initiating a Proceeding in Ethics:  The Complaint.

An ethics proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a verified complaint, filed only by a person with firsthand knowledge of the event or events complained of.  Said complaint must be predicated on conduct alleged to have arisen during the preceding 90-day period prior to the complaint having been filed.  A complaint in ethics must be based on an allegation of a violation of one or more provisions of this code.  A verified complaint initiating an ethics proceeding shall be filed with either the office of the City Clerk or the City Attorney.  If the ethics complaint is filed with the City Clerk’s Office, the City Clerk shall provide the City Attorney with a copy of the complaint as soon as practicable.  The City Attorney will likewise provide the City Clerk with a copy should the City Attorney be the one served.  City Council shall be notified within 72 business hours of the filing of a complaint in ethics against one or more of its members, but only after the Council person or persons complained against are first notified of the complaint having been filed against them. 


The board or commission member or members complained against shall thereafter be referred to in this Code as the Respondent(s).


(A)  Review for Factual and/or Legal Sufficiency of the Complaint by the City Attorney:


When a complaint has been filed against a member of City Council, or a member of a City board or commission, and prior to the complaint having been made public, the city attorney shall review the complaint for factual and/or legal sufficiency.  If it appears that the complaint is groundless, baseless, or undertaken for purposes of harassment, vindictiveness or other improper purpose, the city attorney may elect to dismiss the complaint. The city attorney will only dismiss a complaint if it meets the above criteria, and only after having notified the complaining party, the complained against board or commission member, the board or commission that the member sits on, City Council, and after notifying the city clerk and city manager of the existence of the complaint.  Further, a complaint shall not be dismissed by the city attorney if it is originated by a City Council member, or a member of a City board or commission, so as to avoid allegations of the city attorney taking sides in a dispute between Council or   commission members.  When dismissing a complaint, the city attorney will give the reasons for doing so, and provide the complaining party, the relevant board and commission members, City Council, and the City Clerk and City Manager a copy of the dismissal and the reasons therefore.    


            After the Respondent and City Council have been apprised of the filing of a complaint in ethics, the City Council shall, at its next regularly scheduled meeting greater than seven working days after the complaint in ethics is filed, convene as the Board of Ethics.  After the Board of Ethics has so convened, the Respondent shall be advised with respect to the complaint in ethics, and the complaint shall be formally presented to the Respondent and read by the presiding officer should the Respondent so desire.  The Respondent may waive reading of the complaint against him or her. 


After the complaint is read or said reading of the complaint is waived, the Respondent shall admit or deny, in whole or in part, the allegations in the Complaint.  If the allegations are denied, in whole or in part, the matter shall be set for hearing, outside of thirty days from the date the complaint is first read and/or presented to the Respondent.  The Respondent may, however, waive said time period, and have the matter set earlier than thirty days, on a regularly schedule City Council  meeting date, should scheduling so permit and should the Respondent so request. 

           

(B)  Rights of the Respondent at a Hearing Upon an Ethics Complaint Having Been Filed:


 Respondent shall have the following rights at the hearing on the complaint in ethics:

(i)  that he/she has the right to a public hearing before the Board of Ethics, and to be presumed free from wrongdoing unless the complaint is proven by a preponderance of the evidence against them.

(ii)  that he/she has the right to be represented by counsel.

(iii)  that he/she has the right to confront and cross examine the witnesses called against him or her.

(iv)  that he/she has the right to has the right to present evidence on their own behalf, including calling witnesses to testify on their behalf, and to compel the attendance of witnesses to testify on their behalf.

(v)  that he/she will have the right to a fair and impartial hearing on the ethics complaint, and that any members of the Board of Ethics that may have a conflict of interest or are a material fact witness or a complaining party shall recuse themselves from consideration of the ethics complaint at the hearing and from all other proceedings associated with the Complaint proceedings.


(C)  Conducting the Hearing:


The hearing will be presided over by the Mayor, or if the Mayor is a witness or a Respondent, the Mayor pro tem, or if the Mayor pro tem must also be recused, next most senior presiding Council Member remaining on the Board of Ethics, that hasn’t otherwise been disqualified or recused.   This shall be per the rules of succession for presiding officers for City Council.  If there is a tie with respect to seniority amongst the remaining Council Members, the presiding officer shall be determined alphabetically, that is, the person whose last name begins with a letter closest to the beginning of the alphabet.  The presiding officer shall conduct the hearing, rule on objections, admit exhibits, and otherwise preside over the hearing and all matters that arise during the hearing.  The members of the Board of Ethics shall be allowed to ask questions of the witnesses and the parties that give testimony. 


The Petitioner shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence, in attempting to prove the Complaint against the Respondent.  The Petitioner shall proceed first in presenting his or her case in chief, consisting of testimony, exhibits and other relevant, admissible evidence, followed by the Respondent and his/her case in chief and evidence of the same relevant nature.  The Petitioner shall be given a chance to rebut, with surrebutal being reserved for the Respondent. 


The Rules of Evidence shall be persuasive authority for the conduct of the hearing for the complaint in ethics.  


(D)  Subordinate Boards and Commissions: 


As of the date this Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct are being written and considered for adoption, there are nine boards and commissions associated with the City of Trinidad, excluding the Trinidad City Council.  This Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics shall apply to all boards and commissions of the City of Trinidad, and shall apply to the individual members making up those boards and commissions as well.  City Council shall have sole jurisdiction and authority for enforcing this Code with respect to alleged violations of this Code made against members of subordinate City boards or commissions.


A complaint against a board or commission member shall be initiated in the same manner set forth in this Code, and members of a board or commission shall be afforded the same due process rights and protections provided herein, should a complaint be filed against a board or commission member and not be dismissed by the City Attorney.  However, City Council, upon an affirmative vote by a majority of its sitting members, may summarily issue a letter of warning or reprimand against a board or commission member for a violation of this Code.


Should the member of the board or commission that received the summary warning or reprimand issued against them dispute said warning or reprimand, that member shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by City Council in response.


Members of boards or commissions should be mindful of the fact that they are participating in the business of the City, and as such, are representing the City in their capacity as a board or commission member.  Members of said boards or commissions should refrain from untoward and excessive criticism of the City of Trinidad, City Council, City employees, or City management. Members of subordinate City boards and commissions serve at the pleasure of City Council, and may be removed from their position for cause by a majority vote of City Council.     

           





Section 2-71.1 Rules of Ethics.  


 (1)      Confidentiality.

It is of the utmost importance that board and commission members keep confidential matters confidential, and hold inviolate information that is entrusted to them as part of their official duties. While many matters will be entrusted to board and commission members with the expectation and belief that the commission member will keep the matter confidential, there are certain matters that are, and must be, kept confidential under all circumstances.  Such confidential information includes, but is not limited to:

(a)  Executive Sessions:  it is required that all matters imparted or discussed during an executive session be kept confidential.  This requirement applies to all participants/attendees of an executive session, but especially so for the board and commission members present at the executive session.  Everything that is discussed, the viewpoints expressed, or the leanings of individual members all must be kept confidential.   This is especially so for legal advice given during executive sessions.  In such matters, the confidentiality considerations are heightened by attorney/client principles, as well as the requirements of the confidentiality of executive sessions.     The content of such executive session shall be kept confidential unless it is decided by a majority of City Council to make the matter public.  Board or commission members may lose insurance coverage for revealing matters that are discussed in executive session.

(b)  Legal Advice Given Outside of Executive Session: a member of a board or commission may receive legal advice in their capacity as a municipal official in several ways.  Legal advice given publicly or during a meeting clearly does not carry with it the need for confidentiality, nor can it be expected to be kept confidential.  A board or commission member must differentiate, however, between legal advice given previously in a confidential session/discussion and what has been discussed or revealed publicly.  


(c)  Quasi-Judicial Matters:  matters shared with board or commission members during, before, or after a quasi-judicial matter must absolutely remain confidential, so as to not jeopardize the integrity of the decision making process. 


(d)  Other Confidential Matters: There will be other matters entrusted to board and commission members in their official capacities as well, where the board member will be asked, or expected, to keep a matter or matters confidential.  Usually the person imparting the confidential information will declare the information confidential before the discussion regarding the information, but in some instances it should be a matter of common sense as to information that should be kept confidential.  


(2)       Lawful Compliance.

Board or commission members shall be expected and required to be law abiding during their tenure in office. Law abiding shall mean free of criminal convictions consisting of:  felonies, misdemeanors, class one traffic offenses, or criminal violations of the Trinidad municipal code. Criminal convictions shall not be taken to mean convictions for traffic offenses, lower than a class one traffic offense.    A conviction of a crime under state statute, federal statute, or the Trinidad Municipal Code or other municipal codes may result in the recommendation of the resignation of a member of City Council or a member of a subordinate board or commission, a vote of no confidence by a majority vote of City Council, or the removal of a member of a subordinate board or commission by a majority vote of City Council.


Board or commission members must also abide by and adhere to the Trinidad Municipal Charter, and adhere to the requirements and legal standards set forth therein.  Repeated violations of the Trinidad Municipal Charter by an individual City Council or board or commission member shall be treated as a violation of any other portion of the Code of Ethics or Code of Conduct.  If City Council, or a subordinate board or commission, shall inadvertently violate the Trinidad City Charter, it shall not be deemed a violation by any individual member or all of the Council or a subordinate board or commission.    

           

(3)       Conflicts of Interest.

Board and commission members have a fiduciary responsibility to their constituents and to the people that transact business and come before them to ensure that their decision making is independent, unbiased, and free from inappropriate outside influences.  Stated conversely, it is of paramount importance that board and commission members make decisions in the best interests of Trinidad, and not themselves, their friends or family members.  Conflicts of interest can and will arise for board and commission members in many ways.  It is vital to the decision making process that board and commission members exercise independent judgment free of conflicts of interest.  As always, if a board or commission member believes he or she has a conflict of interest, the best course of action is to err on the side of disclosure in revealing the potential or actual conflict, and seek the advice of staff, and the legal advice of the city attorney, in such a situation.


The standard that shall be adopted for purposes of this Code is that if there is a substantial appearance of impropriety, the appearance of self-dealing, or the likelihood of an impossibility or improbability of being able to exercise independent judgment, as determined by a reasonable person standard.  That is, would a reasonable person in the board or commission member’s position have their ability to fairly decide a matter compromised, impaired by, or would there be the appearance of impropriety, with respect to an outside matter that would make it less likely to render an impartial decision based entirely on the matter presented to the board or commission member?     


            (a)  A direct conflict of interest:  

            A direct conflict of interest shall involve or deal with any decision a board or commission member would be required to make that would affect said member’s business or financial interests; the business or financial interests of a competitor business; any matter that a board or commission member has a direct financial interest in; any matter that would similarly benefit a board or commission member’s family or family member, or their financial interests.  A direct conflict of interest reflects directly on one’s ability to fairly judge or consider a matter, and shall always be disqualifying for a board or commission member.   


(b)  An indirect or potential conflict of interest:

There will be times when a board or commission member will have a conflict of interest that is not a direct conflict, but could or would rise to the level of a conflict of interest nonetheless.  The appearance of impropriety standard would apply to such situations, and if it does appear that the board or commission member would have their ability to exercise independent and impartial judgement reasonably questioned, the member should move to recuse or disqualify him or herself.  


If a board or commission member suspects that they may have a conflict of interest, the member should not take any action with respect to the matter until the question of the conflict of interest can be resolved.  A board or commission member should raise or discuss the possibility of a conflict of interest as soon as they suspect that they may have a conflict.  Also, one should not attempt to influence one’s fellow members of a board or commission, or members of subordinate boards or commissions, on any matter within which they may have a conflict of interest.  This is especially true of matters of a quasi- judicial nature.

 

(4)       Communications.    

Board or Commission members must not run afoul of the Colorado Open Meetings Law, and discuss city business with more than one of their fellow board or commission members.  Communications between three board or commission members or more without a meeting having been properly noticed is a violation of the Colorado Open Meetings Law.  A board or commission member shall not initiate, encourage, or participate in or continue a meeting that one knows or reasonably should have known is in violation of the Colorado Open Meetings Law.  This shall include communication by way of email or text messaging, as a group email or group text to two or more members of a board or commission would constitute a meeting in contravention of the Colorado Open Meetings Law.  


(5)       Nepotism.

A board or commission member shall not attempt to benefit a family member by obtaining employment for them, having a city contract awarded to a family member, or otherwise acting in one’s official capacity to benefit, promote or elevate a family member.  These rules should apply to a board or commission member’s close friends as well, and again, the appearance of impropriety standard should apply to this situation as well.  All rules with respect to conflicts of interest apply to matters of nepotism, and it is a clear conflict and/or misuse of office to try to benefit or advance a family member in one’s capacity as a board or commission member. 


Nepotism rules and considerations should be applied and construed strictly to personnel matters, and a board or commission member should not try to interfere with or influence City management regarding the hiring/firing of a family member or friend, or if already part of the City work force, their work performance, disciplinary matters, or any investigative or disciplinary matter undertaken by the City regarding that friend or family member.


(6)       Emoluments/Gifts.

A board or commission member should not accept a gift with more than $50.00 in value.  A board or commission member should never accept services in lieu of or as a gift, if it relates to their being a board or commission member.    


Section 2-71.2 Violations / Sanctions.


            If a violation of this Ethics Code or the Code of Conduct is proven, the Ethics Board shall elect from the following options the punitive sanction to be imposed:


            ---to issue a public warning, verbal or written;

---to issue a public reprimand or censure, verbal or written;

            ---to issue a written public admonishment;

A public warning shall be the least severe form of punishment, followed by a public reprimand/censure, with the most severe form of punishment being a public admonishment.


As part of an adjudication of wrongdoing and the imposition of a punitive sanction being imposed per the above, the Board of Ethics may also recommend or strongly encourage the Respondent to attend remedial education or training given by an organization such as CIRSA or the Colorado Municipal League regarding the issues that gave rise to the complaint.         


            In considering what punishment to impose, the Board of Ethics shall consider:


            ---the severity of the misconduct;

            ---whether the member has been the subject of an ethics proceeding before,  especially as it concerns the conduct complained of, and whether the present proceeding is of the same subject matter as prior ethics complaints/proceedings;

            ---the facts giving rise to the complaint, the mitigation or aggravation of the alleged misconduct, and;

            ---whether the Council or board or commission member is likely to repeat the conduct that gave rise to the complaint. 


The Ethics Board does not have the authority to remove a member of City Council, but does have that authority with a member of a subordinate board or commission.  The Ethics Board shall not have the authority to levy a fine or impose other sanctions not specified by this Code.    


Section 2-71.3 Code of Conduct.


This Code of Conduct is designed to set forth and memorialize tenants of good conduct for board and commission members, in facilitating how such members deal with and interact with each other, the public, and staff in their municipal capacities.  This Code of Conduct should be used in conjunction with each individual board and commission member’s sense of decency, respect, kindness to others and desire to pursue excellence in municipal affairs.  By getting along with each other, members of boards or commissions are better able to focus on the business at hand, rather than focusing on individual personalities or issues with each other.                 

Board and Commission members shall:


            (a)  While serving a term as an elected or appointed member of a Trinidad board or commission, be mindful that you are always representing the City of Trinidad, even when not conducting official business. 

            (b)  Be respectful of everyone and everyone’s viewpoints, including your peers on your particular board or commission.  Treat them as you yourself would and do want to be treated;

            (c)  Don’t scold, admonish, belittle or diminish others in meetings, especially for taking a position you don’t agree with.  If you have a personal issue with one of your colleagues, address it respectfully after the meeting.  This applies to members of the public addressing or being involved in any proceeding with a board or commission;

            (d)  Similarly, don’t scold, berate, belittle, admonish, or publicly criticize staff during meetings.  Should you have an issue with a staff member during a meeting, feel free to talk to them after the meeting, or direct criticisms about staff to the City Manager if necessary; 

            (e)  Outside of meetings, act in furtherance of the stated policies or decisions of the City in general and your board or commission in particular, not in defiance of them.  Carry out the will of your particular board or commission if known, not your own individual agenda; 

            (f)   Honor and respect settled law and or policies of the City of Trinidad.  One can disagree with those laws and or policies personally, but shouldn’t criticize them or the policy makers for deciding what or how they decided;                

            (g)   Adhere to the Trinidad Code of Ethics;

(h)  Recognize the presiding officer and his or her authority while conducting the meeting;   

            (i)  Remember that one of the most important reflections of a City, and a City’s reputation, is how well meetings are conducted, especially that of City Council.  The better all of the constituent parts function, the better members get along, the more that gets accomplished in an efficient, expeditious yet thorough manner, the better the City looks to the outside world.  Respecting each other, the public and staff, being prepared, setting aside petty personal agendas, and focusing on the business at hand are all the hallmarks of a City board or commission to be proud of, and;.

            (j)  Recognize the presiding officer as such, and “points of order” and “points of personal privilege” notwithstanding, respecting his or her authority while conducting the meeting.    One can always address a matter with the presiding officer after the meeting, and express concerns or issues then.  The more a board or commission member maintains their composure and professionalism during something the individual board or commission member doesn’t agree with, the greater the likelihood of a rational result. 


This Code of Conduct, while setting forth standards of positive and favorable conduct, are primarily aspirational, and therefore recommendations, rather that mandatory principles as set forth in the Code of Ethics.  However, repeated violations of this Code of Conduct may, and shall be, enforceable as would an alleged violation of the Code of Ethics.  (Ord. 2075, Sec 2-71 repealed and re-enacted, eff. 5-17-19)
ARTICLE 18. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
Section 2-74.   Procedure of Bargaining Units – Elections and Recognition



1)  Definitions.

As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:

“Bargaining Unit”  means each of the three separate Bargaining Units recognized by the City and specified as follows:


Fire Department.

Includes all fire department positions excluding all supervisory positions.

Trinidad Police Department.

Includes all police department positions excluding all supervisory positions.

General Government.

Includes all general government positions not within the fire or police department, excluding all supervisory positions.


“Exclusive Bargaining Agent” means the employee organization recognized by the City as the exclusive bargaining agent in accordance with this Section.


“Majority” means fifty-one percent (51%) of the entire bargaining unit.


d)    “Supervisory position” means an Administrative employee of the City.


Recognition.


The City recognizes as the exclusive bargaining agent for each Bargaining Unit the employee organization which is a party to the Collective Bargaining Agreement with the City for that bargaining unit at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.


Petition for De-Certification .  The Petition form for de-certification must be signed by thirty percent (30%) of all members of the bargaining unit and an election shall be held within thirty (30) days of the filing of the Petition to determine whether a majority desire to continue to be represented by the current exclusive bargaining agent or by a new exclusive bargaining agent.  Petition forms may be obtained from the City Clerk and no more than one petition may be filed in each separate bargaining unit to decertify the exclusive bargaining agent for that bargaining unit in any Council-approved Agreement term.


The ballot question to decertify shall be:

“Should [insert name of bargaining agent] continue as the exclusive bargaining agent for [insert said bargaining unit]?

___YES

___NO”


Petition for Certification. The Petition form for certification of an exclusive bargaining agent must be signed by thirty percent (30%) of all members of the bargaining unit and an election shall be held within thirty (30) days of the filing of the Petition to determine whether a majority desire to be represented by the proposed exclusive bargaining agent, to not be represented by the proposed exclusive bargaining agent, or to have no representation. If no choice receives a majority of the votes cast, there will be a run-off election between the two choices receiving the greatest number of votes. Petition forms may be obtained from the City Clerk.


The ballot question to certify shall be:

“Should [insert proposed bargaining agent] become the exclusive bargaining agent for [insert said bargaining unit]?

___YES

___NO

___I elect to have no representation.”


Election Procedure. Any election for de-certification or certification of an exclusive bargaining unit shall be conducted by the City Clerk’s office. The election shall take place over the time span of one full business week (Monday through Friday, 8:00 am to 5:00 pm daily).


Notice.


Notice for de-certification shall be given and ballots shall be returned to the City Clerk and counted by individuals appointed by the Council. If a majority of the membership of the bargaining unit vote to support the de-certification petition, the council shall decertify the exclusive bargaining agent.


Notice for certification shall be given and ballots shall be returned to the City Clerk and counted by individuals appointed by the Council. If a majority of the membership of the bargaining unit vote to support the certification, the council shall certify the exclusive bargaining unit.

Appeal of Election. Should any member of the bargaining unit desire to appeal to the City Clerk the result of the election as to the validity of the ballots, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of the vote. Any resulting recount of ballots and the decision of whether to accept or deny the disputed ballots by the City Clerk shall be final.


6)  The City Manager in consultation with the City Clerk may adopt procedures to implement this Ordinance.   (Ord. 2011, Article 18 enacted, eff. 7-19-16)

CHAPTER 3.  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



Sections:


3-1                   License required.

3-2                   Application for new license - Contents. 

3-3                   Notice of hearing - Posting and publication. 

3-4                   Applicant's initial appearance before Council. 

3-5                   Investigation; report. 

3-6                   Decision of Council. 

3-7                   License renewal procedure. 

3-8                   Changes in ownership of outlet - Application.

3-9                   Transfer of location of license - Application.

3-10                 500-foot Requirement for hotel and restaurant licenses eliminated.

3-11                 Sale to certain persons prohibited. 

3-12                 Minors on licensed premises prohibited. 

3-13                 Hours of operation

3-14                 Unlawful conduct - Licensee.

3-15                 Suspension and revocation proceedings.

3-16                 Fine in lieu of suspension.

3-17                 Penalty for violations. 

3-18                 Prohibited acts; penalty. 

3-19                 Liquor license application fees.

3-20                 Fees for Special Events Permits. 

3-21                 Optional premises standards.

3-22                 Liquor Tasting Permits.
























CHAPTER 3.  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.


Section 3-1.    License required.

This Chapter shall be deemed to exercise the police powers of the City for the protection of the economic and social welfare, health and peace and morals of the people of this City. This Chapter is further intended to augment the requirements provided for in Article 3, Title 44, C.R.S. It shall further be deemed to impose other reasonable restrictions, terms and conditions which are placed upon licenses for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages which may be granted by the Trinidad City Council as the Local Licensing Authority for the City as provided in Articles 46 and 47 of Title 12, C.R.S.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer to sell, to dispense, or offer to dispense,


any malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, as defined by the Article 3, Title 44, C.R.S. (Ord. 2071, Sec 3-1, amended eff. 1/12/19.)


Section 3-2.    Application for new license - Contents.

An application for a new alcoholic liquor or fermented malt beverage license shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the State Liquor Licensing Authority. The application shall be complete in every material detail and shall be accompanied by the documents required to illustrate ownership interests, possession, the proposed licensed premises in detail, and moral character. Where a petition in support of a new license being issued has been circulated, said petition must be filed with the City Clerk no later than one calendar week preceding the public hearing date. The applicant is required to submit any other such information and documents as may be required by the City Clerk. (Ord. 2071, Sec. 3-2, amended eff. 1/12/19.)


Section 3-3.    Notice of hearing - Posting and publication.

Upon receipt of an application, except an application for renewal or for transfer of ownership, the local licensing authority shall schedule a public hearing upon the application not less than thirty (30) days from the date of the application and shall post and publish the public notice in conformance with §44-3-311, C.R.S. (Ord. 2071, Sec. 3-3, amended eff. 1/12/19.)


Section 3-4.    Applicant's initial appearance before Council.

(1)  The City Clerk shall cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the Council meeting to be held no less than four (4) nor more than thirty (30) days after the Clerk has received the application.


(2)  The applicant shall be in attendance at the Council meeting at which his/her application is presented to the Council.  This date of presentation to the Council shall be deemed the date of filing of the application for the purposes set forth in the statutes.


(3)  The Council shall tentatively set the boundaries of the neighborhood considered affected by the proposed location.  Until the Council sets the tentative boundaries, the neighborhood shall be deemed to be that area within a radius of one half (½) mile in all directions from the proposed outlet.


(4)  The applicant shall be instructed to, and shall cause to be prepared and shall furnish the Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing an official area map showing the location of the proposed outlet and the location and nature of all other licensed premises located therein.


(5)  The Council shall also set a date for public hearing which date shall not be less than thirty (30) days from the date of the Council meeting at which the application is presented.

Section 3-5.    Investigation; report.


(1)  After the initial appearance of the applicant before the Council, the Clerk shall commence the investigation of the applicant and the premises.  Such investigation shall include the following:


            (a)  Obtaining from the appropriate law enforcement agencies a criminal record on the applicant, including all partners, principals or stockholders holding over ten percent (10%) of the outstanding and issued capital stock, if applicable.


            (b)  Letters of reference shall be verified with the person or persons signing the letters, if the references are local.  If the references are not local, a letter from the Clerk shall be sent to the person or persons signing the reference letters requesting verification.


            (c) A report shall be prepared by the City Building Inspector identifying satisfaction of City

Building Codes at the proposed licensed location or a recitation of any deficiencies and the steps

required to correct such deficiencies.


            (d)  The maps and information submitted concerning the general character of the neighborhood and of the residents and working population of the neighborhood shall be verified.


            (e)  The premises proposed for a license shall be inspected to ensure that the plans and specifications submitted with the application are true representations of the premises.


(2)  All departments and administrative officials of the City shall cooperate fully with the Clerk in his/her investigation.  These departments and officials shall include, but are not limited to, the Planning and Zoning Department, the Fire Department, the Building Inspector, the Police Department, the City Attorney, and all other City departments and officials.


(3)  Any reports of the results of this investigation shall be delivered by the respective departments or officials to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing on the application.


(4)  Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of hearing on the application, the Clerk shall make known the findings based on the investigation in a written report to the applicant or principals of the organization applying for the license, and upon request to other interested parties, by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail.  (Ord. 1269, Sec. 2, 7/2/85.)


Section 3-6.    Decision of Council.

(1)  The decision of the City Council shall be rendered not more than thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing.


(2)  In formulating a decision, the City Council shall consider all of the facts and evidence adduced as a result of the investigation and hearing, including the reasonable requirements and desires of the inhabitants of the neighborhood affected; the number, type and availability of outlets located in or near the neighborhood under consideration; all other restrictions applicable to the area under consideration; whether the City, State or Federal Building Codes, Fire Codes or Electrical Codes are  being satisfied at the proposed licensed location; and any other pertinent matters affecting the  qualifications of the applicant to conduct the type of business proposed. (Ord. 1316, Sec. 1, 4/7/87.)


Section 3-7.    License renewal procedure. 

(1) A renewal application for a liquor or fermented malt beverage license shall be filed with the City Clerk on a form provided by the State Liquor Licensing Authority, no later than forty five (45) days before expiration of the existing license, together with the required fees.


(2) The City Clerk is authorized to administratively process and approve, conditionally approve or deny renewal applications, or refer the license renewal to the City Council who shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny renewal applications. At the time of submission, the Clerk shall be furnished with all items consistent with section 3-7(1) of this Article. The City Clerk shall not approve a renewal application unless credible evidence of good cause is presented.  The City Clerk may impose reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to obtain or ensure compliance with this Article, this Code and applicable state law.  The City Clerk shall provide written notice of his or her decision, including the reason(s) therefor, by first-class, postage-prepaid U.S. mail to the Applicant at the address shown in the application.  An Applicant whose renewal application is denied or conditionally approved may appeal the Clerk’s decision to the Authority by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the decision.  The Authority shall conduct a hearing on such appeal in accordance with Section 3-7(10) & 3-7(11) of this Article.


(3) If the City Clerk has referred the license renewal to City Council, the City Clerk shall cause the renewal application to be placed on the agenda of the Council meeting to be held no less than four (4) nor more than thirty (30) days after the Clerk has received the application.


(4) The applicant shall be in attendance at the Council meeting at which his/her renewal application is presented to the Council.


(5) At the time of presentation of the renewal application, the Council shall be furnished with the following:

            (a) A summary report submitted by the Police Department of the City of Trinidad identifying all calls responded to by the Police Department to the licensed location. Such summary report shall be accompanied by necessary subordinate information to provide a clear explanation of calls identified within the report.

            (b) Copies of all incident reports of police responses to incidents which are identified as having originated at or within the licensed establishment during the previous license period.

            (c) A report prepared by the City Building Inspector identifying satisfaction of City Building Codes or a recitation of deficiencies and the steps required to correct such deficiencies.

            (d) A report prepared by the Fire Department identifying satisfaction of City Fire Codes or a recitation of deficiencies and the steps required to correct such deficiencies.


(6) At the time the renewal application is presented to the City Council, the Council may approve the renewal application or postpone action on the application to a later date. In the event of a postponement, the Council shall not be required to hold a hearing on the application, except that no renewal application may be denied unless a renewal hearing has been held.

(7) The motion to set a hearing on the application must set forth the reason or reasons for holding a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises for a period of ten (10) days, and notice of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be by mail or personal service.


(8) The renewal hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided for hearings on applications for new liquor and fermented malt beverage licenses. At the hearing, evidence shall be taken to determine whether good cause exists to refuse to approve the renewal application. At the close of the hearing, the City Council may vote to approve or deny the renewal application, or may adjourn the hearing to a later date before rendering its decision. Where timely application for renewal has been made, the decision must be rendered prior to the date of expiration of the existing license, and in no event shall the hearing be adjourned for a period exceeding thirty (30) days.


(9) The City Council may refuse to renew a license for any of the following reasons: Failure to comply with City, State or Federal Building Codes, Fire Codes or Electrical Codes; any other reasons set forth under State law; and any other good cause reasons. (Ord. 2031, Sec. 3-7 repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/16/17)



Section 3-8.    Changes in ownership of outlet - Application.

(1)  All applicants for the issuance of a license by reason of transfer of possession of the licensing premises by operation of law or by the purchase and sale of the premises shall file an application on forms provided by the State Licensing Authority in duplicate with the City Clerk.


(2)  All such applications shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.


(3)  Notwithstanding Subsection (2) of this Section, the Council shall consider only the character of the applicant, and the applicant shall not be required to submit any other information except as it concerns his/her character and ability to conduct the business according to law.  (Ord. 973, Sec. 3.8 (c).)


(4)  All applications for change of ownership shall be set for hearing.  Notice of the hearing must be conspicuously posted on the licensed premises for a period of ten (10) days, and notice must be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall be required to be in attendance at the hearing. (Ord. 1269, Sec. 9, 7/2/85.)


(5)  Where the licensee is a corporation any transfer of ten (10%) percent or more of the capital stock of the corporation shall be reported to the City Clerk on forms provided by the State Licensing Authority not less than ten (10) days prior to such transfer.  (Ord. 973, Sec. 3.8(c).)


Section 3-9.    Transfer of location of license - Application.

(1)  Before the location of a license is changed, the licensee shall submit an application on forms provided by the State Licensing Authority in duplicate to the City Clerk for such change.  (Ord. 973, Sec. 3-8. (b).)


(2)  All applications for a change in the location of a license shall be filed with the Clerk and shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.  (Ord. 973, Sec. 3-8. (b).)


(3)  Notwithstanding Subsection (2) of this Section, the Council, when considering an application for a change in location of a license, shall only consider the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood to which the applicant seeks to change his/her location, and the desire of the adult inhabitants as evidenced by petitions, remonstrances or otherwise.  (Ord. 1269, Sec. 10, 7/2/85)


(4)  Notwithstanding Subsection (2) of this Section, all applications for change of location of a license shall be set for hearing.  The public hearing and notice requirements are the same as for a new license application.  The applicant shall be required to be in attendance at the hearing.  (Ord. 1269, Sec. 10, 7/2/85.)


(5)  The City Council shall not transfer such license in less than twenty (20) days after the application has been made and then only after no less than ten (10) days notice of the hearing has been given. (Ord. #973, Sec. 3-8.(b).)


Section 3-10.  500-foot requirement for hotel and restaurant licenses eliminated.

Pursuant to Section 12-47-138 (1) (d) (IV), Colorado Revised Statutes, the distance restriction imposed by Section 12-47-138 (1) (d) (I), Colorado Revised Statutes is eliminated for hotel and restaurant licenses only. (Ord. 1383, 08/07/90.) 


Section 3-11.  Sale to certain persons prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, to dispense or offer to dispense, or to deliver or offer to deliver, any malt, vinous spirituous liquors to any person who is an habitual drunkard, or to any person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or to an intoxicated person.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 3-9.)


Section 3-12.  Minors on licensed premises prohibited.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to be in, or remain on any premises for which a tavern license has been issued, during those hours in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served, except in those areas of the licensed premises in which the serving of alcoholic beverages is merely incidental to the serving of food, or other regular business of the establishment.


(2) Any person who violates Subsection (1) of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).


(3) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his/her agents, or employees to permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be in or remain on any premises for which a tavern license has been issued, during those hours in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served, except in those areas in which the serving of alcoholic beverages is merely incidental to the serving of food, or other regular business of the establishment.


(4) Any person who violates Subsection (3) of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00), or both. (, Ord. 2071, Sec. 3-12, amended eff. 1/12/19)

Section 3-13.  Hours of operation

Hours of operation for all types of licenses granted shall be those allowed pursuant to C.R.S., Article 3, Title 44, revised October 1, 2018 and as may be amended thereafter. (Ord. 2071, Sec. 3-13, repealed and re-enacted, eff. 1/12/19)


Section 3-14.  Unlawful conduct - Licensee.

(1)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee having authority to sell alcoholic beverages on his/her premises to permit any disturbances or disorderly acts or conduct to be committed by any person or group of persons on his/her premises.


(2)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee having authority to sell alcoholic beverages on his/her premises to in any manner encourage or participate in any disturbance or unlawful or disorderly act or conduct upon his/her premises, provided, however, such licensee may use such lawful means as may be proper to protect his/her person or property from damage or injury.


(3)  A licensee having authority to sell alcoholic beverages upon his/her premises shall immediately report to the police department any unlawful or disorderly act or conduct or any disturbance committed on his/her premises.


(4)  It shall not be a defense that the licensee was not personally present on his/her premises at the time such unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance took place.  However, an agent, servant or employee of the licensee shall not be liable hereunder when absent from the premises and not on duty.


(5)  It shall be unlawful for individuals employed as bartenders to consume alcoholic beverages during those times in which they are actually engaged in the serving of alcoholic beverages to customers on a licensed premises or for such individuals to engage in the serving of alcoholic beverages to customers on the licensed premises while in an intoxicated condition; or for a licensee having authority to sell alcoholic beverages on his/her premises to permit such conduct by his/her bartenders.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a licensed premises by a licensee, his/her agents or employees during such times in which they are not engaged in the serving of alcoholic beverages.


(6)  Any licensee, agent, servant or employee of a licensee who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the penalty provided for in Section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. 1269, Sec. 11, 7/2/85.)


Section 3-15.  Suspension and revocation proceedings.

(1)  The City Council shall have the power, upon its own motion or upon complaint to:


            (a)  Summarily suspend any license for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or


(b)  Upon notice to the licensee and hearing to suspend any license for a period not to exceed six (6) months or to revoke such license.


(2)  Suspension and revocation proceedings shall be commenced by the Council by issuing and causing to be served upon the licensee a notice of hearing and an order to show cause why his/her license should not be suspended or revoked whenever it shall appear to the Council that there is probable cause to believe that the licensee has violated any law, any rule or regulation of the State Licensing Authority, or any of the terms, conditions or provisions of the license issued by the Liquor Authority Board.


(3)  A hearing shall be held at a place and time designated by the Council on the day stated in the notice, or upon such other day as may be set for good cause shown.  Evidence in support of the charges shall be given first, followed by cross-examination of those testifying thereto.  The licensee, in person or by counsel, shall then be permitted to give evidence in defense, and in explanation and shall be allowed to give evidence and statements in mitigation of the charges, followed by cross-examination of those testifying thereto.  In the event the licensee is found to have committed the violation charged, or any other violation, evidence and statements in aggravation of the offense shall also be permitted, followed by cross-examination of those testifying thereto.


(4)  If the evidence presented at the hearing does not support the charges stated in the notice and order served upon the licensee, but standing alone establishes the guilt of the licensee of a violation of some other law, rule or regulation, the licensee shall be permitted to give evidence and statements in defense, explanation and mitigation if then prepared to do so.  If such evidence is not then available, but can be obtained by the licensee, the licensee shall state the substance thereof and upon his/her request the hearing may be recessed for not more than ten (10) days, and shall then continue under the same procedure as though no recess has occurred.


(5)  In the event the licensee is found not to have violated any law, rule or regulation, the charges against him/her shall be dismissed. If the licensee is found to have violated some law, rule or regulation, his/her license may be suspended or revoked.


(6)  Every licensee whose license has been suspended by the City Council shall, if ordered by the Council, post two (2) notices in conspicuous places, one (1) on the exterior and one (1) on the interior of his/her premises, for the duration of the suspension.  The notices shall be twenty-four inches (24") in length and fourteen inches (14") in width, and shall be in the following form:



NOTICE OF SUSPENSION


ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES ISSUED


For These Premises Have Been


Suspended by Order Of The


LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY


For Violation Of The


COLORADO BEER CODE - COLORADO LIQUOR CODE


(7)  The temporary suspension of a license without notice pending any prosecution, investigation or public hearing as provided for by the provisions of C.R.S. 12-47-110 and 12-46-107, 1973, shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.  (Ord. 973, Sec. 3.8(d).)


Section 3-16.  Fine in lieu of suspension.

(1)  (a)  Whenever a decision of the City Council suspending a retail license for fourteen days or less becomes final, whether by failure of the retail licensee to appeal the decision or by exhaustion of all appeals and judicial review, the retail licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition the City Council for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having his/her retail license suspended for all or part of the suspension period.  Upon receipt of the petition, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition if it is satisfied:


(I)    That the public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the retail licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes;


(II)   That the books and records of the retail licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of malt beverages which the retail licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 


(III)  That the retail licensee has not had his/her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two years immediately preceding the date of a motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the retail license.


            (b)  The fine shall be equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of the retail licensee's estimated gross revenues from sales of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages during the period of the proposed suspension; except that the fine shall not be less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).         


            (c)  Payment of any fine pursuant to this section shall be in the form of cash or in the form of a certified check or cashier's check payable to the City.


(2)  Upon payment of the fine pursuant to this section, the City Council shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension.  The City Council shall cause such monies to be paid into the City's general fund.


(3)  In connection with any petition pursuant to this Section, the authority of the City Council is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for it to complete its investigation and make its findings and if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed.


(4)  If the City Council does not make the findings required in paragraph (a) of Subsection (1) of this section and does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the City Council. (Ord. 1359, 7/18/89)


Section 3-17.  Penalty for violations.

The holder of any license for the sale of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors dispensing establishments found guilty of violating any of the ordinances of the City relating to the conduct of his/her place of business shall be subject to the penalty in Section 1-8 of this Code.  (Ord. 2071, Sec. 3-17, amended, eff. 1/12/19)


Section 3-18.  Prohibited acts; penalty. (Ord. 1678, Sec. 3-18, repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/28/01)


(1) Except as may be authorized through approval of a Fermented Malt Beverage license, Special Event Permit or Entertainment District Event Permit, no person shall carry or have in his/her possession any open bottles or containers containing fermented malt beverages, or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, nor shall any person consume any fermented malt beverages, or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors on any street, sidewalk, parking lot, alley or any public school or public park in the City, or in any automobile or other vehicle on a public way or public parking lot in the City, or as otherwise authorized in this Chapter. (Ord. 2071, Sec 3-18(1), repealed and re-enacted eff. 1/12/19)


(2) No person shall carry or have in his/her possession any open bottles or containers containing malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, nor shall any person drink any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor at the Trinidad Municipal Golf Course unless a valid liquor license that would allow for open consumption is in effect, and alcohol beverages are obtained solely from that licensee. (Ord. 2012, Sec 3-18(2), repealed and reenacted, eff. 7-29-16)


(3)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the POSSESSION OR consumption of fermented malt beverages at the UPPER FIELD BASEBALL FACILITY OF CENTRAL PARK DURING, OR IN ASSOCIATION WITH, NON-YOUTH BASEBALL GAMES, SUBJECT TO THE RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH IN § 12-47-901(1)(h)(I), C.R.S. (Ord. 1926, Secs 3 and 4, eff. 3/6/12)


(4) Every person convicted of any violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  (Ord. 1926, Secs 3 and 4, eff. 3/6/12)


Section 3-19.  Liquor license application fees. (Ord. 1835, Sec. 3-19 repealed and reenacted, eff. 7/27/07)


The application fees for license applications to cover actual and necessary expenses shall be as follows: 

    (1)  New license

                        (a)       On or after August 8, 2007, Six Hundred and Twenty-Five Dollars ($625.00) (Ord. 1835, 7-27-07)

(2)  Transfer of location or ownership

                        (a)       On or after August 8, 2007, Six Hundred and Twenty-Five Dollars ($625.00) (Ord. 1835, 7-27-07)

(3)  Renewal of license

                        (a)       On or after August 8, 2007, Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) (Ord. 1835, 7-27-0

(4)  Renewal of expired license - Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) (Ord. 1835, 7-27-07)


Section 3-20.  Fees for Special Events Permits.

Special events permit fees for organizations and political candidates qualifying under state law for the sale, by the drink only, of malt beverages or the sale, by the drink only, of malt, spirituous or vinous liquors shall be Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), to cover the expenses of investigation and issuance of the permit.  (Ord. 1273, Sec. 2, 8/6/85.)


Section 3-21.  Optional premises standards. (Ord. 1638, Sec. 3-21, eff. 8/11/00)


The following standards for the issuance of optional premises licenses and for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license are hereby adopted:  


(1) The standards adopted herein shall be considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the issuance of licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code for an optional premises license and for optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license.  These two types of licenses for optional premises shall be collectively referred to as “optional premises” in these standards unless otherwise provided.  


(2) Outdoor sports and recreational facility shall mean a golf course.  


(3) An optional premises may only be approved when that premises is located on or adjacent to an outdoor sports and recreational facility.  


(4) When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises an applicant shall submit the following information in addition to information required by the State licensing authority and this

Chapter of this Code:  


(a) A detailed diagram of the outdoor sports and recreational facility showing:  


(I)        The location of the outdoor sports and recreational facility;  


                        (II)       The location of all proposed optional premises;                                    

(III)      The proposed locations of any permanent, temporary or movable structure or vehicle located on an optional premises and used to dispense alcoholic beverages;  


                        (IV)     The seating, if any;  


                        (V)      Restroom facilities, if any;  


                        (VI)     Restrictions, if any, to access to the optional premises;  


                        (VII)    Location of secured area or areas for use in storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors for future use on the optional premises.  


(b) A written statement setting forth what will be done to secure the optional premises and

storage area or areas and the reason why the license should be granted; and  


            (c) Such other information as reasonably may be required to satisfy the City that control of the optional premises will be assured, and that the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and outdoor sports and recreational users will not be adversely affected should the license be issued.  


(5) If the applicant does not own the proposed optional premises, he/she shall submit to the City Clerk a written statement by the owner of the premises approving the application sought.  


(6) The applicant shall provide the City Clerk with evidence that the State Licensing Authority has approved the location proposed to be optional premises, as required by the Colorado Liquor Code.  


(7) An application for a new hotel and restaurant license with optional premises shall be processed in the same manner as any other hotel and restaurant license application.  If an application to use optional premises is filed in connection with an existing hotel and restaurant license, then the application shall be processed in the same manner as an application to modify or expand licensed premises.  No fee shall be required in connection with an application for an optional premises relating to an existing hotel and restaurant license.  


(8) No one licensee shall have more than four (4) optional premises within an outdoor sports and recreational facility.  


(9) No alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided notice to State and Local Liquor Licensing Authorities forty-eight (48) hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional premises.  Such notice must contain the specific day and hours on which the optional premises are to be used.  In this regard, there is no limitations on the number of days which a licensee may specify in each notice.  However, no notice may specify any date of use which is more than 180 days from the notice date.  


Section 13-22.            Liquor Tasting Permits. (Ord. 1911, Sec. 13-22 eff. 1/28/11)


(1)  Authorization.  The City Council is authorized to issue permits for alcoholic beverage tastings, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, § 12-47-101 et seq., C.R.S., to a retail liquor store licensee or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, subject to the provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code and this Section.  


(2)  Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a tasting without first having obtained a valid tastings permit as provided in this Section.   


(3)  Application Requirements.   


(a)       Application for a tastings permit shall be made to the Office of the City Clerk upon forms provided by the Office of the City Clerk.  Applications shall provide a schedule of dates and times that tastings will be held, and such other information as reasonably may be required to satisfy the City Council that tastings will be conducted without violations of the Colorado Liquor Code and without creating a public safety risk to the neighborhood.  Tasting schedules shall not exceed one (1) year in duration


(b)       An application to conduct a tasting or tastings must be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the first tasting included in the permit.  At the time of permit application, the Office of the City Clerk shall collect a permit application fee in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to cover expenses associated with investigation and issuance of the permit.  


(c)       Any additions or changes to a schedule submitted with an application must be submitted in writing to the Office of the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date(s) to be added or changed.  


(d)       No application for a tasting permit shall be approved if the licensee has had his or her license suspended or revoked, or had any suspension held in abeyance or stayed by payment of fine, during the six (6) month period immediately preceding the date of the application.  (Ord. 1911, Eff. 1-28-11)


(e)       Any of the disciplinary actions detailed in paragraph (d) of this subsection shall result in the cancellation of any scheduled tasting dates pending the City Council’s approval of a new application


(4)       Limitations on Tastings.  Tastings shall be conducted in conformance with §44-3-301 (10), C.R.S. (Ord. 2071, Sec 3-22 (4), amended eff. 1/12/19)

CHAPTER 4.  ANIMALS


ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Sections:


4-1                         Butchering unlawful and a nuisance; exception.

4-2                         Cruelty to animals.

4-2-1                      Tethering and penning.

4-3                         Keeping hogs in City.

4-4                         Fowl not to run at large.

4-5                         Animals not to run at large.

4-6                         Offensive pens - Nuisance.

4-7                         Keeping of noisy and odoriferous poultry.

4-8                         Penalty for violation.

4-9                         Release of impounded animal without authority.


ARTICLE 2.  IMPOUNDING.


4-10                       Animals running at large to be impounded.

4-11                       Disposition of impounded animals.

4-12                       Impoundment fees; claiming impounded animal.


ARTICLE 3.  DOGS AND CATS.


4-13                       Definitions.

4-14                       License and registration required; fees.

4-15                       Tag and Collar.

4-16                       Vaccination.

4-17                       Confinement of dogs and cats biting persons or suspected of being rabid; procedure.

4-18                       Dogs running at large.

4-19                       REPEALED

4-20                       Liability of owner.

4-21                       Impounding dogs.

4-22                       Notice to owner and period of impoundment.

4-23                       Disposition of impounded dogs and cats.

4-24                       Keeping of vicious dogs prohibited.

4-25                       Definitions.

4-26                       Unlawful conduct.

4-27                       Investigation and Complaints.

4-28                       Citations, Orders & Impoundment.

4-29                       Penalty-Fines.







CHAPTER 4.  ANIMALS



ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 4-1.          Butchering unlawful and a nuisance; exception.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or dress any cow, calf, sheep, hog or goat or to steam or render any tallow or lard, except for his/her own use or consumption.


(2)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 4-1.)


Section 4-2.          Cruelty to animals.


It shall be unlawful for any person to commit cruelty to animals.  A person commits cruelty to animals if, except as authorized by law, he/she knowingly over drives, overloads, overworks, tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance unnecessarily or cruelly beats, needlessly mutilates, needlessly kills, carries in or upon any vehicles in a cruel manner, or otherwise mistreats or neglects any animal, or causes or procures it to be done, or, having the charge and custody of any animal, fails to provide it with proper food, drink or protection from the weather or abandons it.  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances.

Section 4-2-1. Tethering and penning.

It is a violation for any owner or keeper of an animal to:


(1)       Keep any animal on a permanent tether that restricts movement of the tethered animal to an area less than one hundred forty-four square feet (144 sq. ft.), or less than a twelve foot (12’) radius at ground level.


(2)       Tether an animal with a choke-type collar or prong-type collar.


(3)       Keep any animal tethered for more than four (4) hours during a twenty-four (24) hour period or keep any animal confined in an outdoor pen, or cage without appropriate shelter for more than four (4) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period.


(4)       Keep any animal tethered without appropriate shelter at all times from the weather or for any duration when outdoor conditions (extreme heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or hail) pose an adverse risk to the health or safety of the animal.


(5)       Keep any animal tethered with a tether that has weights attached or that contains metal chain links more than one-quarter of an inch thick.


(6)       Provide an inappropriately sized shelter for the animal, defined as a structure with a roof and sufficient ventilation while providing the animal ability to maintain body heat in cold months and ability to dissipate heat in warm months.


(7)       Tether an animal so as to restrict its access to suitable and sufficient clean water and food.


(8)       Tether an animal in a manner that allows it to become entangled with the tether or other object that restricts its movement.


(9)       No person owning or keeping any animal shall subject the animal to cruel conditions or inhumane chaining or tethering at any time (ie., exposure to filth, taunting or harassing,  or subjecting it to dangerous conditions).


(10)     Cage, pen, or kennel an animal in a confinement with sidewalls less than four (4) feet nor provide a floor area less than 24 square feet per animal or a length less than three times the length of the animal, whichever is greater.


Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 2048, Sec. 4-2-1 enacted, eff. 12-01-17)


Section 4-3.          Keeping hogs in the City.


It shall be unlawful for any person to keep hogs or pigs within the City, except as follows.  Any person may keep what is commonly known as a Miniature Pot-Bellied Pig within any zone district within the City in which domestic animals are permitted.


Section 4-4.    Fowl not to run at large.


It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of chickens, ducks, geese or other like fowl to permit them at any time to run at large within the City.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 4-10.)


Section 4-5.    Animals not to run at large.


It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of horses, asses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats and swine to permit them to run at large within the City.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 4-13.)


Section 4-6.    Offensive pens - Nuisance.


It shall be unlawful for any person after notice to abate by a City officer, to permit or maintain any pen, place or premises in or upon which animals are kept so as to be offensive or any annoyance to any person.  All such places are declared to be a nuisance.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 4-6.)




Section 4-7.    Keeping of noisy and odoriferous poultry.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to knowingly keep, maintain or permit to remain, under his/her control, upon any lot or parcel of land in the City, any poultry or fowl, or any creature which by any persistent or pertinacious noise, sound or outcry, or by the creation or causing of offensive odors, shall disturb the peace or comfort of any neighborhood or interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property, and such conditions shall be abated upon the order of the City Manager or any other authorized official of the City.


Section 4-8.   Penalty for violation.


Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-8 of this Code.


Section 4-9.   Release of impounded animal without authority.


It shall be unlawful for any person to release or attempt to release any animal that has been impounded, from the custody of any animal control officer or police officer of the City, or from the City's Animal Shelter, transport vehicle or cages or traps set in the field, by opening the gate of the Animal Shelter, tearing down the fence or enclosure, or in any other manner without the consent of the person in charge thereof.



ARTICLE 2.  IMPOUNDING.


Section 4-10.        Animals running at large to be impounded; notice of sale.


Any animal control officer or police officer shall impound at the City's Animal Shelter any of the animals listed in Sections 4-4 or 4-5 of this Code, found running at large.  Where livestock is so impounded, the State Brand Inspector shall be notified as soon as practicable of such impoundment.



Section 4-11.  Disposition of impounded animals. (Ord. 1942, Sec. 4-11 repealed and reenacted, eff. 8/16/13)


(1)       Disposition of impounded livestock shall be in accordance with State statutes and regulations and at the direction of the State Brand Inspector.


(2)       The following procedures shall be followed with respect to the disposal of all other animals impounded pursuant to this Article:  No such animal shall be put up for adoption or humanely destroyed unless the ownership of such animal cannot be ascertained or at least ten (10) days have elapsed since written notice of impoundment has been issued to the owners.  Said notice shall advise the owner as to where the animal was impounded, the date and time of the impoundment, the location where the animal is being held, a description of the animal, that the animal must be claimed within ten (10) days of the issuance of the notice, and the impound fee and feeding costs to be paid prior to the release of the animal to the owner.  Said notice shall be either mailed by certified mail to the owner’s last known address or hand delivered to the owner.


Section 4-12.  Impoundment fees; claiming impounded animal. (Ord. 1942, Sec. 4-12 repealed and reenacted, eff. 8/16/13)



The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this Article shall be charged Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day for boarding and feeding of said animal.  If the owner of the impounded animal shall claim such animal within the ten (10) day period specified in the notice and pay all costs then accrued for impounding and feeding, plus a Fifteen Dollar ($15.00) redemption fee, the animal shall be released to the owner; except that in the case of livestock, the owner may be required by the State Brand Inspector to pay the cost of transporting the animal to the Animal Shelter before the animal is released.


ARTICLE 3.  DOGS AND CATS.


Section 4-13.        Definitions.


As used herein:


(1) Animal control Officer shall mean the person employed by the City Manager as being responsible for control of animals by the City.


(2) Dog shall mean an animal of canine species, male or female.


(3) Female dog shall mean a dog of the female sex.


(4) Male dog shall mean a dog of the male sex.


(5) Owner or owns means any person, firm, corporation, or organization owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having financial or property interest in, or having control or custody of a domestic animal (meaning any dog, cat, any animal kept as a household pet, or livestock), including a dangerous dog as the term is defined in Section 4-24 of this Article 3.  (Ord. 1942, Sec 4-13(5), amended eff. 8/16/13)


(6) Spayed female dog shall mean a dog of the female sex upon which surgery has been performed to make her incapable of reproduction.


(7) Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in bruising, muscle tears, or skin lacerations requiring, or that could require, professional medical treatment or any physical injury that requires or could require corrective or cosmetic surgery.  (Ord. 1942, Sec 4-13(7), eff. 8/16/13)



(8) Serious bodily injury means bodily injury which, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function or any part or organ of the body, or breaks or fractures. (Ord. 1942, Sec 4-13(8), eff. 8/16/13)



Section 4-14. License and registration required; fees.


(1) All dogs and/or cats kept, harbored and maintained by their owners, except as provided in Subsection (4) hereof, shall be licensed and registered annually, and each owner shall pay to Noah’s Ark Animal Welfare Association for its use and benefit, the following license fees:


(a) Female dogs (unspayed) and male dogs (Unneutered)------$15.00

(b) Male dogs (neutered) and female dogs (spayed)-------------$  8.00

(c) Cats------------------------------------------------------------------$ 3.00


(2) All license fees shall be due and payable not later than the 15th day of January of the ensuing year.


(3) The owner shall state at the time application is made for license, and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his/her name and address, and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog and/or cat owned or kept by him/her.

(4) All dogs and/or cats over four (4) months old shall be licensed as herein provided, within ten (10) days after their acquisition or purchase by the owner or after their arrival in the City. (Ord. 1978, Sec. 4-14, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6-2-15)


Section 4-15. Tag and collar.


(1) A license tag will be furnished by Noah’s Ark Animal Welfare Association upon receipt of the application, together with a certificate from a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary

medicine in this State, unless the same has been waived as provided in Section 4-16, that the dog and/or cat has a certificate of rabies vaccination that is valid until the end of the year, together with the payment of the required fee. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog and/or cat with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn.


(2) In case a dog and/or cat tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by Noah’s Ark Animal Welfare Association upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of a Two Dollars ($2.00) fee for the issuance of the duplicate tag.


(3) Dog and/or cat tags shall not be transferable from one dog and/or cat to another and no refund shall be made on any dog and/or cat license fee because of the death of the dog and/or cat or the owner leaving the City before the expiration of the license. (Ord. 1978, Sec. 4-15, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6-2-15)



Section 4-16. Vaccination.


(1) Each dog and/or cat shall be vaccinated against rabies and such vaccination shall be repeated as determined by the veterinarian administering the original vaccination. A certificate of vaccination shall be completed in duplicate by the veterinarian, and one (1) copy retained in the veterinarian's file. In the event the dog and/or cat is not of age to be properly vaccinated, the vaccination shall be waived therein and a certificate delivered to Noah’s Ark Animal Welfare Association.


(2) No dog and/or cat shall be licensed as provided in Section 4-14 unless a valid certificate of rabies vaccination accompanies the application for the license. (Ord. 1978, Sec. 4-16, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6-2-15)



Section 4-17.        Confinement of dogs and cats biting persons or suspected of being rabid; procedure.


(1)  The owner of any dog or cat that has bitten any person shall immediately advise the Supervising Animal Control Officer of this fact.  Any dog or cat that has bitten any person or has been exposed to another animal that is believed to have rabies, shall be immediately confined for a period of ten (10) days or for a longer period, at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.  No owner of any dog or cat that has bitten any person or that has been exposed to another animal that is believed to have rabies, shall destroy such animal before it can be properly confined by the Supervising Animal Control Officer.  Such confinement may be on the premises of the owner, if deemed appropriate in the discretion of the Supervising Animal Control Officer, but it must be within the City for a minimum of ten (10) days.  If the dog or cat is not confined on the premises, the confinement shall be at the City Animal Shelter or any veterinary hospital of the owner's choice.  Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner.  Stray dogs whose owners cannot be located shall be confined in the City Animal Shelter.


(2)  No person knowing or suspecting a dog or cat has rabies shall allow such dog or cat to be taken off his/her premises or beyond the limits of the City without the written permission of the Animal Control Officer.  Every owner, or other person upon ascertaining a dog or cat is rabid, shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or a police officer, who shall remove the dog or cat to the Animal Shelter for observation, or follow the procedure as provided for in Subsection (1) hereof.

Section 4-18. Dogs running at large.

No owner of any dog shall permit the same to run at large within the City, and all dogs shall be confined to the immediate premises of the owner, except when:

Restrained by a leash, chain, rope, cord or other device physically attached to the collar of the dog, which keeps the dog under the absolute control of the owner.

Within public places where it is clearly posted by the City that no leash is required (Ord. 1992, Sec. 4-18, repealed and reenacted, eff. 10/16/15)


Section 4-19.        REPEALED (Ord. 1992, eff. 10/16/15)


Section 4-20. Liability of owner. (Ord. 1732, Sec 4-20, amended eff. 8/29/03)


The owner of any dog shall comply with the following conditions:


(1)  Shall not allow said dog to obstruct or interfere with any pedestrian or motor vehicle upon any public way or the entrance of any building or upon any public area.


(2)  Shall keep and maintain said dog so that it does not, by noise or other activities, injure or interfere with the rights of other persons.


(3)  Shall commit no cruel or inhumane action against said dog.


(4)  Shall be liable and responsible for said dog at all times, whether it is on or off the owner's premises.


(5) Shall not feed stray/homeless dog(s) without taking full responsibility for the dog(s) by providing the dog(s) with continued humane treatment which shall include proper food, water, shelter, veterinarian care, rabies vaccination, and alter the dog(s).  Any person who feeds stray dogs must follow the regulations by the city in reference to licensing and vaccination.


(6) It is unlawful for any owner, or temporary owner, to own a pair of dogs of opposite sex of breeding age without one or both of the dogs being altered even if not allowed to roam at large, with the exception of licensed pet stores, veterinary clinics, and animal shelters.


(7) It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale or for free any dog(s) six (6) months of age or older without the dog(s) being altered, with the exception of pet stores with a current city business license and animal shelters.


(8) It is unlawful for any person to own any number of unaltered dogs of the opposite sex and of breeding age (six months of age or older), with the exception of pet stores with a current city business license and animal shelters.


(9) It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or other person in possession, of a dog to permit such dog to cause annoyance in any neighborhood in the City by damage any lawn, garden, shrubbery, or any property of another at any time, or in any other way to create a nuisance on the property of another, including the discharge of deposit of feces or other waste matter.


(10) It is unlawful for a person to own, keep or harbor more than three dogs in any residence or provided establishment within the city.  Within thirty (30) days of enactment of this ordinance, any dog owner who altered and licensed his or her dogs in excess of three can continue to own, keep or harbor such dogs in excess of three.  Any owner who has in excess of three dogs and complies with this sub-section cannot replace any dog in excess of three if any of the dogs dies or goes missing.  It is the owner’s responsibility to provide written documentation of the altering and licensing of the dogs.


Section 4-21.        Impounding dogs.


The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may catch and impound any dog that is not wearing a proper license as herein provided, that is not under proper control or confined to the owner's premises as herein provided or is in violation of any Section of this Article, in the Animal Shelter, provided, however, that if any dog cannot be safely caught and impounded because of its dangerous or vicious propensities, such dog may be slain.


Section 4-22.        Notice to owner and period of impounding. (Ord. 1762, Sec 4-22 amended eff. 10/15/04)


(1)  Any dog or cat which has been impounded at the Animal Shelter pursuant to this Article, and whose owner cannot be ascertained, shall be held at least seventy-two (72) hours before said dog or cat is disposed of by adoption or by humane destruction.  No notice shall be required prior to disposition of said dog or cat.


(2) Any dog or cat which has been impounded at the Animal Shelter pursuant to this Article, and whose owner is ascertained, shall not be disposed of by adoption or humane destruction until at least ten (10) days after notice of impoundment has been issued to the owner.  Said notice shall advise the owner as to where the dog or cat was impounded, the date and time of the impoundment, the location where the dog or cat is being held, a description of the dog or cat, that the dog or cat must be claimed within ten (10) days of the issuance of the notice, and the impoundment fee to be paid, and any vaccination and/or licensing requirements which must be met prior to the release of the dog or cat to the owner.   Said notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner at the owner’s last known address or hand delivered to the owner.   (Ord. 1942, Sec. 4-22(2) repealed and reenacted, eff. 8/16/13)


(3) Any dog that has been impounded at the Animal Shelter pursuant to a summons and complaint under Section 4-24 “Keeping of vicious dogs prohibited” shall be held indefinitely.  The dog may be released pending the resolution of the summons and complaint if the owner of the dog has shown cause to the Municipal Judge as to why the dog should be released.  The owner of the dog must establish to the Municipal Judge facts that show that the owner has taken steps to confine, restrain, or properly supervise the dog before the dog is released to the owner pending resolution of the summons and complaint.


Section 4-23.  Disposition of impounded dogs and cats. (Ord. 1523, Sec. 4-23 repealed and reenacted 12/5/95)


Any owner may redeem a dog or cat being held at the Animal Shelter upon proof of ownership thereof and the payment of a care and maintenance fee of Eight Dollars ($8.00) per day or any portion of a day that the dog or cat is maintained at the Animal Shelter or any greater fee that might be charged by a veterinarian for the impounding of such dog or cat, a tranquilization fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00) where it has been necessary to tranquilize such dog or cat in order to impound it, and payment of a redemption fee of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00), subject to the provisions of Section 4-17 and vaccination and/or licensing requirements.



Section 4-24.    Keeping of dangerous dogs prohibited. (Ord. 1924, Sec. 4-24 repealed and reenacted, eff. 8/16/13)


(1)       It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or possess a dangerous dog anywhere in the City.


(2)       As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:


(a)       Dangerous dog means any dog that:


(I)        Inflicts bodily or serious bodily injury upon, or causes the death of a person or domestic animal; or


(II)       Engages in or is trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in C.R.S. 18-9-204; or


(III)      Demonstrates tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may inflict bodily or serious bodily injury upon, or cause the death of any person or domestic animal.


(IV)     Such dog shall not be deemed to be a dangerous dog under the following circumstances where such dog has bitten or attacked under the following circumstances:


(a)       Any person engaged in the unlawful entry into or upon the dog owner’s property where such dog is kept;

(b)       Any person engaged in the unlawful entry upon the dog owner’s automobile or any vehicle wherein such dog is confined, or which is parked on the street immediately adjacent to the owner’s property;

(c)       Any person engaged in attacking or molesting another person;

(d)       Any person engaged in attempting to stop an altercation between such dog and another dog;

(e)       Any person who deliberately and wantonly provokes such dog to bite or attack such person, another person or another animal.  (Ord. 2035, Sec. 4-24(2)(a) repealed and reenacted, eff. 7/28/17)


Section 4-25.        Definitions (Ord. 1732, Sec 4-25 repealed and reenacted eff. 8/29/03)


Definitions. As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to each:


(1) “Altered” means any animal that has been sprayed or neutered.


(2)   “Animal Shelter” means an animal shelter operated by city or county government or a shelter operated by a non-profit organization organized to benefit animals.


(3) “Cat” means any commonly domesticated feline animal and includes both the male and female sex of the species.


(4) “Free Roaming” means any cat that is allowed or that is able to leave the property of the owner at will.


(5) “Nuisance Cat” means any cat that is allowed to free roam and is not altered.


(6) “Owner” means an adult person or custodian possessing, harboring, keeping, feeding or having control or custody of a cat or any person having any financial interest, right, or property in the cat and also includes any person who permits a cat(s) to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person.


(7) “Temporary Owner” means an adult person or custodian who harbors an animal with the knowledge and consent of the owner who is temporarily unable to care for the animal because of absence or indisposition.  An animal is deemed to be harbored if it is sheltered and/or fed.  A temporary owner shall be responsible for any violations of this chapter and shall pay fines or fees charged as a result of any violation.


Section 4-26.        Unlawful conduct.


(1) It is unlawful for the owner, or temporary owner, of any cat(s) to allow it to be a nuisance cat(s). (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(2) It is unlawful for any person to feed stray/homeless cat(s) without taking full responsibility for the cat(s) by providing the cat(s) with continued humane treatment which shall include proper food, water, shelter, veterinarian care, rabies vaccination, and alter the cat(s).  Any person who feeds stray cats must follow the regulations by the city in reference to licensing and vaccination. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(3) It is unlawful for any owner, or temporary owner, to own a pair of cats of opposite sex of breeding age without one or both of the cats being altered even if not allowed to free roam, with the exception of licensed pet stores, veterinary clinics, and animal shelters. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(4) It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale or for free any cat(s) six (6) months of age or older without the cat(s) being altered, with the exception of pet stores with a current city business license and animal shelters. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(5) It is unlawful for any person to own any number of unaltered cats of the opposite sex and of breeding age (six months of age or older), with the exception of pet stores with a current city business license and animal shelters. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(6) It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or other person in possession, of a cat to permit such cat to cause annoyance in any neighborhood in the City by any loud or unusual noise, or to damage any lawn, garden, shrubbery, or any property of another at any time, or in any other way to create a nuisance on the property of another, including the discharge or deposit of feces or other waste matter. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(7) It is unlawful for a person to own, keep or harbor more than three cats in any residence or provided establishment within the city.  Within thirty (30) days of enactment of this ordinance, any cat owner who altered and licensed his or her cats in excess of three can continue to own, keep or harbor such cats in excess of three.  Any owner who has in excess of three cats and complies with this sub-section cannot replace any cat in excess of three if any of the cats dies or goes missing.  It is the owner’s responsibility to provide written documentation of the altering and licensing of the cats. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(8) It is unlawful for a person to own, keep or harbor a cat or cats that have not been vaccinated pursuant to Section 4-16. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


Section 4-27         Investigation and Complaints.


(1) Upon receipt of a complaint by one or more persons alleging the presence of possible nuisance cat(s), the name of the owner of the animal, the address of the owner, and the description of the suspected cat(s), an animal control officer may investigate the complaint to determine if in fact the animal is a nuisance cat. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(2) Persons bothered by a nuisance cat may humanely trap the cat(s) on complainant’s property.  Complainants, after making prior arrangements, may deliver the cat to the animal control shelter.  Humane traps will be available at animal control for a nominal fee and/or refundable deposit.  Persons using animal control traps shall be provided instructions regarding use of humane traps. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


Section 4-28         Citations, Orders & Impoundment.


(1) The department shall order the owner of a nuisance cat or dog running at large or vicious dog to have the animal altered at the owner’s expense, or if there is only one cat owned, order the owner to prevent the cat from free roaming. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(2) A citation or order may be issued to the owner or temporary owner of a cat for failure to comply with any applicable section of this chapter. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)

(3) Animal control may set humane traps, resulting from complaints, where free roaming nuisance cat(s) are suspected and a secure trapping site is available. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(4) Free roaming cats may be impounded at the city-county animal control shelter. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


(5) Any unaltered cat that is impounded shall be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense and all impound fees, board fees, etc., paid before it can be reclaimed from the shelter.  Animal control shall transport the cat to owner’s choice of veterinarian clinics within the city limits. (Ord. 1732, eff., 8-29-03)


Section 4-29 Penalty for violation. (Ord. 1903, Sec. 4-29 repealed and reenacted, eff. 9/17/10)


(1)  An owner or temporary owner who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the assessment of a fine in accordance with this Section.  No jail time shall be imposed for any violation of this Article.


(2)  An owner or temporary owner who is found guilty of a first offense of any violation of this Article, other than a violation addressed in subsection (3) below, shall be fined an amount of not less than Thirty Dollars ($30.00), plus an increment of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each additional offense occurring within a twelve (12) month period.
(3)  An owner or temporary owner who fails to license and register his or her dog(s) or cat(s) or fails to vaccinate the dog(s) or cat(s) shall be fined an amount of Twenty Dollars ($20.00).

CHAPTER 5.  BUILDINGS .




ARTICLE 1.  IN GENERAL.


Sections:

5-1.                  International Building Code.

5-2.                  International Residential Code.

5-3.                  Reserved.

5-4.                  International Mechanical Code.

5-5.                  International Fuel Gas Code.

5-6.                  International Energy Conservation Code.

5-7.                  International Existing Building Code.

5-8.                  International Property Maintenance Code.

5-9.                  Reserved.


ARTICLE 2.  CONTRACTOR LICENSING.


5-10.                Definitions, Classifications and Fees.

5-11.                Testing.

5-12.                Insurance Requirements.

5-13.                Duties and Responsibilities of Licensee.

5-14.                Suspension and Revocation of License.

5-15.                Application Form and Contents.

5-16 – 5-22     Reserved.

ARTICLE 3.  NON-CONFORMANCE


5-23.                Reserved.


ARTICLE 4.  MEANS OF APPEAL


5-24.                Board of Building Code Appeals and Means of Appeal.

5-25.                Building Code Variance Petition.


ARTICLE 5.  VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION


5-25.                Title, purpose and intent.

5-26.                Definitions.

5-27.                Registration required.


5-28.                Fees.

5-29.                Property maintenance obligations.

5-30.                Inspections.

5-31.                Unlawful conduct; penalties; enforcement.

5-32.                Joint and several liability.

5-33 – 5-44.    Reserved.


ARTICLE 5.  ANTI-DILAPIDATION CODE


5-45.                Title, purpose and intent.

5-46.                Definitions.

5-47.                Dilapidated Buildings.

5-48.                Inspections.

5-49.                Dilapidated Buildings prohibited.

5-50.                Violations; penalties; enforcement.

5-51 – 5-54.    Reserved.


ARTICLE 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT


5-55.                Purpose.

5-56.                Definitions.

5-57.                Notice of violation.

5-58.                Administrative citations – general provisions.

5-59.                Issuance of administrative citation.

5-60.                Administrative citation – contents.

5-61. Appeals – notice and scheduling.

5-62.                Conduct of appeals hearings.

5-63. Failure to obey subpoena.

5-64.                Failure to attend administrative appeal.

5-65. Failure to comply with administrative enforcement order.

5-66. Penalties assessed.

5-67.                Failure to pay fines.























CHAPTER 5.  BUILDINGS

(Ord. 1949, Chapter 5, repealed and reenacted eff. 12/17/13)



ARTICLE 1.  IN GENERAL.

(Ord. 2061, Article 1, repealed and reenacted eff. 7-13-18)


Section 5-1.  International Building Code.


1. The International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapter C

(“Group U Agricultural Buildings”) and J ("Grading"), as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Building Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Building Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.


2. The following sections of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition ("IBC"), are hereby revised:


a. Amend IBC § 101.1, Title, as follows: insert "the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.


b. Amend IBC § 109.2, Schedule of permit fees, as follows: insert the following Schedule of Permit Fees:





Schedule of Permit Fees
Total Valuation:	Fee:
$1.00 to $500.00	$24.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00	$24.00 for the first $500.00; plus $3.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $40,000.00	$69.00 for the first $2,000.00; plus $11.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $40,000.00
$40,001.00 to $100,000.00	$487.00 for the first $40,000.00; plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00	$1,027.00 for the first $100,000.00; plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00	$3,827.00 for the first $500,000.00; plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 to $5,000,000.00	$6,327.00 for the first $1,000,000.00; plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $5,000,000.00
$5,000,001.00 and up	$18,327 for the first $5,000,000.00; plus $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
Other Inspections and Fees:

1.  Plan review fee..............................................................................................................................Sixty five percent (65%) of the permit fee

2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours.................................................................  $50.00 per hour* (Minimum charge – two hours)

3.  Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of IBC § 108.4............................................................................................  $50.00 per hour*

4.  Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated........................................................................................................  $50.00 per hour*

5.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to plans ……................................................…...….$50.00 per hour*

6.  For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both..... …….................................................…...……Actual Cost**

7.  For issuance of each temporary Certificate of Occupancy ..........................................................................................................$750.00***

8.  Administrative Fees.....................................................................................................................  $150.00 min  ($50.00 per hour thereafter)

NOTATION:  Reference City of Trinidad Municipal Code Chapter 7, Article 3, Section 7-23 regarding imposition of Use Tax.

*  Or the total hourly cost to the City, whichever is greatest.  The cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees involved.

**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.

***  $500.00 shall be refunded if a Certificate of Occupancy is issued prior to the expiration of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Amend IBC § 114.4, Violation penalties, to read: Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


d. Amend IBC § 115.3, Unlawful continuance, to read: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9  of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


f. Amend IBC § 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas, as follows: insert name of jurisdiction as "the City of Trinidad, Colorado," and insert "April 3, 1984," as the date of issuance.

Section 5-2.  International Residential Code.


(Buildable lot size shall be a minimum of 6,000 square feet. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area must remain open space. Accessory structures shall not exceed 75% of the primary structure footprint.)


1. The International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapters E, F, G, M, Q, R, and S, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Residential Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.


2. The following sections of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition ("IRC"), are hereby revised:


a. Amend IRC § RlOl.1, Title, as follows: insert "the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.


b. Amend IRC § RlO5.2, Permits, as follows:

(1) Accessory structures require a permit if greater than 120 square feet.

(2) Fences require a permit if over 5 foot 6 inches (5'6") high.


c. Amend IRC § R108.2, Schedule of permit fees, as follows: See Building Permit Fees Section 5-1(2)(b).


d. Amend IRC § Rl13.4, Violation penalties, to read: Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


e. Amend IRC § R114.2, Unlawful continuance, to read: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1,  Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


f. Amend IRC Table R301.2(1), Climatic and geographic design criteria, as follows: Insert the following table:

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA CITY OF TRINIDAD

GROUND

SNOW
LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC

DESIGN
CATEGORY

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMP

ICE BARIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED

FLOOD HAZARDS

AIR FREEZING INDEX

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP

Speed

(mph)

Topographic

effects

Special wind region

Windborne

debris zone

Weathering

Frost line

depth

Termite

30

115

NO

NO

NO

B

Severe

32”

Slight to moderate

6

Yes

Adopted 5/2/98 FIRM 080107 0001 B 4/3/84

597

51.7F

MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA

Elevation

Latitude

Winter heating

Summer cooling

Altitude correction factor

Indoor design temperature

Design temperature cooling

Heating temperature difference

5761

North 37

6

90

.82

70

75

64

Cooling temperature difference

Wind velocity heating

Wind velocity cooling

Coincident wet bulb

Daily range

Winter humidity

Summer humidity

--

15

15

7.5

60

H

30%

50%

--






TABLE R302.1

EXTERIOR WALLS

EXTERIOR WALL ELEMENT	MINIMUM FIRE RESISTANCE RATING	MINIMUM FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
Walls	(Fire-resistance rated)	1 hour with exposure from both sides	0 feet
(Not fire-resistance rated)	0 hours	5 feet 1
Projections	(Fire-resistance rated)	1 hour on the underside	2 feet
(Not fire-resistance rated)	0 hours	5 feet 2
Openings	Not allowed	Not applicable	< 3 feet
25% maximum of wall area	0 hours	>= 3 feet and < 5 feet
0 hours	>= 5 feet
Penetrations	All	Comply with IRC § R302.4	< 3 feet
None required	>= 3 feet

Fire separation distance of three (3) feet can be used if the exterior wall cladding and trim are of noncombustible material. (Refer to IRC § R202 for a definition of "noncombustible material.")

Fire separation distance of three (3) feet can be used if the soffit cladding and facia board are of noncombustible material. (Refer to IRC § R202 for a definition of "noncombustible material.")

Amend IRC § R313.2, One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems, to delete the exception and to read: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings.

Amend IRC R315.2.2, Alterations, repairs and additions, by deleting exception 2.

Amend IRC § R315.3, Location, to read:  Carbon monoxide alarms in dwelling units shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping area within 15’ of the bedroom doors. Where a fuel-burning appliance is located within a bedroom or its attached bathroom, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed within the bedroom.

Delete IRC Chapter 11, entitled "ENERGY EFFICIENCY," in its entirety. Please refer to the International Energy Conservation Code, adopted in Section 5-12 of this Article, for energy conservation requirements.

Amend IRC § P2603.5.1, Sewer depth, as follows: insert "thirty-two (32)" in two locations.

Section 5-3. Reserved.

Section 5-4. International Mechanical Code.


The International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix A ("Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs"), as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.

The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition ("IMC"), are hereby revised:

Amend IMC§ 101.1, Title, as follows: insert "the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.

Amend IMC § 106.5.2, Fee schedule, as follows: insert the following fee schedule:



Fee Schedule

Valuation of Work:

Permit Fee:

Not more than $2,000.00

$30.00

More than $2,000.00

$30.00 plus, $10.00 per each $1,000.00 valuation or fraction thereof.


c. Amend IMC§ 106.5.3, Fee refunds, as follows: insert "fifty percent (50%)" as the specified percentage in both locations.

d. Amend IMC§ 108.4, Violation penalties, to read: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

e. Amend IMC § 108.5, Stop work orders, to read: Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Two Thousand Six Hundred Fifty ($2,650.00).

f. Amend IMC § 109.1, Application for appeal, to read: Any person shall have the right to appeal an order, decision, or determination of the code official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed no later than fifteen (15) days following the issuance of the order, decision, or determination.

g. Delete IMC§§ 109.2 through 109.6, regarding membership and procedures of the board of appeals. 

Section 5-5. International Fuel Gas Code.


The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.

The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition ("IFGC"), are hereby revised:

Amend IFGC § 101.1, Title, as follows: insert ''the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.

Amend IFGC § 106.1, Where required, to read: An owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace an installation regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit for the work; provided, however, that such a permit shall only be required from the City of Trinidad, Colorado, if the City, rather than the State of Colorado, is performing fuel gas inspections.

Exception: Where appliance and equipment replacements and repairs are required to be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the City's next working business day.


Amend IFGC § 106.6.2 Fee schedule, to read: The fees for all fuel gas work requiring a permit from the City of Trinidad shall be as indicated in the following schedule:










Fee Schedule


Valuation of Work:


Permit Fee:


Not more than $2,000.00

$30.00

More than $2,000.00

$30.00 plus $10.00 per each $1,000.00 valuation or fraction thereof.



d. Amend IFGC § 106.6.3, Fee refunds, as follows: insert "fifty percent (50%)" as the specified percentage in both locations.

e. Amend IFGC § 108.4, Violation penalties, to read: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or erect, install, alter, or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

e. Amend IFGC § 108.5, Stop work orders, to read: Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

f. Amend IFGC § 109.1, Application for appeal, to read: Any person shall have the right to appeal an order, decision, or determination of the code official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed no later than fifteen (15) days following the issuance of the order, decision, or determination.

f. Delete IFGC §§ 109.2 through 109.6, regarding membership and procedures of the board of appeals

Section 5-6. International Energy Conservation Code.


The International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.

The following sections of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition ("IECC"), are hereby revised:
a. Amend IECC § C101.1 and R101.1, Title, as follows: insert ''the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.


Amend IECC § C108.4 and R108.4, Failure to comply, to read: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

Delete IECC § C103.6.3 Systems operation control in its entirety.

Amend IECC § C403.6.1 Variable air volume and multiple-zone systems, #1 and #2 to add “Direct Digital Control” in front of the letters DDC to read: …for systems with Direct Digital Control (DDC)…

Amend IECC § R402.4.1.2 Testing to read: The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour or 0.30 cubic feet per minute for multi-family units and not exceeding three air changes per hour or 0.24 cubic feet per minute for all other residential buildings and dwelling units.  (remainder of section unchanged).

    Delete IECC §§ C404.5 through C404.5.2.1 in their entirety. (Amended Ord. 2073, eff. 3/15/19)
Section 5-7. International Existing Building Code.


The International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Existing Building Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.

The following sections of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition ("IEBC"), are hereby revised:

Amend IEBC § 101.1, Title, as follows: insert "the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.

Amend IEBC § 113.4, Violation penalties, to read: Any person who violates a provision of this code or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who repairs, alters, or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

Amend IEBC § 114.3, Unlawful continuance, to read: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Two Thousand Six Hundred Fifty ($2,650.00).

Add to IEBC § 106.2.7. Phased Construction, (only for existing and historic structures within the city limits) as follows:
A Colorado licensed design professional will do an assessment of the building or structure which will be provided to the Building Official for review to ascertain the current type of construction and structural adequacy.

A building may use a Phased approach to a remodel project only if complete, stamped plans for that phase and the location/description of future phases including intended occupancy are provided to and approved by the Building Official prior to the initiation of the project.

                                         A Phased approach plan submittal shall include:


A code analysis of all intended occupancies based on construction type.

Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the code official. The work areas shall be shown along with fire protection system(s) shop drawings, means of egress, exterior wall envelope, interior environment and site plan.
Section 5-8. International Property Maintenance Code.


The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapter   A ("Boarding Standard"), as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.

The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition ("IPMC"), are hereby revised:

Amend IPMC § 101.1, Title, as follows: insert "the City of Trinidad, Colorado" where indicated.

Amend IPMC § 103.5, Fees, as follows: See Building Permit Fees, Section 5-1(2)(b).

Amend IPMC § 106.4, Violation penalties, to read: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

Amend IPMC § 111.1, Application for appeal, to read: Any person directly affected by an order, decision, or determination of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed no later than fifteen (15) days following the issuance of the order, decision, or determination.  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.

Delete IPMC §§ 111.2 through 111.6, regarding membership and procedures of   the board of appeals.

Amend IPMC § 112.4, Failure to comply, to read: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.

Amend IPMC § 302.4, Weeds, as follows: insert "six inches (6")."

Delete IPMC § 304.14, Insect screens.

Amend IPMC § 602.3, Heat supply, as follows: insert "January 1 to December 31."

j. Amend IPMC § 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, as follows: insert "January 1 to December 31."

Section 5-9  Reserved.



ARTICLE 2. CONTRACTOR LICENSING.

(Ord. 2061, Article 2, repealed and reenacted, eff. 7-13-18)


Section 5-10. Definitions, Classifications and Fees.


Contractor. Contractor means a person who supervises himself or herself, his or her firm or one (1) or more trades or subcontractors, and who for any compensation undertakes any landscaping, construction, addition, alteration, repair, demolition, removal or moving of any building, structure or utility. A resident homeowner shall not be required to obtain a contractor's license for any landscaping, construction, addition, alteration or repair of the homeowner's occupied residence, or a building or structure accessory to such residence, provided that the homeowner shall first assume all duties and responsibilities of a contractor as set forth in this Section by executing a form furnished by the Chief Building Official pursuant to which the homeowner agrees to assume all duties and responsibilities.

Classification.

Contractor A. A Contractor A license is authorized to work with respect to multi-unit residential buildings, office buildings, commercial buildings, tenant finish and alterations thereto and any work authorized under Contractor B, C and D licenses. This license covers all buildings including those three (3) stories and above. Requires proof of ICC testing.

Contractor B. A Contractor B license is authorized to work with respect to multi-unit residential buildings, office buildings, commercial buildings, tenant finish and alterations thereto and any work authorized under Contractor C and D licenses. This license covers buildings under three (3) stories or less. Requires proof of ICC testing.

Contractor C. A Contractor C license is authorized to work with respect to detached single-family residential buildings and alterations thereto and any work authorized under Contractor D license. Requires proof of ICC testing.

Contractor D. A Contractor D license is authorized to work as a single trade only i.e. home repair, siding, plastering, sheetrock installation, excavation, concrete work not in a city right-of-way. No proof of ICC testing required.

Plumbing and electrical contractors fall under D licensing but because they are required to hold a State Masters License are not required to show proof of ICC testing.

Mechanical and roofing contractors fall under D licensing but are required to show proof of lCC testing.

Fees.    Contractor's licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. The annual license fee shall be as stated below unless amended by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the licensing classifications as set forth above [Section 5-10(2)]. In addition to the license fee, there is a processing/application fee for new applicants in the amount of $50.00.

Contractor A - $150.00

Contractor B - $125.00

Contractor C - $100.00

Contractor D - $75.00 for each license type i.e. roofing and stucco= $150.00

License fees are not refundable. Any fee paid under this Section shall not be refunded for any reason after the license has been issued.

Violations. A fine as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado shall be assessed to the following:

Any contractor or subcontractor working within the City limits without possessing a current contractor's license; and

Any contractor or subcontractor performing work outside the scope of their license.
Section 5-11. Testing.


ICC Standardized Contractor Exams. Contractors are required to successfully pass the ICC Contractor Exam. The City and its citizens benefit from such commonality having a solid foundation upon which to issue licenses to practice.
Section 5-12. Insurance Requirements.
The City of Trinidad shall be identified as the Certificate Holder on insurance certificates. Every contractor shall procure workers' compensation coverage as required by state law and general liability coverage with the following minimum limits:

General Aggregate: two million dollars ($2.000.000.00).

Products, completed operations: two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).

Personal and advertising injury: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).

Each occurrence: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).

A license and permit bond shall be procured for a minimum of $5,000 for all new contractor licenses and any revoked/suspended licensees seeking reinstatement.

No contractor's license shall be issued under this Article until the following documents are filed with the Chief Building Official:

A statement or certificate signed by an authorized agent of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, stating that a policy or policies have been issued to the applicant with the coverage amounts set forth in Subsection (1) hereof, and including the effective date and expiration date of the policy or policies; and

A copy of an endorsement to the policy requiring at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the Chief Building Official of cancellation of the policy for any reason.

In the event of cancellation of any policy required by this Section, the Chief Building Official shall immediately suspend the contractor's license. The license shall be reinstated when the licensee furnishes the documentation required by Subsection (2) hereof.

Section 5-13. Duties and Responsibilities of Licensee.


All licensees under this Article shall be responsible for the following:
a. All work covered by his/her permit, whether or not such work is done directly by the licensee or his/her employees or subcontractors. Subcontractors are required to be licensed with the City even if they are working under the supervision of a licensed contractor.
b. All funds or property received by him/her for completion of a specific contract or for a specific purpose.
c. Obtaining any required permits for himself/herself and any subcontractor under his/her supervision.
d. Safety measures and equipment to protect workers and the public in compliance with applicable federal and state laws.
e. Compliance with all applicable City ordinances, codes and regulations.
f. Constructing any building or structure in substantial compliance with the drawings and specifications approved by the Chief Building Official and the permit issued for the same, unless changes are approved by the Chief Building Official.
g. Completing all work authorized by the permit unless there is good cause for the non-completion of the work.
h. Obtaining inspection services where required by this Chapter and any technical code.
i. Paying any fee assessed under the authority of this Code or any technical codes.
j. Obeying any order or notice issued pursuant to this Code or any technical code.
k. Presenting his/her license when requested by the Chief Building Official.
l. Maintaining workers' compensation and liability insurance as required by Section 5-12.

Section 5-14. Suspension and Revocation of License.


The Chief Building Official may suspend or revoke a license for any of the following:

Failure to comply with any of the duties and responsibilities set forth in Section 5-13.

Using a contractor's license to obtain a permit required under this code for any other person, corporation or legal entity.
Violating any provisions of the Trinidad Building Code including any codes which are adopted by reference.

Failure to reveal any material fact in the application for a contractor's license or permit, or the supplying of information which is untrue or misleading as to any material fact in the application for a contractor's license or permit.

Failure to obtain a proper permit for any work for which a permit is required.

Receipt of three (3) or more written verified complaints.

Upon written notification of revocation or suspension of license, the contractor shall have the right to appeal their case by oral and documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts to the Board of Building Code Appeals.

Suspension or revocation of a contractor's license shall not be construed to release the contractor from liabilities and obligations of completing his contract. During the period prior to the hearing before the Board of Building Code Appeals, the contractor shall not be allowed to submit an application for any other projects.


The Board of Building Code Appeals (BOBCA) may reinstate a license for any contractor whose license has been revoked, provided a majority of the BOBCA votes in favor of such reinstatement for such reason as the BOBCA may deem sufficient. In such case where the contractor's license has been revoked and the contractor is petitioning the BOBCA for reinstatement, the petitioner shall follow the established policies for requesting such hearing and pay all applicable fees.


Section 5-15. Application Form and Contents.


Along with the application, proof of ICC testing (if required) and certificates of insurance listing the City of Trinidad as the Certificate Holder must be provided. An application for a contractor's license shall be on a form furnished by the City, shall be filed with the Chief Building Official and shall contain the following information under oath:

Correct business contact information.
ICC testing information.
Insurance carrier information.
Business references.
Signature, title and date of person making oath of accuracy.
Sections 5-16 through 5-22 RESERVED. (Ord. 2061, eff. 7-13-18)



ARTICLE 3.  NON-CONFORMANCE


Section 5-23.  Reserved. (Ord. 1976, eff. 6-26-15)




ARTICLE 4.  MEANS OF APPEAL



Section 5-24.  Board of Building Code Appeals and Means of Appeal.


(1) Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within fifteen (15) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.  The Board may only rule on the code interpretation of the CBO.


(2) Membership of board. The board of appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction.  The board shall be appointed by the City Council, and shall serve staggered and overlapping two-year terms.


(a) Alternate Members. The City Council shall appoint two or more alternate members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member.  Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership.


(b) Chairperson. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.


(c) Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.


(d) Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board.  The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceed ings in the office of the chief administrative officer.


(e) Compensation of members. Compensation of members shall be determined by law.


(3) Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.


(4) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public.  The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.  A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the board membership.

(a) Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted.  The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.


(5) Postponed hearing. When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.


(6) Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members.

(a) Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded.  Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.


(b) Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.


(7) Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law.  Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.


(8) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board.



Section 5-25.  Building Code Variance Petition.


(1)       Before any variance from building codes may be granted, the Board of Building Code Appeals must find all of the following:

(a) Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other structures or buildings in the same zoning district.

(b) Conditions not created by applicant. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or negligence of the applicant.


(c) Special privilege not conferred. That granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied to other buildings or structures in the same zoning district.


(d) Hardship conditions exist. That literal interpretation of the provisions of the building code regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in this same zoning district under the terms of this ordinance and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant.

(e) Only minimum variance granted. That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building or structure.


(f) Not injurious to the public welfare. That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the building code and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public interest or welfare.


(g). Existing non-conforming uses of other property not the basis for approval. No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.


(2) Application and instructions below.

Fill in the owner’s information section.  It is important to have a complete address and phone number for communication between the applicant and the department.

Fill in the project description box.  Explain what the building project is i.e. basement alteration, second floor alteration, two-story addition, etc.

If there is an agent working for the owner and the agent is a better contact for information regarding the variance, fill in the agent information area.
Answer the three questions:

State the code and section number with a summary of what the code says.  Also, indicate what the non-conforming conditions for the project are i.e. COMM21.04 minimum stair width is 36 inches; i.e. will have 34 inches of stair width.
State why the rule cannot be satisfied i.e. not structurally feasible.
State what will be done to provide an equivalency to the code.  These items should be things that relate to the item the variance is being sought for and exceed code requirements.

Print the owner’s name on the line indicating to do so.

The owner of the property is required to sign where indicated.  If the project is for a one or two family home, the form is not required to be notarized.  If the project is for a commercial building, the form is required to be notarized.


BUILDING CODE VARIANCE PROCEDURE


Fill out the variance form.

If the variance is for a commercial building and is not for an accessibility code contact the fire department so they can fill out a fire department position statement.

Submit the application and a $250.00 fee for a residential variance or a $490.00 fee for a commercial variance to the building inspection department.  Also, where applicable, submit the fire department position statement.

A field inspector may visit the site to verify existing conditions and the completeness of the application.

If there have previously been at least 5 variances for the same item approved, the variance may be approved on precedence.  In this case the applicant will not have to attend a meeting of the Board of Building Code Appeals and will be notified by letter that the variance is approved.  The letter will be sent within 7 days after the scheduled meeting.

In all other cases the variance will be presented to the Board of Building Code Appeals at a monthly meeting.  Seven days before the meeting the supervisor will review the variance for approval to be put on the agenda.  Five days before the meeting the secretary will mail out the agenda to the Board of Building Code Appeals members and to the applicants.

When a variance is heard by the board the applicant or agent must attend the meeting to answer questions.

The meeting minutes will be mailed within 7 days after the meeting.



ARTICLE 5.  VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION

(Ord. 2029, Article 5, amended, eff. 6/16/17)


Section 5-26.    Title, purpose and intent.

(1) This Article shall be known as the City of Trinidad Vacant Property Registration Code, or the “Property Registration Code.”


(2) The purpose and intent of this Article is to mitigate the elevated risk inherently present in abandoned properties of becoming deteriorated, abandoned, unsecured, vandalized and hazardous, all to the detriment of the public health, safety and welfare.  When allowed to proliferate, vacant properties can cause widespread blight, provide havens for criminal activity and vagrancy, destroy the safety and quality of neighborhoods, pose unnecessary dangers to public safety professionals, deplete already-scarce City resources, diminish property values throughout the City, undermine the City’s ability to enforce its criminal laws, and interfere with the City’s duty to protect its citizens from unsafe and harmful conditions.  This Article is intended to provide an avenue for the City to be aware of vacant properties and to monitor, inspect and enforce certain minimum maintenance standards at such properties that pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.


Section 5-27.    Definitions.

For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.


Code Official means the Chief Building Official of the City of Trinidad or any other City official, employee or agent designated and authorized by the City Manager to enforce this Article.


Person in Control means and includes, in regards to any particular property, the person, persons, entity or entities holding title; a mortgagee or vendee; a receiver; an executor; a trustee; and any other person, entity, lessee or holder of a lesser estate or interest, who possesses the authority to enter the property.


Vacant Property means any property upon which any building remains unoccupied by authorized persons for any consecutive period of time greater than one year.


Vacant Property Registration Form means the form required by this Article to register a vacant property and available in the office of the City Clerk.


Section 5-28.  Registration required.

(1)  Each Vacant Property within the City must be registered with the City pursuant to this Section within thirty (30) days of becoming a Vacant Property under the terms of this Article.  It is the joint and several obligation of each Person in Control of such property to register the same and to annually renew such registration within thirty (30) days of the anniversary date of the original registration.  Renewal may consist of written notification, with no particular form required, when the renewal indicates that no information has changed since the last provided information.  Each renewal must include the applicable renewal fee.


(2)  Vacant Property Registration Forms shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall not accept any incomplete Form.  A complete Vacant Property Registration Form shall include, at a minimum, the following information, and be accompanied by the applicable registration fee:


(a)  Location and description of the Vacant Property, including the legal description, parcel identification number, physical address and mailing address, if not the same.


(b)  The full name, mailing address, residential address (if different than mailing address) and telephone number for each individual known by the applicant to be a Person in Control.


(c)  The full name, mailing address, business address (if different than mailing address) and telephone number of at least one (1) officer, manager or director, for each entity known by the applicant to be a Person in Control, if such Person in Control is a business entity.


(d)  If no Person in Control has a Colorado residential or business address within fifty (50) miles of the City of Trinidad, the full name, mailing address, residential or business address (if different than mailing address) and telephone number of the agent for the property who shall have either a residential or business Colorado address within fifty (50) miles of the City of Trinidad, along with a copy of the writing designating the agent to act as the representative of the applicant on issues related to the Vacant Property and for receipt of notices and legal service of process related to the Vacant Property.


(e)  An affirmation that the application is complete and contains no false, misleading or fraudulent statements.


(f)  An affirmation of and consent to the City’s right to enter the Vacant Property for purposes of inspection for compliance with this Article.


(3)  It is the duty of each Person in Control to ensure that all of the information provided in a Vacant Property Registration Form is kept up to date at all times, and it shall be unlawful for a Person in Control to fail to provide updated information to the City within ten (10) days after the date upon which any information provided is no longer accurate.  This obligation includes an obligation to notify the City in writing no later than ten (10) days after a Vacant Property is occupied in such a way that it no longer constitutes a Vacant Property under this Article.


Section 5-29. Fees.

(1)  Original registration fee.  Each original Vacant Property Registration Form filed for any particular property for any particular consecutive vacancy period shall be accompanied by a registration fee of five hundred dollars ($500).  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the original registration fee shall be waived if a Person in Control registers a Vacant Property promptly after such Person in Control becomes aware that the property qualifies as such under this Article and prior to the City’s issuance of any written notice that the property is required to be registered under this Article.


(2) Renewal registration fee.  Written notice of the required annual renewal of each registered Vacant Property shall be accompanied by a renewal registration fee of five hundred dollars ($500).  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the renewal registration fee shall be waived if a Person in Control files the required annual renewal no later than thirty (30) days after the anniversary date of original registration of the Vacant Property.


Section 5-30. Property maintenance obligations.

(1)  It is the duty and obligation of each Person in Control of a Vacant Property to maintain the same free from conditions that would identify the property as a long-term vacancy to a person with ordinary sensory abilities observing the Vacant Property from adjacent or nearby public property or right-of-way.  Such prohibited conditions include, but are not limited to:


(a)  Signs, placards and any other written indication that the property is foreclosed or vacant, excepting, however, any “do not occupy” order or other notice or order issued by the City of Trinidad or any other entity with jurisdiction over the Vacant Property in regards to fire, health and safety regulations, required or authorized to be posted on such property by law;


(b)  Excess debris and litter;


(c) Broken windows or doors that are not repaired within thirty (30) days.  For purposes of this subsection, “repaired” shall mean restored to its original condition or replaced with a window or door of approximately the same design.  A broken window or door may be covered with plywood or similar boarding material as an emergency measure, but in no event longer than thirty (30) days;


(d)  Handbills, circulars, newspapers, advertisements and similar materials deposited and remaining on the property for more than five (5) consecutive days;


(e)  Standing water other than what naturally occurs on the property as a result of its geographical condition and the weather, such as, but not limited to, standing water in swimming pools, yard decorations and or animal and bird feeders;


(f)  Any condition, or combination thereof, constituting a violation of the City of Trinidad Anti-Dilapidation Code or the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as adopted and amended by the City, pursuant to Section 5-14 of this Code.


(2)  The maintenance requirements of this Section are in addition to, and shall not be considered to conflict with or abrogate, any and all other property maintenance requirements set forth in the Trinidad Municipal Code and all codes adopted by reference thereby.  Nothing in this Section or Article shall operate to eliminate, mitigate or otherwise affect the legal responsibilities and duties of each Person in Control of Vacant Property to comply with each and every other law applicable to such property, including but not limited to building, housing, nuisance, and zoning regulations.


Section 5-31.  Inspections.

(1)  Pursuant to the consent to inspect granted by the Vacant Property Registration Form, the City may enter and inspect any registered Vacant Property for purposes of determining compliance with this Article by filing an inspection request with the Person in Control or with such other person designated as the authorized agent by the Vacant Property Registration Form, at least five (5) business days prior to the requested inspection date.


(2)  If the inspection request issued under subsection (1) above is denied or ignored, or if inspection of the Vacant Property on the inspection date is otherwise made impossible, the City may appear before the Municipal Court Judge and request, pursuant to Rule 241(b)(2) of the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, as amended, a court order authorizing the City to enter upon the premises for purposes of inspection for compliance with the requirements and limitations of this Article.  Upon possession of the court order, the City may enter the Vacant Property, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry.


(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deny entry to an authorized City employee, agent or official when such individual is acting pursuant to a court order that has been issued according to the procedure outlined in this section.


Section 5-32.  Unlawful conduct; penalties; enforcement.

(1)  It shall be unlawful for any Person in Control and any authorized agent designated by a Person in Control to fail to perform any act required by this Article, or to knowingly permit such failure.  Each and every day that a violation of this Article exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and any party committing such violation, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Section 1-8 of this Code.


(2)  A violation of the property maintenance obligations set forth under this Article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement by the City in accordance with Article 7 of Chapter 16 of this Code.


(3)  A violation of this Article may be prosecuted and enforced through the administrative enforcement process set forth under Article 6 of this Chapter 5.


(4)  Each and every remedy and enforcement avenue set forth under this Section is cumulative and distinct, and the City may enforce this Article through any and all legal avenues available to it.


Section 5-33.  Joint and several liability.

Each Person in Control and each authorized agent designated by a Person in Control is jointly and severally responsible and liable for violations of this Article, and all fees, costs and fines levied as a result of such violations, arising out of the Vacant Property over which such person has, or has been delegated, control.


Sections 5-34 – 5-45.  Reserved.








ARTICLE 5.  ANTI-DILAPIDATION CODE

(Ord. 2009, Article 5, enacted 5-17-16)



Section 5-45.  Title, purpose and intent.


(1) This Article shall be known as the City of Trinidad Anti-Dilapidation Code, or the “Anti-Dilapidation Code.”


(2) The purpose and intent of this Article is to prevent and remedy the deterioration and neglect of buildings that constitute threats to the public health, safety and welfare by presenting fire hazards, threatening to collapse and damage persons or property, attracting and harboring illicit and illegal activity, harboring vermin and feral animals, and providing an environment within which mold, dust and other contagion may thrive.  This Article is intended to define such buildings and provide an efficient and effective enforcement mechanism to remedy the same.


Section 5-46.  Definitions.


For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.


Code Official means the Chief Building Official of the City of Trinidad or any other City official, employee or agent designated and authorized by the City Manager to enforce this Article.


Dilapidated Building means any building or structure deemed to be dilapidated under the provisions of Section 5-47 of this Article.


Section 5-47. Dilapidated Buildings.


For purposes of this Article, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a Dilapidated Building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.


(1)  Exterior doors or windows are broken, missing, damaged, not secured, or are so poorly constructed or maintained as to be an ineffective barrier between the interior and exterior of the building.


(2)  Exterior walls, roofs, steps, chimneys, porches, decks, fences, fascia board, soffits, or other features are damaged, collapsed or collapsing, broken, or so deteriorated as to expose the interior of the building to weather.


(3)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.


(4) The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, covered in or littered with some other matter or substance, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.


(5) Any portion of the building has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by another cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.


(6) Any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become dislodged or detached, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property, including but not limited to gutters, rain guards, ornamental trim, ornamental design, ornamental decorations, cornice, and cobbling.

(7) The building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation; deterioration; decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or complete collapse.


(8)  The building or structure, or any part thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.


(9)  The building or structure has been so damaged by catastrophe or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor for unauthorized occupants; or so as to provide a venue for covert criminal activity.


(10) The building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of the City of Trinidad, or of any law or ordinance of the state, or City relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.


(11)  If intended for dwelling purposes, the structure or building, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the department of health or a City official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.


(12) The building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistant construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee or another City official, to be a fire hazard.


(13) The building or structure is condemned or posted as unsafe to occupy by the City or by any other entity with jurisdiction over the building or structure, or the same is vacant and unregistered as required by the Property Registration Code.


(14) The building, structure, or property is left in a state of incomplete construction, partial demolition, damaged by vandalism, fire, earthquake or other acts for a period of 6 months, excluding such time when work is in progress pursuant to a valid building or other construction permit.


(15) The building, structure, or property is consistently in violation of City of Trinidad Codes or Ordinances or require a disproportionate amount of City service or personnel response.


(16) The condition of the building, structure, or property is maintained and kept in such a way that it is likely to attract, contain, or harbor vermin, debris, trash, illegal dumping or other conditions which are a detriment to the public health, safety and welfare.


Section 5-48.  Inspections.


(1) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce this Article, or whenever a Code Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in or upon any property a Dilapidated Building, the Code Official shall first present proper credentials and shall request entry. If entry is refused, such officer shall give the owner or occupant, or if the owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, he or she shall leave at the property, a written notice, of intent to inspect not sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after the time specified in the notice of intention to inspect. The notice shall state that the owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by the Municipal Judge or a judge of any other court having jurisdiction.


(2) In addition to, or in lieu of, the procedures described in Subsection (1) above, a Code Official may appear before the Municipal Judge and, upon presentation of an affidavit showing probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling such officer or other authorized representatives of the City to enter the property described in said warrant. For purposes of this Section, probable cause exists when the supporting affidavit alleges sufficient facts to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that a Dilapidated Building, as defined by this Article, is located or maintained on the described property.  In determining whether probable cause for issuance of a search warrant exists, the Municipal Court Judge shall consider the totality of the facts and circumstances known to the affiant, and due consideration shall be given to the affiant's experience and training in evaluating the existence or probable existence of violations of building code requirements and health, safety and welfare regulations.  In determining whether probable cause exists for issuance of the search warrant, the Municipal Court Judge shall make a practical, commonsense decision as to whether, given the totality of the circumstances set forth in the affidavit, there is a fair probability that conditions constituting a Dilapidated Building will be found in a particular place.


(3) After obtaining a search warrant, the Code Official and any other City representative authorized by such warrant may enter the property described therein using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of said property to resist reasonable force used by any authorized agent acting pursuant to this Article.


(4)  Whenever an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Article, a Code Official, upon a presentation of proper credentials or identification in the case of occupied property, or possession of said credentials in the case of unoccupied property, may enter into any property within the jurisdiction of the City. In said emergency situation, such officer may use such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry into said property. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the property to deny entry to the Code Official or to resist reasonable force used by such officer acting pursuant to this Subsection.


Section 5-49. Dilapidated Buildings prohibited.


(1) It is unlawful for any person to own, occupy or have under his or her control any property with a Dilapidated Building located thereon.


(2)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to construct, maintain or otherwise keep a Dilapidated Building within the City, or to knowingly permit, aid, abet or facilitate any of the foregoing.


Section 5-50.  Violations; penalties; enforcement.


(1)  Whenever in any section of this Article the doing of any act is required, prohibited or declared to be unlawful, any person or entity who shall be convicted of a violation of any such section shall, for each offense, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Section 1-8 of this Code. Each and every day that a violation of this Article exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.


(2)  A Dilapidated Building, as defined by this Article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement by the City in accordance with Article 7 of Chapter 16 of this Code.


(3)  A violation of this Article may be prosecuted and enforced through the administrative enforcement process set forth under Article 6 of this Chapter 5.


(4)  Each and every remedy and enforcement avenue set forth under this Section is cumulative and distinct, and the City may enforce this Article through any and all legal avenues available to it.


Sections 5-51 – 5-54.  Reserved.



ARTICLE 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT

(Ord. 2009, Article 6, enacted 5-17-16)



Section 5-55.  Purpose.


This Article is intended to encourage prompt compliance with the building regulations established by this Chapter and prompt payment of penalties for violations thereof.


Section 5-56. Definitions.


For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.


Administrative hearing officer or AHO means that person or body designated by the City Manager from time to time to hear appeals from administrative citations issued under this Article.


City Manager means the City Manager or his or her designee.


Code Official means the Chief Building Official of the City of Trinidad or any other City official, employee or agent designated and authorized by the City Manager to enforce any provision of this Chapter 5.


Municipal Court means the municipal court for the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


Responsible Party means a person or entity who has violated this Chapter or, in the case of property subject to an administrative citation under this Article, who has possession or control of any real property or premises, whether as owner, co-owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, mortgagee or vendee, receiver, executor, trustee or holder of any other estate or interest in such property.


Section 5-57.   Notice of violation.


(1) Upon becoming aware of a violation of any provision of this Chapter, a Code Official may issue a notice of violation to a Responsible Party. The notice shall state the date and location of the violation, the approximate time the violation was observed, identifying, where applicable, the property in violation by address or legal description. The notice shall refer to the applicable section violated, describe the violation, and describe the action required to correct the violation. The notice shall require the Responsible Party to correct the violation within thirty (30) days, and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct said violation, including the issuance of an administrative citation.


(2)  Service of a notice of a violation on a Responsible Party shall be by any of the following means:


(a)  The Code Official may personally deliver a copy of the notice of violation to a Responsible Party; or


(b)  A copy of the notice may be mailed by first-class, certified  mail to the last known address of a Responsible Party as reflected in the county real estate records; or


(c) A copy of the notice of violation may be posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the violation.


(3)  The City’s provision of notice pursuant to paragraph (2)(b) of this section to the last known address of a Responsible Party as reflected in the records of the Las Animas County Assessor’s Office shall be considered adequate notwithstanding any error in the county's records. An officer may reasonably rely upon current county records to obtain an accurate address for a Responsible Party.


(4)  At any hearing conducted pursuant to Section 5-62, the AHO may consider evidence of actual notice received by a Responsible Party in determining whether adequate notice of a violation or of a citation has been provided. The AHO may find that notice is adequate despite a lack of technical compliance with subsection (2) hereof upon evidence that a Responsible Party received actual notice of a notice of violation at least thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for the specified violation(s) or actual notice of an administrative citation.


(5) Any person in charge receiving a notice of violation may request a meeting with the City Manager or City Manager Designee and the Code Official to pursue a resolution as allowed per section 5-58 (6).  The Code Official shall not issue an administrative citation until after such a meeting is scheduled.  The scheduling of this meeting shall not take place any longer than fourteen (14) days from the issuance of the notice of violation by the Code Official unless authorized by the City Manager in writing.


Section 5-58.   Administrative citations – general provisions.


(1) Any Responsible Party violating any provision of this Chapter 5 may be issued an administrative citation by a Code Official as provided in this Article.


(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, Responsible Parties cited under the provisions of this Article shall have only the appeal rights granted herein.


(3)  Administrative citations shall be issued only after the Responsible Party has received a notice of violation and has been given time to comply as stated in the notice of violation.


(4)  Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for which a separate administrative citation may be issued. However, once an administrative citation has been issued for a violation of an applicable section, no additional administrative citation shall be issued for the same violation for ten (10) days or, if the Responsible Party appeals, until after the appeal has been heard and the Responsible Party has not complied with an order of the Administrative Hearing Officer within ten (10) days of its issuance or such other time as the AHO has specified.


(5)  A fine assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Code Official shall be paid to and filed with the Office of the City Treasurer/Finance Director, and if not timely paid, shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this Article.


(6) Enforcement actions for violations of applicable sections are intended to be alternative in nature. At any one time, the City may pursue a civil, criminal, or administrative action against a Responsible Party. The City may also choose to pursue an alternative action upon staying the original action.


Section 5-59.  Issuance of administrative citation.


(1)  If a Responsible Party has failed to correct the violation noted in the notice of violation within the time provided on such notice, a Code Official may issue an administrative citation to the Responsible Party on a form approved by the City Manager.


(2)  The Code Official may require that the Responsible Party provide evidence of identity and residential or working address.


(3)  The Code Official shall first attempt to issue the administrative citation to a Responsible Party at the site of any violation, if a Responsible Party can be located there.  However, the Code Official may issue an administrative citation to a Responsible Party by any of the methods described in Subsection 5-53(2) above.


(4)  The Code Official shall attempt to obtain the signature of the person receiving the administrative citation on the citation. If that person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings.


(5)  Notice shall be deemed served on the earliest of: (i) the date of receipt by the Responsible Party, if personally served; (ii) the fourth day after the mailing of the administrative citation; or (iii) the date the administrative citation was posted.


Section 5-60.  Administrative citation – contents.


(1)  The administrative citation shall state the location of the violation(s) and the date(s) and approximate time(s) the violations were observed. Where applicable, the administrative citation shall identify the property in violation by address or legal description.


(2)  The administrative citation shall refer to the applicable sections violated and describe the violations.


(3)  The administrative citation shall describe the action required to correct the violations.


(4) The administrative citation shall require the named Responsible Party to correct the violations immediately and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct said violations.


(5)  The administrative citation shall state the amount of fine imposed for the violation.


(6)  The administrative citation shall explain how the fine shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine.


(7)  The administrative citation shall briefly state the process for appealing the administrative citation.


(8)  The administrative citation shall contain the signature of the Code Official and the signature of the Responsible Party if it can be obtained.


Section 5-61. Appeals – notice and scheduling.


(1) A person served with an administrative citation may file a notice of appeal within five (5) business days from the service of the administrative citation. Compliance with this time limit shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to any appeal brought under this Article, and failure to comply shall bar any such appeal.


(2)  The notice of appeal shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk in person, by facsimile transmission or by mail. Regardless of the manner of filing such appeal, the notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within five (5) business days from the date the administrative citation was served.


(3)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the City Manager or City Manager designee shall assign an AHO who shall schedule a date, time and location for the hearing.


(4)  Written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be personally served upon or sent by certified mail to the Responsible Party at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be held no more than thirty (30) days after a timely filed notice of appeal.


(5)  In computing the day a notice of appeal must be filed or the day by which a hearing must be held, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to the first day thereafter which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.


Section 5-62.  Conduct of appeals hearings.


(1) Administrative appeals are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures provided in this section.


(2) The parties to an administrative appeal shall be the named Responsible Party and the City Building Department. Parties may be represented by legal counsel. Each party may call and question witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of its case.


(3)  The AHO, at the request of any party to the hearing, may subpoena witnesses, documents and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. The form of, and the process for issuing subpoenas, shall be the same as in the Municipal Court.


(4)  The AHO shall have the power to call and question witnesses, review and consider the relevancy of documentary or other tangible evidence, and rule on evidentiary questions.


(5) The only issue to be decided by the AHO is whether the Code Official exceeded his/her authority in issuing the administrative citation. To do so, the City bears the burden of proof to establish the existence of a violation of the cited portion(s) of this Chapter. The City's meeting of this burden of proof shall constitute prima facie evidence that the Code Official did not exceed his/her authority. The appellant shall have the burden of rebutting such evidence.


(6)  The standard of proof required in an administrative appeal is a preponderance of the evidence.


(7)  Copies, photographs, and photocopies may be admitted into evidence or substituted in evidence in place of original documents.


(8)  Hearings shall be recorded by electronic means and transcripts of such recordings shall be made at the expense of the party requesting the transcript.


(9)  Whenever it appears that an appeal is not filed within the time permitted by this Article, or that the AHO for some other reason lacks jurisdiction, the appeal may be dismissed on the motion of any party or on the AHO's own motion.


(10)  The decision of the AHO shall be known as an administrative enforcement order.


(11) The AHO may uphold the administrative citation and all penalties or dismiss the administrative citation and all penalties or may waive or conditionally reduce the penalties assessed by the administrative citation. The AHO may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violations or require payment of any outstanding penalties.


(12)  In the event that the AHO does not dismiss the administrative citation, the AHO shall assess reasonable administrative costs of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), but not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).


(13)  The administrative enforcement order shall become final on the date of mailing the order to the Responsible Party. A copy of the order shall be provided to the City.


Section 5-63. Failure to obey subpoena.


It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by an AHO. Failure to obey a subpoena constitutes contempt and may be criminally prosecuted and have penalties imposed in the same manner as violation of a Municipal Court subpoena.


Section 5-64.  Failure to attend administrative appeal.


Any Responsible Party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. The AHO may take testimony, evidence and argument from the City and issue an administrative enforcement order.


Section 5-65. Failure to comply with administrative enforcement order.


It is unlawful for a Responsible Party who has been served with a copy of the final administrative enforcement order to fail to comply with the order. Failure to comply with a final administrative enforcement order may be criminally prosecuted and have penalties imposed similar to those for failure to comply with an order of the Municipal Court.


Section 5-66. Penalties assessed.


(1)  The City Manager shall develop a fine schedule based upon the Manager's assessment of the cost to the City for enforcing the provisions of this Article. The Manager shall publish the fine schedule on the City’s web site and post the same at one (1) or more conspicuous location(s) at City Hall where the same may be inspected by the public during all regular City business hours.  The schedule of fines shall be graduated in amount, with the smallest fine being assessed for the first administrative citation and increasingly larger fines for second, third and subsequent administrative citations. No single fine assessed for an administrative citation shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The schedule of fines shall be amended no more than once per year.


(2) If the Responsible Party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for violations of the same applicable section.


(3) Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.


(4)  All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Trinidad.


Section 5-67.  Failure to pay fines.


(1) The failure of any Responsible Party to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation or administrative enforcement order, if an administrative hearing was held, may result in the imposition of a late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), a twenty percent (20%) charge to defray the cost of collection, and interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum on all unpaid amounts.


(2) In the event of failure to pay all fines assessed, the City Manager may refer the matter for collection by whatever means are available to the City.


(3) As authorized by C.R.S. § 31-20-105, the City may certify all delinquent charges and assessments made under this Article to the treasurer of the County to be collected and paid over by the Treasurer of the County in the same manner as taxes are collected.


(4)  An action or other process provided by law may be maintained by the City to recover or collect any amounts, including late fees, interests, and administrative costs, owing under this Article.

CHAPTER 6.  ELECTIONS.


Sections :


6-1                   Nominating petition requirements; qualifications of candidates; conduct of elections.

6-2                   Vacancies in Council or Office of Mayor.

6-3                   Write-in candidate affidavit.

CHAPTER 6.  ELECTIONS.


Section 6-1.    Nominating petition requirements; qualifications of candidates; conduct of elections.


(1)  Any candidate seeking election to the office of Mayor or City Council Person, shall appear in person before the City Clerk and sign an affidavit of intent to seek such office.  Upon receipt of such affidavit, the City Clerk shall provide the person desiring to be a candidate a petition of nomination form.  Petition of nomination forms shall be issued only to those persons signing the affidavit of intent, and shall contain the name and address of the affiant and shall indicate the office to which he/she is seeking election.


(2)  The requirements for write-in candidates shall be governed by Section 6-3 of this Code.


(3)  All other procedures for nomination of candidates for City Council or Mayor, the conduct of all elections, qualifications of Council Persons, the Mayor and electors, and all other matters pertaining to municipal elections shall be governed by the Charter of the City of Trinidad, the "Uniform Election Code of 1992" and the "Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965."  (Ord. 1486, 09/20/94.)


Section 6-2.    Vacancies in Council or Office of Mayor.


The City Council shall have the power, by appointment, to fill all vacancies in the City Council and Office of Mayor, and the person so appointed shall hold office until the next regular election and until his/her successor is elected and qualified.  If the term of the person creating the vacancy extends beyond the next regular election, the person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired term.


Section 6-3.    Write-in candidate affidavit.


No write-in vote for any office in a regular or City Council vacancy election shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed indicating that the person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected.  Such affidavit of intent shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to five days before the regular or City Council vacancy election.  (Ord. 1370, 02/20/90.)

CHAPTER 7.  FINANCE AND TAXATION.


ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Sections:


7-1                         Bills against City - Form of claim.

7-2                         Presentation of bills against City; payment of salaries.

7-3                         Property - Taxable and exempt.

7-4                         Equalization of property valuation; levy.

7-5                         Collection of City taxes; bond of County collector.

7-6                         Allowance to County officers for collection of City taxes.

7-6.1                      Revenue changes.


ARTICLE 2.  CITY SALES TAX ACT.


7-7                         Purpose of Article.

7-8                         Citation of Article.

7-9                         Definitions.

7-10                       Taxable transactions - Exceptions.

7-11                       Transactions - Out of City sales.

7-12                       Retailer responsible to collect and remit tax.

7-13                       Schedule of taxes.

7-14                       Credit sales.

7-15                       Excess tax - Collection and remittance.

7-16                       Retailer holds tax in trust for City.

7-17                       License and tax additional.

7-18                       False or fraudulent returns; refusal to file returns.

7-19                       Use of proceeds of tax.

7-20                       Penalty for violation.


ARTICLE 3.  USE TAX.


7-21                       Purpose.

7-22                       Application and exemptions.

7-23                       Building and Construction Use Tax.

7-24                       Motor Vehicle Use Tax.


ARTICLE 4.  SALES TAX SIMPLIFICATION ACT.


7-25                       Sales Tax - Nonapplicability.

7-26                       Use Tax - Nonapplicability.

7-27                       Sales Tax - Credit for Sales or Use Taxes previously paid to another municipality.

7-28                       Use Tax - Credit for Sales or Use Taxes previously paid to another municipality.

7-29                       Use Tax - Alternative dispute resolution procedure -Deficiency notice or claim for refund.


ARTICLE 5.  BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX ON UTILITY COMPANIES.


7-30                       Levy of tax.

7-31                       Amount of tax.

7-32                       Payment of tax and filing statements.

7-33                       Failure to pay tax.

7-34                       Penalty for violation.

7-35                       Inspection of records.

7-36                       Credit against tax.

7-37                       Exemption from Article.

7-38                       Construction of Article.


ARTICLE 6.  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND.


7-39                       Economic Development Fund established.

7-40                       Economic Development Fund purpose.

7-41                       Determination of use of Economic Development Fund.


ARTICLE 7.  LODGING TAX


7-42                       Lodging Tax Imposed on Transaction of Furnishing Rooms or Accommodations.

7-43                       Point of Imposition.

7-44                       Administration.

7-45                       Persons Liable.

7-46                       City Lodging Tax Tourism Fund Created.

7-47                       Lodging Panel.

7-47.1                    Membership; appointment; term; removal; organization and meetings.

7-48                       Budgeting; spending; reporting.


ARTICLE 8. PURCHASES


7-50                       Small purchases

7-51                       Purchases based on informal bids

7-52                       Purchases based on formal bids

7-53                       Exceptions



ARTICLE 9.  RESPONSIBLE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.


7-54                       Responsible Financial Management Funding








CHAPTER 7.  FINANCE AND TAXATION.


ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 7-1.    Bills against City - Form of claim.

(1)  All bills against the City shall be presented in the form of an itemized account, stating specifically the nature of the indebtedness and shall be sworn to by the claimant, his/her agent or attorney, before the City Clerk, or some other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths, which affidavit may be in the following form:


"STATE OF COLORADO

COUNTY OF LAS ANIMAS"  ss.


I, A.B., on oath, state that the foregoing account is just and due, and no part thereof

has been paid (except ________________) and that it comprises all claims I have

against the City of Trinidad to date."


(2)  If the claim is for a fixed salary or for any certain sum by contract with the City Council, the account need not be sworn to.  All such bills shall be read in open session of the Council, and may be allowed, rejected, referred to any appropriate committee, or otherwise disposed of, as the Council may direct.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 26-2.)


Section 7-2.    Presentation of bills against City; payment of salaries.

(1)  All bills against the City shall be presented for approval, auditing and allowance at regular meetings of the City Council.


(2)  The City Manager is authorized to make payment of salaries and wages to all City employees every two weeks after completion of proper payroll or time cards have been approved by the respective department heads or immediate supervisors of said employees.  Such salaries and wages shall be computed upon fourteen (14) calendar day periods reflecting the work hours or authorized leave time of each respective employee.  All such payroll shall be approved by the City Council as now provided for by ordinance, and the same shall be approved at regular meetings of the City Council.


State law references: As to the powers of the City to levy taxes, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 31-15-302; as to finance matters generally see C.R.S. 1973, Title 31, Art. 20.


Section 7-3.    Property - Taxable and exempt.

The same amount and property, real and personal, shall be exempt from assessment and taxation for City purposes, as are now or may hereafter be exempt by general law from assessment and taxation for County purposes; and all property within the City that is subject to assessment and taxation for County purposes shall be subject to assessment and taxation for City purposes.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 26-5.)




Section 7-4.    Equalization of property valuation; levy.

When the equalization of the value of property within the City shall have been completed each year by the County Commissioners of Las Animas County, as required by law, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to correct the duplicate return of such property made to the City Council by the Assessor, in accordance with the changes in the valuation of the same adopted by the County Commissioners.  The City Council shall by resolution levy upon the real and personal property described in such amended return such sum or sums as may be required for any purpose for which it may be authorized to levy taxes, and it shall therein specify the rate of taxation as fixed by it for City purposes upon all property within the City.  The City Clerk shall then certify a copy of such resolution to the County Assessor who shall proceed to extend upon the tax lists of the current year as required by law.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 26-6.)

State law reference: As to levy and limitations thereon, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 29-1-301.


Section 7-5.    Collection of City taxes; bond of County collectors.

The County Treasurer or other County collector of County taxes shall collect the City taxes at the same time he/she collects other taxes.  He/she shall give such bond as may be fixed by ordinance, and he/she shall pay over all taxes collected for the City to the City Finance Director at the end of each month, upon presentation to him/her of an order signed by the Mayor and City Clerk.  He/she shall be liable upon his/her official bond as County Treasurer for the faithful discharge of all the duties and obligations imposed by law.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 26-7.)


State law reference: As to provisions pertaining to collection of City taxes by County Treasurer, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec, 31-20-106.


Section 7-6.    Allowance to County officers for collection of City taxes.

The City Council each year shall make such allowance, to be paid out of the general fund as shall be reasonable and just to the County officers as compensation for the extra labor imposed by this Article or general law of the State, and shall pay such other charges as by law may pertain to the collection of the City taxes.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 26-8.)


State law reference: As to City's share of expenses of County officers, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 31-20-107.


Section 7-6.1. Revenue changes.

Pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, the qualified electors of the City of Trinidad authorize the City to collect, retain and expend all sales tax, use tax, and property tax revenues, and all Non-Federal grants, fees and other revenues for capital projects and other basic municipal services, notwithstanding any state restriction on fiscal year spending, including without limitation the restrictions of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution on and after January 1, 1995. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to authorize any increase in the rate of taxation of the sales and use tax, or property tax, without a vote of the people if and when required pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. (Ord. 1514, 8-12-1995.)




ARTICLE 2.  CITY SALES TAX ACT.


Section 7-7.    Purpose of Article.

The purpose of this Article is to impose a sales tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of services within the City. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)

Section 7-8.    Citation of Article.

This Article shall be known as the "City Sales Tax Act" and may be cited as such.  (Ord. 1181, Sec. 2, 10/4/80.)

Section 7-9.    Definitions.


As used herein:


(1) City Clerk shall mean the Clerk of the City of Trinidad.


(2) City Treasurer shall mean the Treasurer of the City of Trinidad.


(3) Doing business or engaging in business shall mean the selling, leasing or delivering in the City any activity in the City in connection with the selling, leasing, or delivery in the City, of tangible personal property by the retail sale as defined in this section, for use, storage, distribution or consumption within the City.  This term includes, but shall not be limited to the following acts or methods of transacting business.

(a)  The maintaining within the City, directly or indirectly or by a subsidiary, of an office, distributing house, salesroom or house, warehouse, or other place of business;


(b)  The soliciting whether by direct representatives, indirect representatives, manufacturer's agents or by distribution of catalogues or other advertising or by use of any communication media or by use of the newspaper, radio or television advertising media, or by any other means whatsoever, of business from persons residing in the City, and by reason thereof receiving orders from, or selling or leasing tangible personal property to, such persons residing in the City for use, consumption, distribution and storage for use and consumption in the City.


(4) Executive Director shall mean the executive director of the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado.


(5) Retail sale shall mean all sales made within the City except wholesale sales.


The definition of all other words, terms and phrases shall be as defined in Section 102, Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. 1973 as amended, and said definitions are incorporated herein by reference.  (Ord. 1398, Sec. 2, 6/18/91., Ord. 1539, Sec. 2, 8-31-1996.)


(6) Repealed (Ord. 1539, Sec. 7-9, eff. 8/31/96)



Section 7-10.  Taxable Transactions - Exemptions.


(1)      There is hereby levied and shall be collected and paid a tax in the amount stated in Section 7-13 of this Article on the sale of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of services within the City.  The tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to this Article shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., and subject to the same exemptions as those specified in Section 39-26-713, C.R.S., except the exemption allowed by Section 39-26-709, C.R.S. for purchases of machinery or machine tools, the exemptions of sales and

purchases of those items in Section 39-26-715(1)(a)(II), C.R.S., the exemption for sales of food specified in Section 39-26-707, C.R.S., the exemptions for vending machine sales of food set forth in Section 39-26-714(1)(b), C.R.S., the exemption for occasional sales by a charitable organization set forth in Section 39-26-718, C.R.S., the exemption for sales and purchases of farm equipment and farm equipment under lease or contract specified in Section 39-26-716(2)(3)(4), C.R.S., and the exemption for sales of low-emitting motor vehicles, power sources, or parts used for converting such power sources as specified in

Section 39-26-719, C.R.S. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)

                                                          

(2)  All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Article when such sales meet both of the following conditions:


                 (a)    The purchaser is a non-resident of or has his/her principal place of business outside of the City; and

                 (b)    Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the City limits under the laws of the State of Colorado. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)


(3)  The amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by Article 26 of Title 39, C.R.S. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)



(4)    This sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in C.R.S. 29-2-109, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid.


(5)    This sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule city and county, city, or town equal to or in excess of that sought to be imposed by this City.  A credit shall be granted against the sales tax imposed by this City with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule city and county, city or town.  The amount of the credit shall not exceed the sales tax imposed by this City.  (Ord. 1398, Sec. 2, 9/3/91.)



(6)      This sales tax shall not apply to the sale of food purchased with food stamps.  For the purpose of this subsection (6), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 7 U.S.C. Section 2012(g), as such section existed on October 1, 1987, or as thereafter amended.


(7)  This sales tax shall not apply to the sale of food purchased with funds provided  by the special supplemental food program of women, infants, and children, 42 U.S.C., 1786.   For purposes of this subsection (7), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 42  U.S.C. Section 1786, as such section existed on October 1, 1987, or as thereafter amended. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)



Section 7-11.  Transactions - Out of City sales.

(1)  All retail sales are deemed to be consummated at the place of doing business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to a destination outside the City limits or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the City limits.


(2)  The gross receipts from sales consummated outside the City limits shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. 1973, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.


(3)  In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the City, or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this Article shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, and by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado.  (Ord. 1398, Sec. 2, 9/3/91.)


Section 7-12.  Retailer responsible to collect and remit tax.

(1)  Every retailer shall, irrespective of the provisions of Section 7-13 of this Article, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to the amount specified in Section 7-13 of this Article.


(2)  Every retailer shall remit the amount specified in subsection (1) of this section to the executive director. The collection, administration and enforcement of the tax imposed by this Article shall be performed by the executive director in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the Colorado state sales tax.  Unless otherwise provided in Article 2, Title 29, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, the provisions of Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, shall govern the collection, administration and enforcement of the tax imposed by this Article.  (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)


Section 7-13.  Schedule of taxes. (Ord. 1857, Sec. 7-13 repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/27/08)


(1)      There is hereby imposed upon sales of tangible personal property and the furnishing of services as specified in Section 7-10 of this Article a tax at the rate of four percent (4%) of the amount of sale, to be computed in accordance with schedules or systems  approved by the executive director. (Repealed and reenacted, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)



(2)  Except as provided in subsection (3) of this Section, the retailer shall add the tax imposed hereby or the average equivalent thereof to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts.


(3)  Any retailer selling malt, vinous and spirituous liquors by the drink may include in his/her sales price the tax levied by this Article, except that no such retailer shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner directly or indirectly, that such tax is not included as part of the sales price to the consumer.  The schedules described in subsection (1) of this Section shall be used by such retailer in determining the amounts to be included in such sales price.  Use of the schedules set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall not relieve such retailer from liability for payment of the full amount of tax levied by this Article.


(4)  Every retailer shall be entitled, as collecting agent of the City, to apply and credit the amount of his/her collections against the amount paid by him/her under the provisions of Section 7-15, remitting any excess collections over said amount less the expense allowance provided in subsection (5) of this section, to the executive director.


(5)  Every retailer may deduct three and one-third percent (3 1/3%) of the amount of tax to be paid by him/her under this Article to cover his/her expense of collection and remittance of the tax.


(6)  The amount of sale subject to tax under this Article shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S.  (Ord. 1398, Sec. 2, 9/3/91.)


Section 7-14.  Credit sales.

(1)  In case of a sale upon credit, or a contract for sale wherein it is provided that the price shall be paid in installments and title does not pass until a future date, or a chattel mortgage or a conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment, upon the account of purchase price, that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears in the total purchase price.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (1), a retailer doing business wholly or partly on a credit basis may, at his/her election, make a return, and remit sales tax on credit sales, on the basis of the aggregate amount of cash received during the month from taxable credit sales.  The retailer may determine the tax to be remitted on the basis of his/her reasonable estimate of the aggregate amount of tax which he/she has collected from his/her credit consumers during the month.  A retailer's estimate of the taxes to be collected on credit sales made in any month (referred to in this section as "base month") shall be deemed reasonable if the cumulative sum of the monthly amounts of taxes on such credit sales remitted by the retailer on months following the base month is not less than twenty-five percent, forty-three and seventy-five one-hundredths percent, sixty-two and five-tenths percent, respectively, of the total taxes due on the aggregate credit sales made by the retailer in the base month.  In no event, however, shall the amount of taxes remitted by the retailer in any month be less than the amount which the retailer actually estimates to have been collected in that month.


(2)  If the retailer transfers, sells, assigns or otherwise imposes of an account receivable, he/she shall be deemed to have received the full balance of the consideration for the original sale and shall be liable for the remittance of the sales tax on the balance of the total sale price not previously reported; except that such transfer, sale, assignment, or other disposition of an account receivable by a retailer to a closely held subsidiary, as defined in section 39-26-102 (10)(k), C.R.S. 1973 as amended, shall not be deemed to require the retailer to pay the sales tax on the credit sale represented by the account transferred prior to the time the customer makes payment on said account.  (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)




Section 7-15.  Excess tax - Collection and remittance.

If any vendor, during any reporting period, collects as a tax an amount in excess of four percent of his/her total taxable sales, he/she shall remit to the executive director of the department of revenue, the full net amount of the tax imposed in this Article 2 and all such excess.  The retention by the retailer or vendor of any excess of tax collections over the four percent of the total taxable sales of such retailer or vendor or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the executive director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this Article is declared to be unlawful and constitutes a violation of this Article.


Section 7-16.  Retailer holds tax in trust for City.

All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this Article shall be and remain public money, the property of the City, in the hands of such retailer or vendor, and he/she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the executive director, and failure to so pay the executive director, such retailer shall be punished as provided herein. (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)


Section 7-17.  License and tax additional.

The license and tax imposed by this Article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as herein provided.  (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)


Section 7-18.  False or fraudulent returns; refusal to file returns.

It shall be unlawful for any retailer to refuse to file any returns provided to be filed in this Article, or to file any false or fraudulent return, or fail or refuse to make payment to the executive director of any taxes collected or due the City or in any manner evade the collection and payment of the tax or any part thereof, or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax.  (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)


Section 7-19.  Use of proceeds of tax.

(1)  Tax Monies collected pursuant to this Article shall be used as follows:


(a)  A Sum equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the amount collected shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.



         (b)  The sum equal to the remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount shall be set aside in a reserve fund and shall be used to pay for capital projects, including the construction, maintenance and improvement of public works, and the purchase of land and buildings, as determined by City Council. City Council shall hold at least one public hearing per year for the purpose of providing an opportunity for the public to express opinions as to how such monies should be spent. (Ord. 1539, Sec. 2, 8/31/96; Ord. 1697, eff., 8-16-02; Ord. 1857, eff., 6/27/08, Ord 1962, Eff. 8-29-14)



(2)      The allocation of the tax monies collected pursuant to this Article set forth in subsection (1) of this Section, shall remain in effect until December 31, 2020.  Unless the one percent (1%) sales tax to be used for capital projects is extended by vote of the people prior to that date, the rate of sales tax shall decrease to three percent (3%) on January 1, 2021, and from that date forward all tax monies collected pursuant to this Article shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1398, Sec. 2, 9/3/91., Ord. 1539, Sec. 2, 8/31/96; Ord, 1697, eff., 8-16-02; Ord. 1857, eff. 6/27/08, Ord. 1962, eff. 8-29-14)


Section 7-20.  Penalty for violation.

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of violation thereof and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.  (Ord. 1181, 10/4/80.)



ARTICLE 3.  USE TAX.


Section 7-21.  Purpose.

The purpose of this Article is to raise revenue and provide a complementary tax to the Trinidad City Sales Tax. The tax imposed herein is a Use Tax on building and construction materials which are purchased outside the City of Trinidad by City residents for use, storage or consumption within the City of Trinidad, and on motor vehicles which are purchased outside the City of Trinidad by City residents for use, storage or consumption within the City of Trinidad.


Section 7-22.  Application and exemptions.

In no event shall the Use Tax imposed by this Article extend or apply:


(1)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the City of Trinidad.


(2)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the City of Trinidad, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business;


(3)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the City of Trinidad by a nonresident thereof for his/her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the City of Trinidad;


(4)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government, or the State of Colorado, or its institutions, or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only or by religious or charitable functions;


(5)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit, or use any article, substance, or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label, or the furnished shipping case thereof;


(6)  To the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule town, city or city and county equal to or in excess of that imposed by this Ordinance.  A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this Ordinance with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the City of Trinidad of tangible personal property purchased by him/her in a previous statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county.  The amount of the city credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him/her by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule town, city, or city and county on his/her purchase or use of the property.  The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this ordinance.


(7)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the City of Trinidad and brought into it by a non-resident acquiring residency;


(8)  To the storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the City of Trinidad, and he/she purchased the vehicle outside the City of Trinidad for use outside the City of Trinidad and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and he/she registered, titled and licensed said motor vehicle outside of the City of Trinidad;


(9)  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required, if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective date of such use tax;


(10)  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract bid, let or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of such use tax ordinance or proposal.  (Ord. 1325, Sec. 2, 8/18/87.)


Section 7-23.  Building and Construction Use Tax.

(1)  There is hereby imposed on the privilege of storing, using or consuming any construction and building materials of every kind and form purchased outside the City of Trinidad, for use, storage or consumption within the City of Trinidad, a Use Tax of four percent (4%) of the purchase price of said construction or building materials.  (Ord. 1325, Sec. 2, 8/18/87.)


(2)  Said Use Tax shall be paid by estimate through payment to the City an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the project as indicated on the application for a city building permit and shall be evidenced by the issuance of a building permit by the City Building Inspector.  Provided, however, the City shall, when necessary, issue a certificate of exemption from payment of any further sales or use tax for the materials to be used, stored or consumed pursuant to such building permit.


(3)  The collection and administration of the Use Tax imposed by this Section shall be performed by the Treasurer in substantially the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the Colorado Sales and Use Tax as provided in Article 26, Chapter 39, Colorado Revised Statutes.  The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate such additional rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration of enforcement of this section.


Section 7-24.  Motor Vehicle Use Tax.

(1)  There is hereby imposed on the privilege of using, storing, or consuming every motor vehicle purchased outside this city by any resident of this City for the purpose of use, storage or consumption within this City, a Use Tax in the amount of four percent (4%) of the purchase price of said motor vehicle.  (Ord. 1325, Sec. 2, 8/18/87.)


(2)  Said Use Tax shall be applicable to every motor vehicle for which registration is required by the laws of the State of Colorado.


(3)  No registration shall be made of any motor vehicle for which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued for such vehicle by the Department of Revenue or its authorized agents, until any tax due upon the use, storage or consumption thereof pursuant to this Ordinance has been paid.


(4)  The Use Tax imposed by this section shall be collected by the authorized agent of the Department of Revenue in the County in which the purchaser resides.


(5)  The proceeds of said Use Tax shall be paid to the City periodically in accordance with an agreement entered by and between the City and the authorized County Agent of the Department of Revenue.


(6)  The City Manager and the Mayor are hereby empowered to enter into and execute on behalf of the City any agreements necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Section in accordance with the provisions of Section 24-35-110, Colorado Revised Statutes.



ARTICLE 4.  SALES TAX SIMPLIFICATION ACT.


Section 7-25.  Sales Tax - Nonapplicability.

For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the City's sales tax shall not apply to the sales of construction and building materials, as the term is used in 29-2-109, C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid.  (Ord. 1285, Sec. 1, 12/17/85.)


Section 7-26.  Use Tax - Nonapplicability.

For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the City's use tax shall not apply to the storage of construction and building materials.  (Ord. 1285, Sec. 1, 12/17/85.)


Section 7-27.  Sales Tax - Credit for Sales or Use Taxes previously paid to another municipality.

For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the City's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of four percent (4%).  A credit shall be granted against the City's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality.  The amount of the credit shall not exceed four percent (4%).  (Ord. 1285, Sec. 1, 12/17/85.)


Section 7-28.  Use Tax - Credit for Sales or Use Taxes previously paid to another municipality.

For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the City's Use Tax shall not apply to the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property the sale of which has already been subjected to a legally imposed Sales or Use Tax of another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of four percent (4%).  A credit shall be granted against the City's Use Tax with respect to a person's storage, use, or consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased by him/her in a previous statutory or home rule municipality.  The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him/her by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his/her purchase or use of the property.  The amount of the credit shall not exceed four percent (4%).


Section 7-29.  Use Tax - Alternative dispute resolution procedure - Deficiency notice or claim for refund.

(1)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the City Manager's or his/her designee's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Section.


(2)  As used in this Section, "state hearing" means a hearing before the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue or delegate thereof as provided in 29-2-106.1 (3), C.R.S.


(3)  When the City asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the City shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail.  The deficiency notice shall state the additional use taxes due.  The deficiency notice shall contain a notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to 29-2-106.1 (3), C.R.S.  The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the City's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of use tax paid.


(4)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies.  The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he/she has not exhausted local remedies or if he/she fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection (4).  For purposes of this subsection (4), "exhaustion of local remedies" means:

(a)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City and such City has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon.  Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence, or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief.  The City shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety days after the City's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the City may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any event, the City shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or


(b)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City and the City has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in paragraph (a) above.


(5)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his/her local remedies as provided in subsection (4) above, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in Section 29-2-106.1 (3) through (7), C.R.S.


(6)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the City, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the District Court of the County of Las Animas as provided in 29-2-106 (8), C.R.S., provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in subsection (4) of this section.


(7)  If the City reasonably finds that the collection of Use Tax will be jeopardized by delay, the City may utilize the procedures set forth in section 39-21-111, C.R.S.



ARTICLE 5 . BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX ON UTILITY COMPANIES.


Section 7-30.  Levy of tax.

There is levied on and against utility companies operating within the City a tax on the occupation and business of:


(1)  Maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the City and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the City;


(2)  Maintaining and operating within the City a plant for the transmission and distribution of artificial or natural gas, or a mixture thereof, and of furnishing either or both of said products to the inhabitants of the City; and


(3)  Maintaining and operating within the City a plant for the transmission and distribution of electrical energy and of furnishing and distributing electricity or electrical energy to the inhabitants of the City.


Section 7-31.  Amount of tax.

That the amount of tax hereby levied for 1978 shall be a flat sum in the amount of Thirty Eight Thousand Two Hundred Dollars ($38,200.00), and for years subsequent to 1978, Two and 75/100 Dollars ($2.75) annually for each telephone account for which local exchange service is provided within the City of Trinidad, as provided in Section 2 of this Ordinance No. 998, Series 1971.


Section 7-32.  Payment of tax and filing statements.

(1)  The tax levied by this Ordinance No. 988, Series 1971, which were made under protest or accrued by telephone utilities, shall be applied against the flat fee tax for 1978.  Payment of the 1978 tax shall be made fifty percent (50%) on July 31, 1978 and fifty percent (50%) on or before October 31, 1978 and for years subsequent to 1978, the tax shall be payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments each installment to be payable on the last business day of each calendar month.


(2)  Within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this Ordinance, each telephone utility subject to the tax imposed herein shall file with the Clerk in such form as the Clerk may require, a statement showing the total number of telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the City on January 1, 1978.  Such statements shall be filed in each subsequent year within fifteen (15) days after January 1, showing the total number of such accounts on January 1.


Section 7-33.  Failure to pay tax.

If any utility company subject to this Article shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten (10%) percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the City.  The City Attorney upon the direction of the City Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the said debt in the name of the people of the State. (Ord. 988, Sec. 4, 12/6/71.)


Section 7-34.  Penalty for violation.

If any officer, agent or manager of a utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect or refuse to make or file any quarterly statement in the manner herein prescribed, the said officer, agent, or manager shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).  (Ord. 988, Sec. 5, 12/6/71.)


Section 7-35.  Inspection of records.

The City, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this Article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof.  (Ord. 988, Sec. 6, 12/6/71.)


Section 7-36.  Credit against tax.

Any utility company maintaining facilities within the City pursuant to a franchise granted by the City may claim as a credit against the tax levied by this Article the amount of any franchise payments made in accordance with the terms of such franchise.  (Ord. 988, Sec. 7, 12/6/71.)


Section 7-37.  Exemption from Article.

The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any utility owned and operated by the City.  (Ord. 988, Sec. 8, 12/6/71.)


Section 7-38.  Construction of Article.

This Article shall not be construed as granting a franchise or franchise rights to any utility company.  (Ord. 988, Sec. 9, 12/6/71.)


ARTICLE 6.  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES


Section 7-39. Economic Development Incentives.

(1) Development incentives may be considered as follows to encourage business location that will result in economic growth for the City:


Conveyance of real property owned by the City at no or reduced consideration;
Reduction, deferment, or abatement of outstanding property tax;
Refund of general property tax, pursuant to CRS 39-30-107.5(1);
Refund of personal property tax, pursuant to CRS 31-15-903;
Property tax credit or Incentive Payment, pursuant to HB 02-1399;
Refund of sales tax levied by the City, pursuant to CRS 39-30-107.5(2);
Waiver or reduction of permit fees;
Waiver or reduction of utility tap fees;
Any other incentive deemed appropriate not specifically identified herein.

Section 7-40. Economic Development Incentive Considerations.

(1)  In making an initial determination as to the appropriateness and extent of a development incentive offer and whether it is in the best interest of the City, the following factors shall be considered:


The size and fair market value of the improvements and business facilities that are proposed to be located in the City;
The number of employees that are proposed to be employed at the business site, the proposed educational and/or training requirements of the employees to be employed, whether or not the employees  will be those already retained by the business or will be recruited from the City and the surrounding communities, and the projected salaries of the employees;
The impact that the proposed business will have on the City’s resources and infrastructure.  Particularly, the business shall provide information regarding the amount of water that may be required to operate the business, the projected discharge of wastewater, and special wastes produced by the business that would require the availability of additional resources by the City, whether the business would require increased law enforcement resources, and/or whether the business would produce significant amounts of odor, noise, or dust pollution, and other impacts upon the City’s infrastructure due to the nature of the proposed business.
The financial ability of the proposed business ownership to build the improvements, connect to City infrastructure, or other considerations.  The business ownership may be required to provide proof of such financial ability as part of an agreement for the provision of development incentives by the City.
Whether the proposed business is in conformance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and is of a character that is amenable to the City and the surrounding community.
Whether the business would result in a contribution to the economic diversity of the City.
Whether the proposed business will purchase materials and seek services from the City’s existing businesses.
Any other factors determined to be peculiar to the proposed business.
(Ord. 1967, Article 6 repealed and reenacted, eff. 10/31/14)


Section 7-41.  Negotiation; Determination.

(1)  The City may contract with the Trinidad-Las Animas County Economic Development, Inc., to collect the necessary data; conduct the initial assessment of the appropriateness and extent of the development incentive offer, based on the factors outlined in Section 7-40(a) through (h); and make subsequent recommendations to the City regarding whether granting the development incentive is advantageous to the City and warrants the pursuit of an agreement as described in 7-41(2).

(2)  Upon determination that the granting of a development incentive is advantageous to the City and warranted pursuant to the considerations set forth herein, the business ownership shall enter into an agreement with the City setting forth the terms and conditions by which the development incentive will be allowed.  Such agreement shall be approved by a majority of a quorum at a public meeting of the City Council.



ARTICLE 7. LODGING TAX


Section 7-42.  Lodging Tax Imposed on Transaction of Furnishing Rooms or Accommodations.

Subject to the approval of the eligible registered electors in the City of Trinidad at the election to be held on November 6, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied and shall be collected a 3% lodging tax on the purchase price paid or charged to persons for the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, or person acting in a representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who for consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002)


Section 7-43.  Point of Imposition.

For the purpose of the lodging tax imposed by this Ordinance, all sales are consummated at the place where the actual rooms or accommodations, which are provided, are located. (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002)


Section 7-44.  Administration.

The City lodging tax shall be collected, administered, and enforced, to the extent feasible, pursuant to Section 29-2-106, C.R.S., as amended.  (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002)


Section 7-45.  Persons Liable.

Any person or entity providing rooms or accommodations as included in the definition of “sale” referred to in Section 7-42 of this Article, and at Section 39-26-102(11) C.R.S., as Amended, shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equal to 3% of all such sales made, and shall quarterly, unless otherwise provided by law, make a return to the City of Trinidad the preceding tax-reporting period and remit an amount equivalent to the said three percent on such sales. (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002)


Section 7-46.  City Lodging Tax Tourism Fund Created.

All revenue collected from such City lodging tax shall be credited to a special fund designated as the City Lodging tax tourism fund, which is hereby created.  The fund shall be used only to advertise and market tourism.  No revenue collected from such City lodging tax shall be used for any capital expenditure, with the exception of tourist information center. (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002)



Section 7-47.  Lodging Panel.

Upon approval of a lodging tax by the electors, the City Council shall select a panel of no less than three citizens of the City of Trinidad to a tourism board to administer the fund.  Members of the panel shall be appointed for terms of no more than two (2) years from the tourism industry within the City of Trinidad.  A proven marketing entity shall be contracted with for the purpose of advertising and marketing tourism; the panel shall oversee the contracted entity, and that entity shall provide an audited accounting to the panel and the City Council, on a monthly basis.  Preference should be given to proven marketing entities domiciled within the city limits. (Initiative approved by voters November 6, 2001, effective January 1, 2002; amended Ord. 1874, eff., 2/13/09)


Section 7-47.1            Membership; appointment; term; removal; organization and meetings.

(1) The City Tourism Board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the City Council, and who shall not be a member of the City Council or a Council Officer, as defined in Section 2-16 of the Code of Ordinances. The five (5) members shall be either (i) residents and registered voters of the City of Trinidad, or (ii) residents and registered voters of Las Animas County, Colorado, who are actively involved in a tourism-related business or industry within the City of Trinidad. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01; amended Ord. 1874, eff., 2-13-09; amended Ord. 1927B, eff. 5/11/12, amended Ord. 2078, eff. 8/16/19)


(2) Initial appointments to the Tourism Board shall be made no later than February 10, 2002.  Three members shall be appointed for initial terms of two (2) years.  Two members shall be appointed for initial terms of one (1) year.  Thereafter, all terms shall be two (2) years. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01)


(3) The City Tourism Board members shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the Council.  Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive absences.  Absences by members of the board of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six-month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal.  The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a letter so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01, Ord. 1749, repealed and reenacted eff., 4-16-04)


(4) If any member ceases to reside in the City, his/her membership on the Board shall immediately terminate. (Ord 1677, eff., 12-04-01)


(5) Organization and meetings.  The Board shall elect a Chairperson from among the appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine.  The term of the Chairperson shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection.  The Board shall hold one (1) regular meeting per month.  It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, and transactions, which record shall be a public record. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01)


Section 7-48   Budgeting; spending; reporting.

(1) No later than April 1, 2002, the Tourism Board shall submit to the City Council an interim annual Budget for 2002.  Thereafter, the Board shall submit to the City Manager a proposed Annual Budget for the following year setting forth the specific line items for expenditure of the funds in the City Lodging Tax Tourism Fund, on or before September 15 th of each year.  The City Manager shall include the proposed budget within his/her proposed budget for the following year submitted to City Council. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01)


(2) The City Finance Director shall be the custodian of City Lodging Tax Tourism Fund.  The fund shall be expended only upon warrants signed by the Chairperson or his/her designee and one other member of the Tourism Board. (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01)


(3) At the close of each year, the Tourism Board shall make a report to the City Council showing the condition of its trust during the year, the sums of money expended, and the purposes of the expenditures. The report shall include such other statistics and information as the Board deems of public interest and as may be requested by the City Council.  (Ord. 1677, eff., 12-04-01)



ARTICLE 8. PURCHASES.


Section 7-50   Small purchases.

The Purchasing Agent shall establish written procedures for purchase of goods and securing of a Professional Services Agreement involving the estimated expenditure of $1,000.00 or more, but less than $10,000.00, in aggregate, of public money. These procedures shall require that competition be sought and written records adequate to document the competition be maintained in order to properly account for the funds expended, and to facilitate an audit of the small purchases made.   However, should an opportunity to purchase a good at a less-than market-value price present itself, that requires a timely response, the City Manager may waive the requirement to obtain additional quotes.  With respect to professional services, qualification-based selection (QBS) will be used. (Ord. 2051, Repealed and reenacted, eff. 12-01-17)


Section 7-51   Purchases based on informal bids.

All contracts for the purchase of goods and securing of a Professional Services Agreement involving the estimated expenditure of $10,000.00 or more, but less than $50,000.00, in aggregate, of public money, shall be made after informal bids and/or use of State Award pricing and other various purchasing organizations, such as NJPA pricings, are obtained. All such contracts shall be in writing and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, upon authorization of the City Manager. The quality and performance of the good(s) offered by each bidder, and the time specified for delivery of the good shall be considered in determining the lowest responsible bid. The Department Head and/or the Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all bids submitted and the record shall be available for public inspection after the contract is awarded, in the manner provided by law.  However, should an opportunity to purchase a good at a less-than market-value price present itself, that requires a timely response, the City Manager may waive the requirement to obtain additional informal bids.  With respect to professional services, qualification-based selection (QBS) will be used. (Ord. 2051, Repealed and reenacted, eff. 12-01-17)



Section 7-52   Purchases based on formal bids.

Except as otherwise provided in this Article, no contract for the purchase of goods or securing of a Professional Services Agreement involving the estimated expenditures of $50,000.00 or more, in aggregate, of public money shall be awarded unless the provisions of this Section are followed.   With respect to professional services, qualification-based selection (QBS) will be used. (Ord. 2051, Repealed and reenacted, eff. 12-01-17)

(1)  Proposals shall be invited by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the City.  The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for the opening of bids.  At least seven (7) full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the bid opening.  The advertisement shall state that the City reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids. (Ord. 1684, eff., 3-29-02)


(2) The City may require that bid deposits be submitted with each bid.  If bid deposits are required, they shall be in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the amount of the bid and may be submitted in the form of cash, a cashier’s check, a certified check issued by a bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, a bid bond, or any other form of bid security deemed sufficient by the City Attorney.  The bid deposit requirement, including the form in which bonds or other forms of bid security may be submitted, shall be included in the specifications. (Ord. 1684, eff., 3-29-02)


(3) Bids shall be sealed.  All bids shall be opened in public and the Purchasing Agent or Department Head shall make a record of the bids received.  The record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection after the bid opening in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 1684, eff., 3-29-02)


(4) The City may require the successful bidder to furnish a performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract.  The performance bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and the form of the bond shall be included in the specifications. The City Council may reject the bond of any bidder if it finds it to be unacceptable. (Ord. 1684, eff., 3-29-02)


(5) All contracts to which this Section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the City Council.  The City Council may reject any and all bids. (Ord. 1684, eff., 3-29-02)



Section 7-53   Exceptions.

(1) The provisions of this Article do not apply to the purchase of goods or services when:


(a) the purchase or service is available from one source or when standardization or compatibility is the overriding consideration.


(2) All such purchases of $50,000.00 or more shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2051, Repealed and reenacted, eff. 12-01-17)




ARTICLE 9.  MARIJUANA SALES TAX

Section 7-54.  Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to impose a separate and additional sales tax on the lawful retail sale of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories within the City.

Section 7-55. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(a)       “Consumer” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(b) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution;

(b)       “Lawful retail sale of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories” shall mean the sale of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories by a licensed retail marijuana store to a consumer in compliance with Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and § 12-43.4-101 , et seq. , C.R.S.;

(c)       “Marijuana” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(f) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution;

(d)       “Marijuana Accessories” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(g) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution;

(e)       “Marijuana Establishment” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section 2(i) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution;

(f)        “Marijuana Products” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(k) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution; and

(g)       “Retail marijuana store” shall have the meaning attributed to it in section (2)(n) of Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution. (Ord 1998, Sec. 7-55 corrected, eff. 3-1-16)


Section 7-56.  Tax Imposed.
(a)       A tax is levied and shall be collected upon the lawful retail sale of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories within the City at a rate of five percent (5%) of the price paid by the consumer thereof rounded off to the nearest penny.
(b)       The sales tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the sales tax imposed on the retail sale of tangible personal property pursuant to Article 2 of this Chapter.

Section 7-57.  Collections, administration and enforcement.
The collection, administration and enforcement of the sales tax imposed by this Article shall be performed by the City of Trinidad Director of Finance in a manner similar to the collection, administration and enforcement of the state-collected City sales tax as provided in Article 26 of Title 39 of the Colorado Revised Statutes.


ARTICLE 10.  RESPONSIBLE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.


Section 7-60.  Responsible Financial Management Funding.

Within the General Fund, Water/Sewer Fund, Gas Fund and Power and Light Fund, there is hereby established the following special revenue funds:


Contingency Fund – for emergencies, unforeseen events, opportunities and other occurrences outside of the planned fiscal year operating budget.

The Contingency Fund shall be equal to 5% of the budget for each fund, excluding non-operating items such as capital project transfers and debt service payments or shall be funded annually as determined by the City Council in adoption of the annual budget.


Repair and Replacement Fund – for the repair and replacement of fleet and capital infrastructure items.
Infrastructure and Buildings
Fleet and Rolling Stock

The funding for this fund will be determined annually based upon priorities and fleet management.


Information Technology (IT) Equipment Fund – for the repair or replacement of IT equipment.

The funding for this fund will be determined annually based upon priorities and needs.


Within the General Fund there is hereby established the following special revenue fund:


Economic Development Reserve Fund – for support of economic development activities in Trinidad.  The Economic Development Reserve Fund shall be funded annually as determined by the City Council in adoption of the annual budget. (Ord. 2032, Art. 10 amended, eff. 6/16/17)

CHAPTER 8.  FIRE PREVENTION.


ARTICLE 1. INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.


Sections:


8-1                   International Fire Code.


ARTICLE 2.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


8-4                   Fire Department – Creation and membership.

8-5                   Firefighters – Uniforms.

8-6                   Inspection of buildings and other premises; order to abate.

8-7                   Destruction of buildings to check fire.

8-8                   Spectators at fire to obey orders.


ARTICLE 3. FIREWORKS.


8-9                   Fireworks – Casting, throwing or firing.

8-10                 Fireworks – Exhibition and possession.

8-11                 Fireworks – Defined.

8-11.1              Seizure of fireworks.

8-12                 Exemptions from prohibitions.

8-13                 Penalty for violation.

























CHAPTER 8.  FIRE PREVENTION .



ARTICLE 1. INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.

(Ord. 2061, Article 1, repealed and reenacted, eff. 7-13-18)


Section 8-1. International Fire Code.


(1) The International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C and D, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001 (headquarters), is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, as if fully set forth in this ordinance, together with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in this Section. At least one (1) copy of said International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection.


(2) The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition (“IFC”), are hereby revised:

           

(a) Amend IFC § 101.1, Title, as follows: insert: “the City of Trinidad, Colorado” where indicated.


(b) Amend IFC § 105.2, Application, to read:  Application for a permit for new construction or remodeling of existing structures is required by this code and shall be made to the fire code official or the Chief Building Official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official and/or the Chief Building Official.  Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official and the Chief Building Official as set forth in Chapter 5, Section 5-7 regarding the International Building Codes as adopted by the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(c) Amend IFC §110.4, Violation penalties, to read: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1, Sections 1-8 and 1-9 of the Code of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(d) Amend IFC §112.4, Failure to comply, to read: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Two Thousand Six Hundred Fifty ($2,650.00).


(e) Amend IFC §5704.2.9.6.1, Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited, to read: The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within all zoning classifications, except areas encompassed by the Industrial Zone district and only by special use permit.


(f) Amend IFC §5706.2.4.4, Locations where above-grounds tanks are prohibited, to read: The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within all zoning classifications, except areas encompassed by the Industrial Zone district and only by special use permit.


(g) Amend IFC §5806.2, Limitations, to read: The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within all zoning classifications, except areas encompassed by the Industrial Zone district and only by special use permit.

(h) Amend IFC §6104.2, Maximum capacity within established limits, to read:

Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L). Such storage is prohibited within all zoning classifications, except areas encompassed by the Industrial Zone district and only by special use permit.
 

ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 8-4.  Fire Department – Creation and membership.


(1)   There is created a Fire Department which shall consist of a Chief and as many firefighters necessary to properly handle and manipulate the apparatus of the Department, to provide adequate fire protection for the citizens of the City of Trinidad.  Such protection shall be extended to the Trinidad Industrial Park and may be otherwise extended beyond the corporate limits of the City by contractual relationship with fire district corporations or other legal entities.


(2)   The City Manager shall by rules and regulations define the duties, functions and powers of the Fire Department.


Section 8-5.  Firefighters – Uniforms.


All members of the Fire Department are required to dress in such uniform as is or may be prescribed by Department Rules and Regulations.  Uniforms shall be kept in a neat and clean condition and shall be worn at all times during hours of duty.


Section 8-6.  Inspection of buildings and other premises; order to abate.


(1)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to inspect as often as may be necessary, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of the City pertaining to fire hazards.


(2)   Whenever any Fire Department personnel shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of water paper, boxes, shavings, or any other highly inflammable materials, and which is so situated as to endanger life or property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire, he/she shall order the same to be removed or remedied.  Such order shall be issued in conformance with the procedures set forth in Section 16-64 of this Code.


Section 8-7.  Destruction of buildings to check fire.


In the process of combating a structure fire, the Chief of the Fire Department, or in his/her absence, his/her representative, may order any buildings that are in close proximity thereto to be removed or otherwise disposed of, for the purpose of checking such structure fire.




Section 8-8.  Spectators at fire to obey orders.


Every person in the immediate vicinity of a fire, shall be subject to any obedient to any lawful order of the Chief or any firefighter in extinguishing the fire and removing the protecting property, and any person who shall neglect or refuse such orders shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.


ARTICLE 3. FIREWORKS.

(Ord. 1792, Article 3, repealed and reenacted, eff. 7/1/05)


Section 8-9.   Fireworks - Casting, throwing or firing.


It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw or fire any fireworks of any kind within the corporate limits of the City.  (Ord. 1792, eff. 7/1/05; Ord. 1267, Sec. 1, 5/21/85)


Section 8-10.  Fireworks - Exhibition and possession.


It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or have in his/her possession with intent to use, give away or sell or offer for sale, any fireworks of any kind. (Ord. 1792, eff. 7/1/05; Ord. 1267, Sec. 1, 5/21/85)


Section 8-11.   Fireworks - Defined. (Ord. 1898, Sec. 8-11 repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/28/10)


(1) “Fireworks” as used in Sections 8-9, 8-10, and 8-11.1 shall mean any article, device, or substance of a combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation.  Fireworks include, but are not limited to, blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used where the explosive content of the device or cap exceeds sixteen milligrams of pyrotechnic composition per item; firecrackers; torpedoes; sky rockets; Roman candles; cone and cylindrical fountains; spinning wheels; ground or aerial spinners; illuminating torches and colored fire in any form that utilizes a pyrotechnic composition; explosive auto alarms; chasers; toy propellant devices and toy smoke devices; cigarette loads; trick matches; trick noisemakers; any device containing an explosive or flammable compound; any tablet or device containing an explosive or flammable compound; any tablet or device containing an explosive substance, and any other device of like construction.


(2) “Fireworks” shall not include:


(a) Toy caps which do not contain more than sixteen milligrams of pyrotechnic composition per item , or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices for use with such caps.


(b) Party poppers containing not more than sixteen milligrams of pyrotechnic composition per item that is friction sensitive; and snappers containing not more than one milligram of explosive composition per item.



(c) Highway flares, railway fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles, or any other emergency signal devices only when used for emergency purposes.


(d) Dipped sticks and sparklers, the total pyrotechnic composition of which does not exceed one hundred grams, of which the composition of any chlorate or perchlorate shall not exceed five grams.  However, it shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen years of age to possess or use dipped sticks or sparklers unless such person is under adult supervision.  It shall further be unlawful for any person under sixteen years of age to purchase dipped sticks or sparklers, or for any person to knowingly sell dipped sticks or sparklers to any person under sixteen years of age.


(e) Snake and glow worm pressed pellets of not more than two grams of pyrotechnic composition and packaged in retail packages of not more than twenty-five units.  However, it shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen years of age to possess or use such snake or glow worm pressed pellets unless such person is under adult supervision.  It shall further be unlawful for any person under sixteen years of age to purchase snake or glow worm pressed pellets, or for any person to knowingly sell snake or glow worm pressed pellets to any person under sixteen years of age.


Section 8-11.1 Seizure of fireworks.


Personnel of the City’s Police and Fire Departments are authorized to seize, destroy or otherwise dispose of all fireworks used or possessed in violation of Sections 8-9 and 8-10 of this Code.   (Ord. 1792, eff. 7/1/05; Ord. 1963, eff. 6/28/02, Ord. 1726, 6/13/03)


Section 8-12.  Exemption from prohibitions.


The provisions of Sections 8-9, 8-10, and 8-11.1 shall not apply to any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind so long as a permit shall first be obtained from the Fire Chief.  The Fire Chief shall determine that such demonstration or display will be conducted in a manner that is not deemed to be hazardous to life or property.  In order to ensure compliance with said permit, the demonstration shall be conducted under Fire Department supervision.   (Ord. 1792, eff. 7/1/05; Ord. 1267, Sec. 4, 5/21/85)


Section 8-13.   Penalty for violation.


Any person who violates Sections 8-9 or 8-10 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced as provided in Section 1-8 and subject to the terms of Section 8-12.  (Ord. 1792, eff. 7/1/05; Ord. 1267, Sec. 5, 5/21/85)

CHAPTER 9.  LICENSES.


ARTICLE 1.  IN GENERAL


Sections:


9-1                   Short title.

9-2                   Purpose and scope.

9-3                   Business defined.

9-4                   License required.

9-5                   Exempt activities.

9-6                   Applications.

9-7                   Issuance.

9-8                   Term of license.

9-9                   Renewals.

9-10                 Transfers.

9-11                 Suspension or revocation.

9-12                 Non-issuance of license.

9-13                 Joint license.

9-14                 License required by each place of business.

9-15                 Posting and exhibition.

9-16                 Penalty for violation.

9-17                 Each day's violation deemed separate offense.

9-18                 Invalidity.


ARTICLE 2.   BUSINESSES SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.


DIVISION 1.  AMUSEMENT PARKS.


9-19                 Amusement park license - Fee, term, other pursuits included.

9-20                 Carnivals at amusement park - License required; fee.

9-21                 Circus - License required; fee; effect on other sections.


DIVISION 2.  AUCTION SALES.


9-22                 Auction sales - License required; exemption.

9-23                 License fee.

9-24                 Sales at auction of new jewelry prohibited.

9-25                 Penalty for violation.


DIVISION 3.  CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, AND PARADES.


9-26                 Carnivals outside of amusement parks prohibited.

9-27                 Circuses, shows, parades, exhibitions - License fees; exceptions.

9-28                 Deposit required for possible damage to City property.

9-29                 Licenses - Contents.


DIVISION 4.  FARM PRODUCE AT WHOLESALE.


9-30                 Definitions.

9-31                 Sale of farm produce; license required; fee, exception of common carriers and     certain farmers.

9-32                 Registration of farmers and producers; certificate.

9-33                 License transfer; use of license of another.

9-34                 Bond requirements.

9-35                 Exclusions from provisions.


DIVISION 5.  JUNK DEALERS.


9-36                 Junk shop - License required.

9-37                 License Fee - Junk shop; junk wagon.

9-38                 Bond requirements.

9-39                 Junk shop - License issuance.

9-40                 Separate license for each vehicle required.

9-41                 Change of business location; notice to City Clerk.

9-42                 Vehicle license plate; driver's badge.

9-43                 Register of articles dealt in.

9-44                 Waiting period before sale.

9-45                 Purchasing from minor prohibited.

9-46                 Hours of purchase.

9-47                 Receiving articles in pawn; advancing money.

9-48                 Licensing as pawnbroker or secondhand dealer prohibited.

9-49                 Police supervision of junk dealers.

9-50                 Exhibiting articles to police.


DIVISION 6.  PAWNBROKERS.


9-51                 Pawnbroker defined.

9-52                 Pawnbroker - License required; fee.


DIVISION 7.  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.


9-53                 Merchandise peddlers and solicitors - License requirements; fees.

9-54                 Exclusion from provisions.


DIVISION 8.  SECONDHAND GOODS.


9-55                 Definitions.

9-56                 Dealer in secondhand goods - License required; fee.

9-57                 Record to be kept; inspection.

9-58                 Receiving goods from minors.





DIVISION 9.  CONTRACTORS.


9-59                 Contractor defined.

9-60                 Contractor's license required.

9-61                 Liability and property damage insurance and worker's compensation insurance        required.

9-61.1              Contractor’s examination.


DIVISION 10.  STREET STANDS.


9-62                 Street stands - License required.

9-63                 License or permit requirements.


DIVISION 11.  EMERGENCY, POLICE AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.


9-64                 License to engage in business of selling; fee.

9-65                 Installation and maintenance costs.

9-66                 False alarms; charges for; suspension or terminations of permits.


DIVISION 12.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.


9-67                 Definitions.

9-68                 Sexually oriented business license required.

9-69                 Fees.

9-70                 Application for sexually oriented business license.

9-71                 Duty to supplement application.

9-72                 Investigation and application.

9-73                 Issuance of sexually oriented business license.

9-74                 Expiration of sexually oriented business license.

9-75                 Suspension of sexually oriented business license.

9-76                 Revocation of sexually oriented business license.

9-77                 Suspension or revocation hearing.

9-78                 Transfer of sexually oriented business license.

9-79                 Manager’s license required; change of manager; inactive status.

9-80                 Application for manager’s license.

9-81                 Expiration of manager’s license.

9-82                 Suspension of manager’s license.

9-83                 Revocation of manager’s license.

9-84                 Suspension or revocation hearing.

9-85                 Notice.

9-86                 Judicial review.

9-87                 Inspection.





CHAPTER 9. LICENSES .


ARTICLE 1.   IN GENERAL.

Section 9-1.    Short title.


This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "General Business Licensing Ordinance of the City of Trinidad."


Section 9-2.    Purpose and scope.


The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a uniform procedure for the issuance, suspension and revocation of business licenses issued by the City.  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all businesses except those exclusively involved in the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages, and any other businesses whose licensing provisions are contained in another Chapter in this Code.


Section 9-3.    Business defined.


Business includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this City or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.


Section 9-4.    License required.


It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on or engage in any business within the corporate limits of the City of Trinidad, subject to any law of the State of Colorado now in force, or hereafter to be enacted, without first having obtained a license therefor from the City Clerk.

(Ord. 1954, eff. 3/14/14)


Section 9-5.    Exempt activities.


(1)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit, or to require a license for, solicitations or sales by members of bona fide religious, charitable, school or civic organizations eligible for exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(2)  No license shall be required for a casual sale, that being defined as an individual, single or incidental transaction which in itself does not constitute the carrying on of business.


(3)  Nor shall a license be required of any person for any mere delivery in the City where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this Chapter.


(4) No license shall be required of any person for the holding a garage sale exceeding not more than four days in length, at a given location, in a calendar year.  No garage sale may be conducted prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. of any day.   Temporary signs are prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Trinidad, including garage sale signs.  Anyone placing signs on public property or in the public right-of-way will be in violation of the City sign code, Section 14-89, et. seq., and subject to a fine of up to $300.00 or imprisonment up to 90 days, or both. (Ord. 1977, Sec. 9-5(4), repealed and reenacted, eff. 6-26-15)


(5)  No license shall be required of a person operating a street stand as a part of a City sanctioned event lasting no more than five (5) days.  However, such person shall be required to obtain a permit from the City Clerk pursuant to Section 9-63(2) of the Code of Ordinances.  (Ord. 1353, Sec. 1, 5/23/89.)


Section 9-6.    Applications.


(1)  The application for every license required by and issued under authority of the City shall contain:

(a)  The name of the person, firm or corporation desiring such license;


(b)  The residence address and home telephone number of each applicant, or of each of the individual members of such firm, or of each     of the directing officers of such corporation, and the address and telephone number of its principle place of business;


(c)  The kind of business desired, stating the business, trade or profession;


(d)  Street address where business is to be carried on as well as its telephone number;


(e)  The time period for which such license is sought; and


(f)   Any other relevant information required by the terms of this Chapter relating to the particular license sought or deemed to be necessary by the City Clerk for the particular license sought.


(2)  All applications shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00).

Section 9-7.    Issuance. (Ord. 1951, Sec. 9-7 repealed and reenacted eff. 1/17/14)


All licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon receipt of the following, unless otherwise specified in this Code:


(1) A proper application containing all applicable information as required on the form provided by the City of Trinidad.


(2) Payment of the annual business license fee of $50.00 to the City Clerk.


(a)       The annual business license fee shall be pro-rated as follows:



If a license is applied for:


(i)        January 1 to March 31                                    $50.00

(ii)       April 1 to June 30                                           $37.50

(iii)      July 1 to September 30                                   $25.00

(iv)      October 1 to December 31                             $12.50


(3) The execution and delivery of any bond or insurance that may be required.


(4) An inspection report by the building inspection and fire department, certifying that the business premises are fit for occupancy.


(5) The fulfillment of all other specific requirements relating to the issuance of the particular license.




Section 9-8.    Term of license. (Ord. 1951, Sec. 9-8 repealed and reenacted eff. 1/17/14)


All licenses, except those issued for seasonal business or activities, shall be valid only from the date of issuance through the last day of February of each year.


Section 9-9.    Renewals.


Any licensee may make application for a new license for the succeeding one year period and pay the required fee therefor on or before the expiration date of any license or licenses issued to him/her for the current one (1) year period.  Whenever any application and license fee therefor is not received on or before the expiration date of any license issued for the current one year period, and the licensee continues to engage in the business or activity for which the license was issued, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the license fee is imposed and collected and an additional penalty of five percent (5%) of the original fee is imposed as of the last day of each calendar month after the expiration date.  In addition to the above penalty provision, it is unlawful for a licensee to engage in any business or activity after his/her license therefor has expired, and subjects the violations to the penalty provisions as set forth in this Chapter.


Section 9-10.  Transfers.


No license may be transferred from one person to another, or from one place to another, except when permitted by State law or the provisions of this Code relating to the particular license, and then only by the City Clerk after written application therefor and the payment of a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) for the transfer of such license.


Section 9-11.  Suspension or revocation.


(1)  The City Clerk, may upon seven (7) days written notice to a licensee stating the contemplated action and in general the grounds therefor, suspend a license for a period not to exceed fifteen days.  The licensee shall have seven days from the date of the notice to file a written protest with the Clerk.  If a protest is filed, the matter shall be set for hearing before the City Council, and the suspension shall be stayed pending the hearing.  Following the hearing, the City Council shall either overrule the suspension, uphold the suspension, impose a suspension for a greater or lesser length of time, or revoke the license.


(2)  If a protest is not filed, the Clerk shall report the violation and suspension to the City Council, which at its option may set the matter for hearing to consider an extension of the suspension period, or a revocation of the license.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the City Council, on it own motion, from scheduling a suspension or revocation hearing.


(3)  A license may be suspended by the City Clerk, or suspended or revoked by the City Council, upon finding that:


(a)  The licensee has failed to maintain or keep in place any bond on insurance during the course of licensing period, where such bond or insurance is required pursuant to the terms of the issuance of the license and the provisions of this Chapter;


(b)  The licensee has violated any of the terms of the provisions pertaining to his/her license, or any regulation or order lawfully made relating thereto; or


(c)  Any fact or condition which now exists or did exist at the time of the application for such license, which had it been known at the time, would have warranted the refusal of the issuance of such license.


Section 9-12.  Non-issuance of license.


Upon the refusal of any license application, the license fee paid therefor in advance, shall be returned to the applicant; the application fee is nonrefundable.


Section 9-13.  Joint license.


A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for each of such businesses but, when eligible, shall be issued one license which shall specify on its face all such businesses.  However, should one or more of such businesses require a license for which additional and/or more stringent requirements are set forth than those set forth in this Article 1, such licensee shall be required to meet such additional and/or more stringent requirements, in order to obtain a license to operate such business or businesses.


Section 9-14.  License required by each place of business.


A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or separate place of business without payment of any additional fee.


Section 9-15.  Posting and exhibition.


Every license for a business to be conducted at a particular street address shall be posted therein in a location that is visibly noticeable to public view during the period such license is valid.  It shall be the duty of each and every person to whom a license has been issued by the City, to exhibit the same upon the request of any law enforcement officer, inspector, or other office of the City.  (Ord. 1343, 12/6/88.)


Section 9-16.  Penalty for violation.


Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00), or be sentenced to jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.


Section 9-17.  Each day's violation deemed separate offense.


The carrying on of any business, profession, vocation, or occupation as provided in this Chapter, without first having procured a license from the City to do so, shall be deemed a separate violation of this Chapter for each and every day that such business, profession, vocation, or occupation is  carried on without a license.



Section 9-18.  Invalidity.


If any Section of this Ordinance or the application of any section thereof to any particular class of business or persons or circumstances, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance, and said Ordinance and the various portions thereof are declared to be severable.




ARTICLE 2.  BUSINESSES SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.


DIVISION 1.  AMUSEMENT PARKS.


Section 9-19.  Amusement park license - Fee, term, other pursuits included.


A license may be granted to the manager of any amusement park upon payment in advance of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).  The license shall be granted by the Council and issued by the City Clerk, to cover a period of one (1) year from the time such license is granted.  Such licensee shall not be required to take out a separate license, as provided by existing ordinances, for the privilege of carrying on the soft drink or restaurant businesses, or conducting public dances, or for showing or permitting to be shown within such park, carnivals, circuses, road shows or any other tented amusement show or amusements such as ferris wheels and merry-go-rounds.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-14.)


State law reference: As to authority of City to license places of amusement, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec 31-15-501.


Section 9-20.  Carnivals at amusement park - License required; fee.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person without an amusement park license to operate a carnival within the confines of an amusement park duly licensed under this Chapter, unless he/she shall first obtain a license, which may be granted by the Council and issued by the City Clerk upon payment in advance by the applicant of the following fees:


(a)  For the first night of such operations---------- $20.00

(b)  For the second night of such operations------ $17.50

(c)  For the third night of such operations--------- $15.00

(d)  For each night thereafter------------------------$12.50


(2)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to repeal Section 9-27 hereof, which Section shall remain in effect except as herein modified.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-15.)


Section 9-21.  Circus - License required; fee; effect on other sections.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person without an amusement park license to operate a circus (except as to parades) within the confines of an amusement park duly licensed under this Chapter, unless he/she shall first obtain a license, which may be granted by the Council and issued by the City

Clerk upon payment in advance by the applicant of the sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each day of operation.


(2)  The provisions of this Section shall exist concurrently with the provisions of Sections 9-26 and 9-28 and such later sections shall remain in effect as to circuses or other amusement shows not operating within an amusement park.


(3)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as rendering the provisions of Section 9-34 requiring a bond for all circus parades inapplicable to circuses showing in an amusement park under this Section.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-16.)


DIVISION 2.  AUCTION SALES.


Section 9-22.  Auction sales - License required; exemption.


It shall be unlawful for any person without first having obtained a license, to sell, dispose of, or offer for sale at auction or to cause or to permit to be sold, disposed of, or offered for sale at auction any goods, wares or merchandise whether the same be the property of such person or whether he/she shall sell the same as agent or employee of others; provided, however, this Section shall not apply to the following:


(1)  Sales at auction by sheriffs, constables, tax collectors, coroners, marshals, executors, administrators, trustees, guardians, assignees of insolvent debtors or bankrupts, or any person required by law to sell real or personal property at auction;


(2)  Sales at auction of the stock on hand of any person who shall for the period of one (1) year, next preceding such sale, have been continuously in business in the City, as a retail or wholesale merchant, handling the particular articles being sold at such auction, and that such sale at auction of the stock on hand of such merchant shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than thirty (30) days in all, within the period of any one (1) year and shall consist solely of bona fide stock which has been on hand for at least ninety (90) days before said sale and in no instance shall the sale be allowed of merchandise specially imported for such sale;


(3)  Sales of livestock at auction by regularly licensed livestock sales rings;


(4)  Sales at auction of used household goods and effects and second hand goods and chattels belonging to bona fide residents of the City, or of the trade territory thereof;


(5)  Sales at auction of the trade fixtures and equipment of any retail or wholesale establishment in the City.  (Ord. 860, Sec. 1, 9/3/63.)


State Law reference: As to State licensing provisions for auction sales, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 12-51-101; as to authority of City to regulate, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 31-15-501.


Section 9-23.  License fee.


No license for auction sales shall be granted until the applicant shall have paid the sum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the year, in advance.  (Ord. 860, Sec. 3, 9/3/63.)


Section 9-24.  Sales at auction of new jewelry prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at auction, even though he/she possesses a license as required herein any new watches, or articles known as jewelry, and any diamonds which have not been sold at retail on a previous occasion.  (Ord. 860, Sec. 5, 9/3/63.)


Section 9-25.  Penalty for violation.


Any person who shall violate this Division shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Five Dollars ($5.00) or more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for each offense. (Ord. 860, Sec. 4, 9-3-63.)


DIVISION 3.  CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, AND PARADES.


Section 9-26.  Carnivals outside of amusement parks prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any carnival, street show, advertising show or other like show or exhibition, (circuses, dog and pony or animal shows excepted), within the City except as provided in Section 9-19.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-31.)


Section 9-27.  Circuses, shows, parades, exhibitions - License fees; exceptions.


A license fee shall be paid to the City by any person, whether or not operating under the auspices of any organization, fraternal or otherwise, for the exhibiting or conducting of any circus, menagerie, acrobatic or gymnastic show, dog and pony show, vaudeville show under canvas, any natural or artificial curiosities, sleight of hand performances, or any other tented show or exhibition for gain, and for the conducting of a parade in connection therewith in the amounts as follows:


(1)     For each parade, in advance One Hundred Dollars ($100.00); there shall be no license fee charged for the first (1st) exhibition of such show, but there shall be paid in advance for each additional exhibition Fifty Dollars ($50.00); provided, however, that if such shows do not conduct a parade, One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first (1st) performance, and Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each additional performance thereafter.  In case any exhibition should be continuous in its nature, for the purpose of fixing the amount of the license fee, each three (3) hours of operation shall be regarded as a separate exhibition.


(2)     Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to apply to any carnival, street show, advertising show or other like show or exhibition, prohibited by Section 9-26.


(3)     A license shall not be required for the exhibiting of motion pictures or the holding of lectures or entertainments under the auspices of any religious organization, or for the holding of Chautauquas or other educational programs or home talent productions.

Cross reference: As to license fees when such amusements are conducted within amusement parks, see Sec. 9-21. State Law reference: As to State license for circuses, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec 12-51-107.



Section 9-28.  Deposit required for possible damage to city property.


Any person conducting a parade, as provided in Section 9-27, shall, before the start of such parade, deposit with the City Clerk the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) as a fund from which the City may be reimbursed for any damage which may be done by such parade to the streets, pavement, curbs, bridges, culverts, light poles, or any other City property.  Immediately after the conclusion of such parade, the City Engineer and the Superintendent of the Street and Bridge Division of the Department of Public Works, shall examine the line of march covered by such parade and shall note any damage done by such parade to City property.  In case damage is found to have been done, then such committee shall forthwith determine the sum necessary to replace the damaged property, and such sum shall be deducted from the deposit. The balance of the deposit shall be returned to the depositor.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-33.)


Section 9-29.  Licenses - Contents.


All licenses issued under Section 9-27, shall specify the object, the number of exhibitions, or length of time for which such licenses are respectively granted.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-35.)


DIVISION 4.  FARM PRODUCE AT WHOLESALE.


Section 9-30.  Definitions.


As used herein:


(1) Common Carrier shall mean a common carrier by steam railroad or any common carrier which has a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the Colorado State Public Utilities Commission to operate as a common carrier.


(2) Regular employee of any farmer or producer shall mean a person then employed by such farmer or producer and whose principal occupation is field work upon the farm or ranch of such farmer or producer.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-140.)


(3) Wholesale , shall mean the sale or delivery to a hotel, restaurant, retailer, commission house, or to any other person for resale, either directly or indirectly, including resale as a part of or an ingredient of a manufactured article.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-140.)


Section 9-31.  Sale of farm produce; license required; fee, exception of common carriers          and certain farmers.


Except as otherwise provided, no person shall engage in the selling or delivering of any fruits, vegetables or farm products, from any building, store, room, freight car, wagon, truck or other vehicle, vacant lot, stand or any other structure or space, at wholesale without first having obtained a license therefor from the City Council and having paid to the City for such license the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) in advance, for each calendar year or fraction thereof; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to common carriers making deliveries as such common carriers, nor to any farmer or producer, registered as provided in Section 9-32 including a regular employee of such farmer or producer, when selling or delivering only such fruits, vegetables or farm products actually grown or produced by such farmer or producer in the State.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-141.)


Section 9-32.  Registration of farmers and producers; certificate.


Any farmer or producer desiring to sell or deliver any fruits, vegetables or farm products, actually grown or produced by him/her in the State, shall obtain a certificate of registration therefor from the City Clerk.  The sale or delivery by such certificate holder of any fruits, vegetables or farm products not actually produced or grown by him/her, without obtaining a license as provided in Section 9-31 hereof, shall constitute a violation of this Code.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-142.)



Section 9-33.  License transfer; use of license of another.


Licenses issued under Section 9-31 shall run from January 1 of each calendar year, shall be for the full calendar year, shall not be transferable, and the fees therefor shall not be prorated for any portion of a calendar year.  No refunds shall be made in case of revocation or surrender.  The conducting of any business by any person under any license or certificate of registration issued to another under the provision of this Division shall constitute a violation thereof.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-143.)


Section 9-34.  Bond requirements.


Before any license shall be issued under Section 9-31 the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a good and sufficient bond in the penal sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) in favor of the City, such bond to be approved by the City Council and conditioned that the licensee shall fully comply with all ordinances relating to the conduct of the business thereby authorized and shall pay all judgments rendered against such licensee for any violation of any such ordinance or for any damage arising out of any misrepresentation or deceit practiced by such licensee in the conduct of business.  The bond herein provided for may be sued upon in the name of the City by and for the use of any person injured by the breach of any condition thereof.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-144.)


Section 9-35.  Exclusions from provisions.


Nothing in this Division shall be construed to supersede or repeal any ordinances now or hereafter in effect relating to peddlers or hucksters selling direct to consumers, or to restaurants and hotels, or to the inspection of foods, wares and merchandise sold or offered for sale.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-145.)


DIVISION 5.  JUNK DEALERS.


Section 9-36.  Junk shop - License required.


It shall be unlawful for any person without first having obtained a license from the City Council to engage in the business of keeping a junk shop or yard, to purchase, sell, barter, exchange or otherwise deal in, or storage of, rags, or old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper, tin, slush, or lead, empty bottles or other junk; or carry on any such business at any place other than that

designated in his/her license; or draw or drive, or cause to be drawn or driven through the streets any hand cart, wheel barrow, or other cart or vehicle, for the purpose of collecting or disposing of such articles; or use a car or cart, or other vehicle for the aforesaid purpose.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-124.)


Section 9-37.  License fee - Junk shop; junk wagon.


The license fee for keepers of junk shops or junk yards shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per annum, payable in advance; and for each junk wagon, truck, or other conveyance used in connection with a junk shop or yard, Ten Dollars ($10.00) per annum, payable in advance; and the license fee for the operator of each junk wagon, truck or other conveyance when used in connection with a junk shop or yard regularly established and licensed in the City, shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per wagon, truck, or other conveyance, and no such license shall be issued for a period less than one (1) year.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-121.)




Section 9-38.  Bond requirements.


Before any person shall be licensed under the provisions of this Division as a keeper of a junk shop or yard, he/she shall execute a bond to the City with good and sufficient securities, to be approved by the City Council, in the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances of the City respecting keepers of junk shops or yards, and before any person shall receive a license for a junk wagon or truck he/she shall execute a like bond in the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-122.)


Section 9-39.  Junk shop - License issuance.


The City Council may grant licenses to persons who shall produce satisfactory evidence of good character to keep what are commonly called junk shops, junk yards or junk wagons or trucks for the purchase and sale of old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin or lead, rags, slush, empty bottles, paper, bagging and other junk.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-120.)


Section 9-40.        Separate license for each vehicle required.


A separate license shall be obtained by every keeper of a junk shop or yard for each truck, wagon or other vehicle used in his/her business.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-123.)


Section 9-41.    Change of business location; notice to City Clerk.


In case any person licensed as provided in this Division shall move his/her place of business from that designated in the license, he/she shall immediately give notice to the City Clerk and have the change noted upon the license.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-134.)


Section 9-42.    Vehicle license plate; driver's badge.


Every person licensed under the provisions of this Division shall, before using any cart, wagon or other vehicle, or cause the same to be used for the collection or disposal of any of the articles of junk mentioned in this Division, obtain from the City Clerk for each wagon, cart or other vehicle, two (2) painted metal plates eight inches (8") long and four inches (4") wide, on which shall be stamped or painted a number corresponding to the license number and also the words "Trinidad Junk", which plates shall be securely fastened on the outer sides of such cart, wagon or other vehicle used in his/her business.  Such persons shall also at the same time obtain from the Clerk a metal badge one and three fourths inches (1 3/4") long and one and one eighth inches (1 1/8") wide for the driver of each licensed wagon, having a number thereon corresponding to the number on the aforesaid plate.  Such badge shall be provided with a pin or other fastening, and shall be worn in a conspicuous place on the outside of the coat.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-125.)


Section 9-43.    Register of articles dealt in.


Every person licensed as the keeper of a junk shop or yard, or junk wagon or truck shall keep at his/her place of business a record book, in which he/she shall enter a minute description of all the personal property purchased by him/her, the date of the purchase, the name and residence, or place of business of the person from whom such purchase was made, and particular mention of any prominent or descriptive marks that may be on such property, and all the entries made therein shall be made in ink.  Every licensee shall, during the ordinary hours of business and when requested by any police officer or inspector of the City, submit and exhibit such book for inspection, and shall also exhibit such goods or personal property to any of the aforesaid officers.  Any person failing or refusing to comply with any requirement of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-126.)


Section 9-44.    Waiting period before sale.


It shall be unlawful for any dealer in junk or keeper of a junk shop, wagon or truck to expose for sale, or sell or dispose of any article within ten (10) days after it shall have been purchased, or until the article shall have been in or upon the premises wherein it is offered, exposed or sold, at least ten (10) days.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  14-127.)


Section 9-45.    Purchasing from minor prohibited.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in junk or keeper of a junk shop, wagon or truck to purchase any goods, articles or things whatsoever, except old rags, and waste paper, from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years.


(2)  Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  12-128.)


Section 9-46.    Hours of purchase.


It shall be unlawful for any dealer in junk or keeper of a junk shop, wagon or truck to purchase for sale and goods, article or thing whatsoever from any person between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-129.)


Section 9-47.    Receiving articles in pawn; advancing money.


It shall be unlawful for any dealer in junk or keeper of a junk shop, junk yard, junk wagon or truck to receive any article or thing by way of pledge or pawn or loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any article or thing. (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-131.)


Section 9-48.    Licensing as pawnbroker or secondhand dealer prohibited.


No keeper of a junk shop, yard, wagon or truck shall receive or hold a license to carry on the business of a pawnbroker, or of a dealer in secondhand articles.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-132.)


Cross reference: As to provisions pertaining to licenses for pawnbrokers, see Sec. 9-52; as to licenses for secondhand dealers, see Sec. 9-56.


Section 9-49.    Police supervision of junk dealers.


The Chief of Police, or any officer designated by him/her, shall have general supervision over all dealers in junk and keepers of junk shops, and the power to inspect their respective places of business, and vehicles, and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he/she shall deem it necessary so to do.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-133.)



Section 9-50.    Exhibiting articles to police.


Every dealer in junk or keeper of a junk shop, wagon or truck, who shall receive, or be in possession of any goods, articles or things which may have been lost or stolen, or alleged, to have been lost or stolen, shall forthwith, on demand, exhibit the same to any member of the Police Department.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-130.)


DIVISION 6.  PAWNBROKERS.


Section 9-51.    Pawnbroker defined.


Pawnbroker shall mean a person who advances or loans money or other valuable things on the deposit of personal security, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-55.)


Section 9-52.    Pawnbroker - License required; fee.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a pawnbroker without first having obtained a license therefor.


(2)  Licenses may be issued for the purpose of carrying on the business of pawnbroker to any applicant therefor upon the payment of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each six (6) months, or Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for one (1) year.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-55 and 14-56.)



Cross reference: As to provisions relating to licensing of junk dealers as pawnbrokers, see Sec. 9-48

State law reference : As to authority of City to license and regulate pawnbrokers, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 13-15-501.


DIVISION 7.  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.


Section 9-53.    Merchandise peddlers and solicitors - License requirements; fees.


(1)  Licensing Requirements.  Hawkers, hucksters, peddlers, vendors, solicitors or transient salesmen who go about from place to place selling and delivering merchandise of any character, except produce and vegetables at retail, and any person who shall come into the City, except traveling salesmen or drummers taking orders for merchandise to be delivered to retail dealers only, in going about from house to house or place to place, offering the performance of temporary services or soliciting the sales of goods, wares or merchandise of any character at retail, whether the same be in its raw or manufactured state, and whether deliveries are made by them or not, for the purpose of profit to themselves through the use of the streets, sidewalks and other municipal agencies of the City, or peddlers, itinerant vendors and persons other than itinerant vendors who shall temporarily bring into the City stocks of goods, wares or merchandise and offer the same for sale at public auction or private sale, shall, before commencing business in the City, secure an annual license from the City Clerk, and shall pay the application fee and license fee as set forth in this Section.


(2)  Application fee and license fee.  The application fee for a new license issued pursuant to this Section shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00).  The annual license fee shall be Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00).


(3)  Bonding Requirement.  Before any license, as provided by this Section is issued to an applicant, such applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond running to the City in the sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), executed by the applicant as principal and at least one surety upon which service of process may be made in the state of Colorado; such bond to be conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the City, of the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the applicant's business, and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him/her by any person or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether the misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof.  Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the City or the use of the aggrieved person.  Such bond must be responsibility of the surety thereon.  (Ord. 1386, 08/21/90.)


Section 9-54.    Exclusion from provisions.


Nothing contained in Section 9-53 shall apply to any resident of this State selling fruits, farm or garden produce of their own raising, or fresh meat butchered from animals of their own raising.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-136.)


State Law reference: As to authority to regulate peddlers and solicitors, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 31-15-501.


DIVISION 8.  SECONDHAND GOODS.


Section 9-55.    Definitions.


As used herein:


(1) Dealer in secondhand goods shall mean a person who shall keep a store or other place of business for the purchase or sale of secondhand clothing, household goods, books, pictures, tools, leather goods, firearms, or any other kind of secondhand goods, wares and merchandise.


(2) Secondhand goods shall mean and include any and all kinds of goods, wares and merchandise, which shall have been purchased by one not a dealer in such articles, for the use of himself/herself, or his/her family or employees.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 4-69.)


Section 9-56.    Dealer in secondhand goods - License required; fee.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a dealer in secondhand goods without first having obtained a license therefor.


(2)  Licenses may be issued for the purpose of dealing in secondhand goods upon payment by the applicant of a license fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00) per year.


Cross reference: As to provision pertaining to licensing of a junk dealer as secondhand dealer, see Sec. 9-48.

State Law reference: As to authority to regulate secondhand stores, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 31-15-501.


Section 9-57.    Record to be kept; inspection.


Every dealer in secondhand goods shall keep a record of all purchases of goods made by him/her or his/her agent, in which record he/she shall enter the names of the seller, a description of the article or articles purchased, the day and hour of purchase, and the signature of the seller.  This record shall be open at all times to the inspection of any member of the City police force.  Any dealer in secondhand goods who shall fail to keep a record as herein required, or who shall fail or refuse to submit the same to the inspection of any member of the City police force, when requested so to do, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-71.)


Section 9-58.    Receiving goods from minors.


It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand goods to purchase or receive from any minor, without the written consent of his/her guardian or parent, any article whatsoever. When any goods are purchased from any minor, the written consent of the parent or guardian shall be attached to the record of the purchase.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 14-72.)


DIVISION 9.  CONTRACTORS.


Section 9-59.    REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)


Section 9-60.    REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)


Section 9-61.    REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)


Section 9-61.1 REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)



DIVISION 10.  STREET STANDS.


Section 9-62.  Street stands - License required.


It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any stand, booth, box, wagon, shed, cart or other thing or contrivance in or upon any street or alley or other public or private place for the purpose of selling or offering for sale therefrom popcorn, candy, lunches, meals or any other article or thing or any goods, wares or merchandise without first having obtained a license therefor, except as set forth in Section 9-63.  (Ord. 1353, Sec. 2, 5/23/89.)


Section 9-63.  License or permit requirements.


(1)  Licenses may be issued for the purposes contemplated in Section 9-62 upon compliance with the provisions of Section 9-6, and upon receipt of a proper application containing all applicable information as required on the form provided by the City of Trinidad and the payment of a license fee in lieu of the annual business license fee set forth in Section 9-7(2).  The license shall be valid for a six (6) month period beginning the date of issuance.  The license fee shall be Twenty-Four Dollars ($24.00) for each six (6) month period.  A new license application, application fee and license fee shall be required for each six-month period for which a license is issued.  No business shall be transacted under such license between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.  All places where such business shall be conducted shall be designated by the City Clerk or a subordinate acting under the City Clerk's direction. (Ord. 1353, Sec. 3, 5/23/89.)


(2)  Any person operating a street stand as part of a City sanctioned special event lasting no more than five (5) days shall not be required to obtain a business license or the license described in Subsection (1) of this Section.  However, such person shall be required to obtain a permit from the City Clerk.  Application shall be made on a form provided to the City.  No application fee shall be charged.  The applicant shall be charged a $5.00 permit fee for issuance of the permit.  The permit shall be valid for the duration of the special event.  No business shall be transacted under such permit between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.   The permit fee requirement set forth in this Section shall not take effect until July 1, 1989.  All other provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect on the effective date of this Ordinance.  (Ord. 1353, Sec. 2, 5/23/89.)


(3)  Any organization or entity seeking City sanction of a special event shall make such a request in writing to the City Manager.  The City Manager shall take into consideration, in deciding whether an event shall be sanctioned by the City, the degree and type of control exercised over the event and arrangements made for clean-up after the conclusion of the events, in addition to any other factors he/she may deem relevant.  (Ord. 1353, Sec. 2, 5/23/89.)


DIVISION 11.  EMERGENCY, POLICE AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.


Section 9-64.  License to engage in business of selling; fee.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating, maintaining, installing or selling any dial alarm devices or systems, or emergency alarm devices of any kind which result in the transmission of a telephone, electrical or electronic signal or impression to the Police Department, Fire Department or any other person who, acting in response thereto, in turn transmits or releases a communication to the Police or Fire Department of an emergency without first having obtained a license from the City Clerk.  An annual license in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be paid by any person securing a license to engage in such business under the provisions hereof and a performance bond or liability insurance policy covering all operations in the scope of this Chapter in the principal sum of no less than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00).


(2)  It shall be unlawful to install and thereafter operate and maintain any emergency alarm device or system of any kind without having first obtained a permit therefor for each device or system installed.  A permit fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) shall be paid prior to the installation of any such device or system in any place within the City, or under any circumstances covered by the provisions of this article.


Section 9-65.  Installation and maintenance costs.


Any and all costs and recurring charges attributable to the installation and maintenance of systems permitted by this Chapter which terminate directly in the Police Department or Fire Department of the City shall be borne entirely by the licensee or permittee.


Section 9-66.  False alarms; charges for; suspension or terminations of permits.


(1)  A charge of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each false fire, burglar, holdup or police emergency alarm to which the Police or Fire Department respond in excess of three (3) in any ninety (90) day period shall be paid to the City. Repeated false alarms in excess of six (6) shall be charged Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each call.  False alarms in excess of nine (9) in any ninety day period for whatever reason shall be grounds for suspension or termination by the Chief of Police of the permit  for such system as a faulty system.


(2)  The Chief of Police shall at all times have the authority to suspend the permit for any such system until such time as satisfactory repairs or replacement is made correcting such system.  Systems shall remain deactivated or removed until the suspension is terminated or a new permit is issued.  (Ord. 1297, 4/1/86.)


DIVISION 12.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.


Section 9-67.  Definitions.


Certain words and phrases used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed in them in Section 9-3 and 14-172. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-68.  Sexually oriented business license required.

(1) No sexually oriented business license shall be issued for any sexually oriented business located within any zone district other than the I-Industrial District. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without first having obtained a valid type A or type B sexually oriented business license issued by the City of Trinidad. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


a. A type A sexually oriented business license shall be required for sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are allowed pursuant to a valid license issued under Chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


b. A type B sexually oriented business license shall be required for all sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverage, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are not allowed. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3) It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business when said person knows or reasonably should know that: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(a) the business does not have a sexually oriented business license; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10 -21-03)


(b) the business has a sexually oriented business license that is under suspension; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) the business has a sexually oriented business license that has been revoked; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) the business has a sexually oriented business license that has expired; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e) the business operates under a type B sexually oriented business license and allows alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer code, on the premises; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f) the business is in violation of any applicable provision of Chapter 14 of this Code. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-69.  Fees.

(1)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is five hundred dollars ($500.00) (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) The annual manager’s license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3) An applicant for either a type A or type B sexually oriented business license shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525.00) at the time of filing an application. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-70.  Application for sexually oriented business license.


(1)  The City Clerk is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, and suspending sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) The Planning Director or his or her designee is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a sexually oriented business license application has been submitted complies with all location requirements of Section 14-174. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3)  The Police Chief or his or her designee is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(4)  The Building Inspector or his or her designee is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable building codes and ordinances. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(5)  The Fire Chief or his or her designee is responsible for ascertaining the compliance of the sexually oriented business with all applicable fire and electrical codes and occupancy requirements. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(6)  Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the City Clerk an original and two (2) copies of a sworn sexually oriented business license application on the standard application form supplied by the City Clerk. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(7)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(a) If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases, and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is twenty-one (21) years of age or older in the case of a type A sexually oriented business license or eighteen (18) years of age or older in the case of a type B sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(b) If the applicant is a legal entity, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized, and if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado, the full legal names, date of birth and the capacity of all officers, directors, managers, and principal owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered agent for service of process, if any. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the sexually oriented business’ fictitious name must be stated. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsections (6)(a) or (b) has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i), and if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsections (6)(a) or (b) has had a previous license under this or any other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, town or county denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the city, town or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f) Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (6)(a) or (b) has been a partner in a partnership or a principal owner of a corporation or other legal entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the city, town or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(g) Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsections (6)(a) and (b) holds any other licenses under this Article or any other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, town or county, and, if so, the name of such city, town or county, and names and locations of such other licensed businesses. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(h) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(i) Proof of the applicant’s right to possession of the premises wherein the sexually oriented business will be conducted. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(j) The applicant’s mailing address and residential address. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(k) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.  The City Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.  If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths subject to the provisions of Section 14-182, the sketch shall show the locations and dimensions of any manager’s stations and demonstrate that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager’s stations of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access, excluding restrooms.  The floor plan shall designate those rooms or other areas of the premise where patrons are not permitted and shall also designate the use of each room or other area of the premises. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(l) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to an initial application by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (i) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; and (ii) the location of the property lines of any church, school, dwelling, public park, or childcare facility within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be certified and (iii) the location of the property lines and structures on the property of any other sexually oriented business within one hundred (100) feet of the property to be certified.  For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence or pending at the time an application is submitted. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(m) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



(8) In the event that the City Clerk determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days properly to complete the application.  The time period for granting or denying a sexually oriented business license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(9) The fact that a person possesses or is required to possess other types of state or town licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-71.  Duty of supplement application.


(1)  Applicants for a sexually oriented business license under Section 9-70 shall have a continuing

duty to promptly supplement any application information required by that section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)  The failure to comply with said continuing duty to supplement an application within thirty (30)

days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-72.  Investigation and application.


(1)   Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the City Clerk and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee and refundable annual license fee, the City Clerk shall immediately stamp the application as received and send copies of the application to the director of planning, the building official, fire chief and the police chief.  The Planning Director, the Building Inspector and the Police and Fire Chief, or their respective designees, shall promptly conduct an investigation of the application information, and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with his or her responsibilities under this section.  Investigations shall be completed within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer.  At the conclusion of their investigations, the Planning Director and the Building Inspector shall indicate on the copy of the application his or her approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event of the disapproval, state the reasons therefore.  The Fire Chief shall only be required to render an opinion regarding fire and electrical code violations and occupancy limits.  The Police Chief shall only be required to provide the information specified in Section 9-70(3), and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   The Planning Director, the Building Inspector, and the Fire Chief may disapprove an application if he or she finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be or is in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulations, or other law in effect in the City.  After their investigations and review the Planning Director, the Building Inspector and the Police Chief shall immediately return the copy of the application to the City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall not issue a sexually oriented business license unless signed copies of the application for the same have been delivered to the City Clerk by the Planning Director and the Building Inspector and unless the Police Chief has supplied said City Clerk with the information specified in Section 9-70(3). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-73.  Issuance of sexually oriented business license.


(1)   The City Clerk shall grant or deny a sexually oriented business license within thirty (30) days from the date of its proper filing.  Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) days, the applicant shall be licensed to begin operating the business for which the sexually oriented business license is sought, unless and until the City Clerk notifies the applicant, by first class mail to the address on the application, of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that denial. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   Grant of a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(a) The City Clerk shall grant the sexually oriented business license unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (3) below is present. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b) The sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business.  The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(3)  Denial of a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(a) An applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age in the case of an application for a type A sexually oriented business license or under eighteen (18) years of age in the case of an application for a type B sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b) An applicant is overdue on his or her payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) An applicant has failed to provide information required by this Article for the issuance of the sexually oriented business license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form and has refused to provide corrected information. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-72(2). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e) The application or sexually oriented business license fees have not been paid. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f) An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(g) The granting of a license would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(h) The applicant has or had a sexually oriented business license under this Article, or under the regulatory provisions of another jurisdiction, that was suspended or revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. In the case of a denial of an application due to the suspension or revocation of the applicant’s license in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Manager.  After the hearing, the City Manager may grant the application without regard to the suspension or revocation of the applicant’s license in another jurisdiction if he finds that the grounds for suspension or revocation in that jurisdiction would not be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(i) An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts for which:

(I) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(II) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date or release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(III) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.  An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required above has elapsed. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(IV) If the City Clerk denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant, by first class mail to the address on the application, of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial.  A copy of such denial shall be forwarded to the City Attorney. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-74.  Expiration of sexually oriented business license.


(1)   Each sexually oriented business license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 9-70 of this article, including but not limited to a review of whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts (for renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient).  Application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3) If, subsequent to denial of renewal the City Clerk finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the sexually oriented business license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a sexually oriented business license if no more than ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-75.  Suspension of sexually oriented business license.

(1) The City Clerk may suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed one

hundred fifty (150) days, unless the period is extended by operation of subpart (2) of this section, if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(a) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article or any provision of Chapter 14 of this Code; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of the public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning code, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the department, division, or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance, or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a twenty (20) day period in which to correct the violation.  If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the


expiration of the twenty (20) day period, the City Clerk shall forthwith suspend the sexually oriented business license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e) operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in Section 14-182; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f) transferred a sexually oriented business license contrary to Section 9-78.  In the event of such suspension, the City Clerk shall forthwith notify the original licensee and the transferee of the suspension.  The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable provisions of Section 9-78 have been satisfied. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the City Clerk’s order and until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-76.  Revocation of sexually oriented business license.


(1)   The City Clerk shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(a) a cause of suspension of Section 9-75 of this article occurred and the sexually oriented business license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b) a licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a sexually oriented business or license; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) a licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances ( as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) a licensee, manager, or an employee has knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e) a licensee, manager or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s sexually oriented business license was suspended; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f) a licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i) has not elapsed; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(g) on two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the sexually oriented business license; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(h) a licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes or fees; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(i) a licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   When the City Clerk revokes a sexually oriented business license, the revocation shall continue for one year (1) and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-77.  Suspension or revocation hearing.


(1)  A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Manager if the City seeks to suspend or

revoke his or her sexually oriented business license based on a violation of this Article or any provision of Chapter 14 of this Code.  The business may continue to operate during the hearing process. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the City Attorney may file a written complaint with the City Clerk setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3)   The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the City Manager for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why

the licensee’s sexually oriented business license should not be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(4)   At the hearing, the City Manager shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the police department or other enforcement officers, the owner, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint.  The City Manager shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment.  If the City Manager determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the sexually oriented business license with thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact.  A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the licensee at the address on the license.  In performing his duties pursuant to this section 9-77, the City Manager may retain independent counsel to advise him regarding any matter. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(5)   The order of the City Manager made pursuant to subsection (4) above shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4).  Failure of a licensee timely to appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(6)   The City Manager shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances.  Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing, which the City Manager conducts.  It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the City Manager.  A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the State of Colorado. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(7)   All hearings held before the City Manager regarding suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business license issued under this ordinance shall be recorded steno-graphically or by electronic recording device.  Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the City Manager, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(8)   In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the sexually oriented business license fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-78.  Transfer of sexually oriented business license.


(1)   A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a sexually oriented business license at any place other than the address designated in the application for sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   A licensee shall not transfer his or her sexually oriented business license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(a) Obtains an amendment to the sexually oriented business license from the licensing officer that provides that he or she is not the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer setting forth the information called for under Section 9-70 in the application; and


(b) Pays a nonrefundable application fee and an annual sexually oriented business license fee.(Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3) No sexually oriented business license may be transferred when the City Clerk has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(4) Any attempt to transfer a sexually oriented business license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-79.  Manager’s license required; change of manager; inactive status.


(1)   A manager shall be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at all times during operation.

It shall be unlawful for any person to work as a manager of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a manager’s license for such premises.  A manager can only manage one sexually oriented business establishment. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   In the event a manager ceases to be employed at the premises listed in his or her application, the manager shall immediately report such change to the licensing officer but in no event shall such change be reported later than ten (10) days after cessation of employment. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3)   Provided a manager has complied with the requirements of subsection (2), his or her license shall remain in inactive status until it expires or is reactivated. A manager who is re-employed at the premises listed in the manager’s license may reactivate his or her license provide the City Clerk determines he or she still meets the requirements of Section 9-80. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-80.  Application for manager’s license.

(1)   A manager shall submit an application for a manager’s license for each sexually oriented business the manager proposes to manage on a form to be provided by the licensing officer.  The application shall contain the applicant’s full legal name, address, date of birth, telephone number, address, the name and address of the sexually oriented business that manager proposes to manage and the information required in Section 9-70(6)(d). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   The police department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant to determine if the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3)   The City Clerk shall grant the application within ten (10) days of its filing unless: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(a) the applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) in the case of a type A sexually oriented business license or under the age of eighteen (18) in the case of a type B sexually oriented business license; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b) the applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) the license fee has not been paid; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i). (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-81.  Expiration of manager’s license.


(1) Each manager’s license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 9-78, including but not limited to a review of whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts.  Application for renewal of a manager’s license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the manager’s license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) If, subsequent to denial of renewal the City Clerk finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the manager’s license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a manager’s license if no more than ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-82.  Suspension of manager’s license.


(1) The City Clerk may suspend a manager’s license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, unless the period is extended by operation of subpart B of this section, if he or she determines that the manager has: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(a) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article or any provision of Chapter 14 of this Code; or


(b) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this Article; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c) knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of the public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d) operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in Section 14-183. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

(2)  The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the City Clerk’s order and until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-83.  Revocation of manager’s license.


(1) The City Clerk shall revoke a manager’s license upon determining that: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21- 03)

(a)       a cause of suspension in Section 9-82 of this article occurred and the manager’s license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(b)       the manager gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a manger’s license; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(c)       the manager knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 or Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(d)       the manager knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(e)       the manager knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the sexually oriented business license was suspended; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(f)        the manager has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in Section 9-73(3)(i) has not elapsed; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(g)       the manager has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)    When the City Clerk revokes a manager’s license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a manager’s license for one year from the date revocation became effective. (Ord. 1738. eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-84.  Suspension or revocation hearing.


(1) A manager shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Manger if the City seeks to suspend or revoke the manager’s license based on a violation of this Article or any provision of Chapter 14 of this Code.  The manager may continue to manage a sexually oriented business during the hearing process. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2) When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the City Attorney may file a written complaint with the City Clerk setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(3) The licensing officer shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the City Manager for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why the licensee’s license should not be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(4) At the hearing, the City manger shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the police department or other enforcement officers, the owner, employee, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint.  The City Manger shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment.  If the City Manager determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the manager’s license within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact.  A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the license at the address on the license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(5) The order of the City Manager made pursuant to subsection (4) above shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the district court to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4).  Failure of a licensee timely to appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the manager’s license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(6) The City Manager shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances.  Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing, which the City Manager conducts.  It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the City Manager.  A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the State of Colorado. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(7) All hearing held before the City Manager regarding suspension or revocation of a manager’s license issued under this ordinance shall be recorded steno-graphically or by electronic recording device.  Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the City Manager, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(8) In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the manager’s license fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-85.  Notice.


Any notice required by this Article shall be deemed sufficient if it is deposited in first class mail, postage pre-paid, to the address on the application and shall be effective upon mailing. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)



Section 9-86.  Judicial review.


After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a license, such act shall be a final decision.  Therefore, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.  The court shall promptly review such administrative action. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


Section 9-87.  Inspection.


(1)   An applicant or licensee or manager shall permit representative of the licensing officer, building official, the director of planning, the police department, the county health department and the fire department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)


(2)   It shall be unlawful for the person, applicant, licensee, or manager who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)

CHAPTER 10.  MUNICIPAL COURT.


Sections:


10-1                 Municipal Court - Creation.

10-2                 Municipal Court - Jurisdiction and powers.

10-3                 Municipal Court - Rules of procedure.

10-4                 Sessions of Court - Regular and special.

10-5                 Municipal Judges - Appointment; oath; salary; powers.

10-6                 Procedure for issuance of warrant.

10-7                 Court Clerk - Appointment; duties; salary; reports.

10-8                 Appropriations for Municipal Court.







































CHAPTER 10.  MUNICIPAL COURT.


Section 10-1.   Municipal Court - Creation.

A municipal court in and for the City of Trinidad is hereby created and established, pursuant to and governed by the provisions of Title 13 of Article 10, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, and the City Charter.


Section 10-2.   Municipal Court - Jurisdiction and powers.

The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction of all cases arising under this Code and other ordinances of the City with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed by ordinance or Court rule.


Section 10-3.   Municipal Court - Rules of procedure.

The Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court, which took effect on January 1, 1989, together with all amendments contained therein, be and the same are hereby adopted by reference and said Rules are hereby enacted as the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure of the City of Trinidad.


Section 10-4.   Sessions of Court - Regular and special.

(1)  There shall be regular sessions of the Court for the trial of cases.  The Municipal Judge may hold a special session of the Court at any time.


(2)  All sessions shall be open to the public.  Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceeding, the Municipal Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared.


Section 10-5.   Municipal Judges - Appointment; oath; salary; powers.

(1)  The Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge appointed for a term of two (2) years by resolution of the Council.  Additional Judges may be appointed as may be needed for a term of two (2) years to transact the business of the Court.


(2)  The compensation of the Judge shall be an annual salary in an amount set by the Council and shall be payable as other salaries to Municipal employees.


(3)  Before entering the duties of his/her office, a Municipal Judge shall make an oath or affirmation that he/she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution

of the State, and the laws of the City and will faithfully perform the duties of his/her office.

(4)  The Municipal Judge is empowered in his/her discretion to assess costs of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) against any Defendant who pleads Guilty or Nolo Contendere or who enters into a plea agreement or who after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation.


(5)  In addition to other powers, a Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court.


(6) The Municipal Judge is empowered to order a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of the City of Trinidad Municipal Code or any of the ordinances of the City, or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence, to make restitution or reparation, or both, to the victim of the defendant’s conduct for the damage or injury sustained.  (Ord. 1936, eff. 5/29/13)



Section 10-6.   Procedure for issuance of warrant.

The application for and issuance of any search warrant which may be issued by the Municipal Judge to search for and seize property, or for inspection of private premises by an authorized inspector, shall be in accordance with those procedures set forth in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure.


Section 10-7.   Court Clerk - Appointment; duties; salary; reports.

(1)  The Presiding Judge may appoint a person to serve as Clerk of the Court whose duties shall be those assigned by the Presiding Judge.


(2)  The compensation of the Court Clerk shall be an annual salary in an amount set by the Council and shall be payable as other salaries to Municipal employees.


(3)  The Court Clerk shall file monthly reports with the City Clerk of all moneys collected by him/her.  All moneys received by and in the custody of the Court Clerk shall be paid daily to the Department of Finance.


Section 10-8.   Appropriations for Municipal Court.

The City Council shall, on an annual basis, budget and appropriate such moneys as may be necessary for the proper operation of the Municipal Court.

CHAPTER 11.  MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE


Sections:


11-1                       Title.

11-2                       Definitions and rules of construction.

11-3                       Who may collect, transport and dispose of municipal solid waste.

11-4                       Licensing procedure - Fee.

11-5                       Vehicles used in transporting municipal solid waste.

11-6                       Insurance requirements.

11-7                       Suspension or revocation of license.

11-8                       Storage and placement of municipal solid waste.

11-9                       Scattering of municipal solid waste.

11-10                     Accumulation and use of manure.

11-11                     Burning of municipal solid waste.

11-12                     City Landfill fees.

11-13                     Penalty for violation.

































CHAPTER 11.  MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE


Section 11-1.  Title.

This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Municipal Solid Waste Ordinance of the City of Trinidad, Colorado."


Section 11-2.  Definitions and rules of construction.

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and vice versa. The word " shall " is mandatory and the word " may " is permissive.


(1) Asbestos material shall mean any material that contains more than one percent (1%) asbestos by weight or volume.


(2) Hazardous waste shall mean any material, alone or mixed with other materials, which has no commercial use or value, or which is discarded or is to be discarded by the possessor thereof, either of which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, or chemical characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.  The term does not include: discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the "Federal Water Pollution Control Act," as amended; source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal "Atomic Energy Act of 1954", as amended; agricultural waste from the raising of crops or animals, including animal manures, which are returned to the soils as fertilizers or soil conditioners; domestic sewage; irrigation return flows; inert materials deposited for construction for fill or topsoil placement in connection with actual or contemplated construction at such location or for changes in land contour for agricultural and mining purposes, or any waste or other materials exempted or otherwise not regulated as hazardous waste under the federal act.


(3) Municipal solid waste shall mean solid waste from community, commercial and industrial sources that does not contain hazardous wastes as defined in Section 25-15-101 (6) of the Colorado Hazardous Waste Act unless otherwise regulated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.


(4) Recyclable materials shall mean a type of material that is subject to reuse or recycling.

(5) Recyclable operation shall mean that part of a solid waste disposal facility, or a part of a general disposal facility at which recyclable materials may be separated from other materials for further processing.


(6) Sanitary landfill shall mean the final disposal of solid waste on land by a method employing compaction of the waste and covering with earth or other suitable material, in compliance with the act and these department regulations.



(7) Scrap tire shall mean a tire that is no longer used for its original purpose.


(8) Scrap tire recycling shall mean the sale of scrap tires in the used-tire market, the sale of tire casings or carcasses for retreading purposes, or the extraction of useful materials or energy from the tires through thermal, chemical, or physical processing.


Section 11-3.  Who may collect, transport and dispose of municipal solid waste.

(1)  All municipal solid waste generated and/or accumulated within the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed at a sanitary landfill by a licensed contractor or City licensed municipal solid waste collection operator.  No person shall hire himself/herself out to collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the City or dispose of any municipal solid waste without having obtained the required license issued by the City.  The provisions of this Chapter, however, shall not prohibit the actual producer or generator at any municipal solid waste or the owner of the premises upon which municipal solid waste has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such municipal solid waste at a sanitary landfill.  Recyclable materials may be accumulated and disposed of separately from other municipal solid waste at an approved public or private recycling operation.


(2)  Scrap tires may be disposed of at a sanitary landfill for scrap tire recycling.


(3)  No hazardous waste or asbestos material may be accumulated nor disposed of at a sanitary landfill unless such sanitary landfill has been authorized by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for such purposes.


Section 11-4.  Licensing procedure - Fee.

It shall be unlawful for any person to hire himself/herself to collect, convey over any of the streets or dispose of any municipal solid waste without having obtained a license to haul municipal solid waste from the City Clerk.  No license shall be issued until the applicant has paid the annual license fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and has met the requirements of Sections 11-5 and 11-6 of the Code of Ordinances.  Application shall be made in the manner set forth for business licenses in Chapter 9 of the Code of Ordinances.



Section 11-5.  Vehicles used in transporting municipal solid waste.

(1)  All vehicles used in the business of transporting municipal solid waste within the City, shall, at a minimum, have the following:

(a)  A permanent cover of canvas or equally suitable or superior material designed to cover the entire open area of the body of such vehicle;


(b)  A body so constructed as to be permanently leak-proof as to such municipal solid waste;

(c)  Extensions of sideboards and tailgate, if any, constructed of permanent materials.


(2)  Prior to the issuance of any license or renewal of the same, the City shall inspect all vehicles

used in the transporting of solid waste to determine that such vehicles meet the requirements set forth in this Section.  No vehicle shall be used in the business of transporting municipal solid waste unless it has been inspected by the City and shall have been determined to meet the requirements set forth in this Section.


Section 11-6.  Insurance requirements.

Any person in the business of transporting municipal solid waste, within the City, must have, prior to commencing such operations, and at all times after commencing such operations, in each motor vehicle used in such business, a motor vehicle liability insurance policy or evidence of such policy issued by an insurance carrier or insurer authorized to do business in the State of Colorado in the sum of not less than One Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($150,000.00) for damages for or on account of any bodily injury to or the death of each person as the result of any one accident, in the sum of not less than One Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($150,000.00) for damages to the property of others as the result of any one accident, and in the sum of not less than Four Hundred Thousand Dollars ($400,000.00) for damages for or on account of any bodily injury to or death of all persons and for damages to the property of others.


Section 11-7.  Suspension or revocation of license.

In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 11-13 of the Code of Ordinances, violation of either Section 11-5 or 11-6 shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license to transport municipal solid waste.  Any person suspected of such violation shall be provided a written notice of the alleged violation by the City Clerk, which notice shall advise the licensee of the date and time of the hearing on said violation.  The City Clerk shall hold a hearing on the alleged violation on the date and time set in the notice, at which the licensee shall be present.  Should the City Clerk find that a violation has occurred, she/he shall suspend or revoke the license to transport municipal solid waste.


Section 11-8.  Storage and placement of municipal solid waste.

(1)  All municipal solid waste accumulated for collection and disposal shall be placed in a leak proof metal or plastic container.  Grass clippings, tree trimmings and other similar vegetative waste shall be likewise kept in a metal or plastic container or boxed or bagged except that tree trimmings need not be kept in a container, box or bag, provided they are cut into strips of no greater than three feet in length and piled or stacked neatly.  All municipal solid waste containers shall be kept free of rodents, insects, bugs and other vectors.  Placement of all containers for the accumulation of municipal solid waste shall be on private property except that such containers may be placed on public property fronting the residences or place of business where such municipal solid waste is generated or accumulated for convenience on such day that the municipal solid waste is collected for disposal.  Such placement shall not create an obstruction to the proper passage of vehicles or pedestrians. Once such municipal solid waste is collected, such container(s) shall be promptly replaced on private property.


(2)  Municipal solid waste accumulated for collection and disposal by a duly licensed contractor or

municipal solid waste collection operator shall be so collected and disposed of no less frequently than once per week.


Section 11-9.  Scattering of municipal solid waste.

No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City any municipal solid waste in any manner, that may result in such municipal solid waste being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or place any solid waste in any trash receptacle either owned by another or provided for use and benefit of another by a private hauler of solid waste.

Section 11-10. Accumulation and use of manure.

It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of property to keep any manure for any purpose other than to spread it lightly on lawns or gardens for fertilizing purposes.



Section 11-11. Burning of municipal solid waste.

It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or burn any garbage, rubbish or waste material or any hay, grass clippings or any other combustible materials, including waste paper, in any receptacle or upon the ground.


Section 11-12. City Landfill fees.

(1)  Fees assessed for the disposal of garbage, trash, and tire carcasses, and all other types of acceptable refuse at the Trinidad Landfill shall be at the following rates for each delivery:


(a) General Customers


(I) Municipal Solid Waste, $27.00 per ton with a minimum of $10.00


(II) Construction waste, $31.00 per ton


(III) Yard waste, $31.00 per ton if delivered to landfill. Free if delivered to composting facility or tree/log/brush chipping area.


(IV) Five dollars ($5.00) per container of waste material not to exceed thirty-five (35) gallons in volume


(b) Licensed Commercial haulers


(I) Typical Municipal Solid Waste, $22.00 per ton


(II) Construction waste, $25.00 per ton


(c) Special waste shall not be subject to the rate set forth in subsection (a) or (b), but instead shall be subject to the following rates:


(I) Special wastes such as contaminated soil, sand trap waste, non-friable asbestos, and other similar wastes which require additional handling by landfill personnel

Disposal fee

$35.00 per ton minimum fee, special negotiation may be required

(II) Passenger car tires and light truck tires up to and including a 16 ½” wheel size

$4.00 per tire

(III) Medium duty and heavy duty truck tires ranging in size larger than a 16 ½” wheel up to and including a 22 ½” wheel

$6.00 per tire

(IV) All tires sizes larger than a 22 ½” wheel up to and including heavy equipment tires

$20.00 per tire

(d) E-Waste Recycling. Fees assessed for the recycling of e-waste at the Trinidad Landfill shall be at the following rates: (Ord. 2085, Sec. 11-12(1)(d), eff. 10-11-19)

(I) ELECTRONICS: 
All computers; Towers, Laptops, Servers, Tablets, iPads, Kindles, Smartphones, Cellphones, etc.

Disposal fee

$3.00 each

(II) GENERAL MIX:
UPS Batteries, routers, switches, keyboards, hubs, mice, Stereo components, DVR/VCR/DVD/CD Players, fax machines, copiers, printers, phone systems, telephones, all cables, cords, and power supplies, Xbox/Wii, Play Stations, small appliances, microwaves, cable boxes, satellite TV equipment, e-readers, cameras, camcorders, recording equipment, A/V equipment, radios, etc.

$1.00 per pound
(III)  CRT/LCD/LED TV’s and MONITORS:
Rear projection and console TV’s, broken TV’s and monitors (CRT-type)

$1.00 per pound




(2) All fees in this ordinance are hereby effective on and after January 1, 2019.


(3) Such fees shall be in effect and charged at drop off for individual customers to a credit or debit card. However customers of City utilities who present a current bill will be allowed to charge the amount due to their utility bill. No individual will be allowed to charge amount due to someone else’s utility account unless prior arrangements have been made. Customers may also pre-pay at the City Utility Billing Office on the first floor of City Hall at 135 N. Animas Street.


(4) All garbage, rubbish, or other municipal waste material under the control of the City at the City landfill, shall be the property of the City, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon such sites, or carry off, dispose of, burn or in any manner disturb or molest any matter or item deposited or existing upon such sites, except under the direction or authority of the Public Works Director or his/her designee.


(5) All vehicles hauling municipal waste for disposal at the landfill shall be enclosed or tarped. Any person who does not comply with this requirement shall be assessed a double charge for disposal of his/her load. (Ord. 2068, Sec. 11-12 repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/28/18)



Section 11-13.      Penalty for violation.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days.  (Ord. 1441, 11/17/92.)

CHAPTER 12.  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.


ARTICLE 1.  UTILITY BILLING.


Sections:


12-1                             Initiation of utility service.

12-2                             Utility billing.

12-3                             Termination of utility service.

12-4                             Discontinuance of utility service.

12-4.1                          Complaints and Related Matters.


ARTICLE 2.  ELECTRICITY.


12-5                             National Electrical Code - Adoption by Reference.

12-6                             Modifications and additions.

12-7                             Penalty for violation.

12-8                             Contractor to furnish plans to Power and Light Department.

12-9                             Disconnecting wires in emergency.

12-10                           Illegal acts.

12-11                           Meter deposits; meter ownership.

12-12                           Rates for electrical energy.

12-13                           Establishment of Electric Light and Power Fund; sources.

12-14                           Purposes of Electric Light and Power Fund.

12-15                           City to pay for service.

12-16                           Electric system to pay own expenses.

12-17                           Connection and extensions.

12-18                           Compliance with regulations; discontinuance of service for violation.

12-19                           Granting rights-of-way and right to alter vegetation.

12-20                           Avoiding compliance with Article or payment of charges.

12-21                           Establishment of the Arkansas River Power Authority as a separate governmental entity.

12-22                           Successor to the non-profit corporation.


ARTICLE 3. NATURAL GAS.


12-23                           Article title and citation.

12-24                           Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department and office of Superintendent created.

12-25                           Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department – operation and maintenance.

12-26                           Service classifications, rates, charges, and regulations – adoption of tariff.

12-27                           Natural Gas Fund – creation; purposes.

12-28                           Natural gas system to be self-sufficient.

12-29                           Tampering with gas system devices prohibited.

12-30                           Applicability of Article; exception.


ARTICLE 4.  SEWERS.


12-46                           Purpose, policy, definitions and abbreviations.

12-47                           Deposit of objectionable wastes unlawful.

12-47.1                        Discharge of untreated, polluted waters unlawful.

12-47.2                        Discharge of waters into sanitary sewer prohibited.

12-48                           Disposal facilities to conform to Article.

12-49                           Prohibited discharges; exceptions.

12-50                           Prohibited wastes; control of discharge.

12-51                           Interceptors required; construction standards; maintenance of interceptors required.

12-52                           Connection with sewer system – When required.

12-52.1                        Sewer construction – Apportioning cost as to property benefitted.

12-52.2                        No permit to connect sewers until assessments paid.

12-53                           Sewage service rates.

12-54                           Sewer main taps.

12-55                           Sewer system extensions.

12-56                           General requirements for main extensions.

12-57                           Elements in planning, constructing and financing main extensions.

12-57.1                        Additional requirements.

12-57.2                        Violations; liability.


ARTICLE 5.  WATER.


12-58                           Definitions.

12-59                           Water Department created; duties of City Manager; power of City Council.

12-60                           Customer to abide by contract.

12-61                           Use of water during fire alarm prohibited.

12-62                           Water use restrictions.

12-63                           Priority of City users over outside users.

12-64                           Standpipes and fire lines.

12-65                           Metered service.

12-66                           Location of water meters.

12-67                           Plant Investment Fee.

12-68                           Charge for private fire hydrants.

12-69                           Water main taps.

12-70                           Water system extensions.

12-71                           General requirements for main extensions.

12-72                           Elements in planning, constructing and financing main extensions.

12-73                           Exemption from front foot charges.

12-74                           Water service rates - Schedule.

12-75                           Regulations part of contract.

12-76                           Unlawful acts.

12-77                           Right of City to shut off water in mains; precautionary measures by customer; Nonliability of City.

12-78                           Right of entry to repair; notice to owner to make repairs.

12-79                           Using water in violation of sprinkling restrictions.

12-80                           Using water or appurtenances without authority.

12-81                           Polluting water in waterworks; obstructing conduits.

12-82                           Polluting water source prohibited.

12-83                           Injuring or damaging waterworks property.

12-84                           Covering up curb box.

12-85                           Permit to re-sell water.


CHAPTER 12.  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.


ARTICLE 1.         UTILITY SERVICE AND BILLING .

(Ord. 1867, Article 1 repealed and re-enacted, eff. 11/28/08)


Section 12-1. Initiation of utility service.


(1) Application for utility service.

(a) All applications for electrical, natural gas, sewer, and/or water service from the City shall be made in writing to the Finance and Accounting Department prior to the provision of utility service to the applicant(s). If convenient, each applicant shall apply in person. The application for utility service shall generally conform to Form No. 1 attached to this Section 12-1 and shall indicate the type(s) of service requested, the date on which service connection is desired, and any other information required by the City. The City shall require each applicant to provide some form of identification. The application itself shall in no way obligate the City to provide utility service to the applicant(s).


(b) Applications for utility service shall meet the following signature requirements:


(i) The application must be signed by adults over eighteen (18) that reside at the premises for which utility service is requested.


(ii) If the applicant is the owner of rental property, the application must be signed by all owners of record of such property.


(iii) If the premises for which utility service is requested are to be used for commercial rather than residential purposes, the application or applications must either be signed by all of the tenants of such location, or by all of the owners of record.


(iv) If the applicant is a corporation, the application must be signed by a person duly authorized to act on behalf of the corporation.


(v) If the applicant is a partnership, the application must be signed by all partners.


(c) For large commercial and industrial applicants, a special written agreement may be required in addition to the application for utility service.


(d) An application for utility service shall not be approved if the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any utility bills to the City at the time of application.


(e) Delinquency in payment for utility service rendered to a previous occupant of the premises to be served, and unpaid charges for services or facilities not ordered by the present or prospective customer, shall not constitute a sufficient cause for refusal of services to an applicant; provided, however, the City may decline to provide utility service at the same premises for the use of a delinquent customer by subterfuge in any manner. Subterfuge includes, but is not restricted to, an application for service at a given location in the name of another party by an applicant whose account is delinquent and who continues to reside at the premises.


(f) An application for utility service at premises not currently connected to the City’s distribution system, or a request for an increase in utility service at premises currently connected to the City’s distribution system, shall be considered an extension of the City’s distribution system and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of any applicable extension policy adopted by the City.


(2) Utility service deposits.


(a) Every application for utility service shall be accompanied by a deposit to serve as a guaranty of future payment as set forth by the Finance and Accounting Department and approved by the City Manager.


(b) The City may, at any time, require any utility customer to pay a deposit if the customer has received one (1) or more discontinuance notifications and the customer’s account has become delinquent. The amount of the deposit should be equal to two (2) times the average monthly utility bill.


(c) An applicant who has, at any time, previously had utility service from the City discontinued for non-payment shall be required to make a deposit equal to twice the normal deposit, as set forth by the Finance and Accounting Department and approved by the City Manager, or equal to two times the average monthly bill for those utility services which are requested, whichever is greater.


(d) Monies collected as utility service deposits shall be placed in a trust fund to be used for the sole purpose of guaranteeing any unpaid utility bills when utility service is disconnected. When utility service is terminated, any remaining deposits shall first be applied to any outstanding utility bill owed by the customer. If such outstanding bills are satisfied, the remaining deposit, if any, shall be refunded to the customer.


(e) Any customer of the City's electrical, natural gas, sewer, and/or water service who has maintained an active service account in good standing for such utility service(s) for a continuous period of eighteen (18) months shall have the deposit for each type of utility service refunded in the form of a credit applied against the customer’s utility account during the billing cycle immediately following the completion of the eighteen (18) month period. A customer's utility account shall be considered in good standing if the customer has not had utility service disconnected for non-payment or is not currently delinquent.


(f) In the event that any customer receiving a deposit credit pursuant to Section 12-1(2)(e) subsequently terminates any utility service, and later re-establishes that utility account for electrical, natural gas, sewer and/or water service, the customer shall not be subject to the applicable utility service deposit(s) payable at the re-establishment of such utility service.


(g) In the event that any customer receiving a deposit credit pursuant to Section 12-1(2)(e) terminates any utility service, and later re-establishes that utility account but has not had an active utility account for a long period of time, it is necessary to re-establish good standing and the customer shall be subject to the applicable utility service deposit(s) payable at the re-establishment of such utility service.


(3) Notification to the City. Any customer starting the use of service without first notifying the City and enabling the City to read the meter will be held responsible for any amount due for service to the premises from the time of the last reading of the meter, as shown by the City’s records. (Ord. 1991, Sec. 12-1 repealed and reenacted, 10/16/15).

§ 12-1, Form No. 1: Application Form

APPLICATION FOR UTILITY SERVICE


? RESIDENTIAL ? COMMERCIAL                         DATE:


? OWN ? RENT   (LANDLORD: __________________________________)


NAME:


SERVICE ADDRESS:


MAILING ADDRESS:


TELEPHONE:                            (HOME)


(WORK)


PLEASE LIST ALL OCCUPANTS WHO ARE EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER:









FORM OF IDENTIFICATION PRESENTED:


SOCIAL SECURITY NO.:


UTILITY SERVICE(S) REQUESTED: ? ELECTRIC                  COMMENCEMENT DATE:

? NATURAL GAS

? WATER

? SEWER


SIGNATURE(S):




****************************** TERMINATION REQUEST ****************************


DATE RECEIVED: , 20 .


SIGNATURE(S):





Section 12-2.  Utility billing.

(1)  Consolidated bill for utility service.  The City shall consolidate into one (1) bill all rents, rates, taxes, assessments, and associated charges for electrical, natural gas, sewer, and water service, and remit said bill to each customer monthly.  For billing purposes, the term “month” shall mean the period between any two consecutive regular readings by the City of the meters at the customer’s premises, such readings to be taken as nearly as may be practicable every thirty (30) days.  However, the City reserves the right to require the payment of bills for service at more frequent intervals.  In such event, meters will be read at the intervals specified by the City.  If the City is unable to read a meter after reasonable effort, the customer will be billed on an estimated usage based on the best available information.

(2)  Contents of utility bill.  All bills remitted to customers for metered service furnished shall show:

(a)  Net amount due for the previous one-month period, plus any delinquent balance, plus any accrued penalty charges;

(b)  Dates and meter readings beginning and ending the period during which service was rendered;

(c)  A distinct marking to identify an estimated bill;

(d)  An appropriate rate or rate code identification;

(e)  Last date payable after which the bill becomes past due; and

(f)  All other essential facts upon which the bill is based.


(3)  Utility bill due date.  The consolidated bill remitted to each City customer shall become due and payable within twenty (20) days after the billing date.  If the total amount listed in the bill is not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5 th ) day after the date it becomes due as indicated in the billing statement, a penalty fee of 1.5 percent of the unpaid balance shall be added to such unpaid balance.

(4)  Customer’s receipt of utility bill.  The bill will be considered as received by the customer when mailed to, or left at, the premises where service is used or at some other location that has been mutually agreed upon.  Final bills, special bills, and bills for connection or reconnection are due upon presentation.  If the customer fails to receive a bill, the City, upon request, will issue a duplicate.

(5)  Failure to receive a utility bill.  The customer is presumed to be aware of the customer’s liability for payment of bills for utility service, and failure to receive a utility bill shall not relieve the customer of the obligation to inquire of the City as to the amount.

(6)  Installment payments.  Any customer shall be permitted to make installment payments if a bill includes amounts from past billing periods arising solely from events under control of the City such as meter malfunctions, billing errors, utility meter reading errors, or failure to read the meter.  Any installment payments under the provisions of this rule may extend over a period equal in length to the period during which the errors were accumulated, and shall bear no interest.

Section 12-2.  Utility billing.


(7)  Budget Billing Plan.  Utility customers may elect to pay monthly bills for service on a Budget Billing Plan subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein. (Ord. 1940, Sec. 12-2(7), repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/28/13)

(a) Any customer electing the Budget Billing Plan shall pay a monthly amount equal to the minimum of one-eleventh (1/11th) of the total utility bills for the most recent twelve (12) months, adjusted to fully reflect any rate increases that may have become effective during said twelve (12) month period.  Said monthly payment shall be made for the following eleven (11) successive months with the final or twelfth (12th) month’s payment being a settlement amount equal to the difference between the total payments made during the prior eleven (11) months and the actual amount due for purchases for the twelve (12) month period.  If the settlement amount is a credit balance the City shall issue a credit against the customer’s settlement month utility bill.  If the settlement amount is a balance owed by the customer, the total balance shall be due and payable on the due date indicated on the bill for the settlement month.


(b) T o be eligible to participate in the Budget Billing Plan, a customer shall meet the following requirements:


(i)  A customer shall have been served by the City at such customer’s current premises for a period of at least twelve (12) consecutive months.


(ii)  The customer shall owe no amounts to the City for electrical, natural gas, sewer, or water service, except for the current bill.


(iii)  The customer shall execute a standard form “Agreement for Budget Billing Plan” at least fifteen (15) days prior to the beginning of the Budget Billing Plan year.


(c)  Normal collection procedures shall be applicable if a customer fails to pay the budget billing amount in any month when due.  If the customer fails to pay the budget billing amount following due notice by the City in accordance with Section 12-4, the customer shall be removed from the Budget Billing Plan, the entire outstanding amount of the account shall be due and payable, and utility service to the customer may be discontinued.


(d)  If utility service is discontinued for any reason to a customer on the Budget Billing Plan, the customer shall be removed from the Plan and the entire outstanding amount of the account shall be due and payable.


(e)  The monthly budget billing amount may be adjusted, at the option of the City, for any increase in the City’s rates of two percent (2%) or more.  Said monthly budget billing amount may also be adjusted at the option of the City if the customer’s use of electrical, natural gas, sewer, and/or water service increases greater than ten percent (10%).  In such cases, the utility department will notify the utility customer of the need for adjustment.


(f)  The customer may elect to terminate the Budget Billing Plan at any time by notifying the City in writing and by paying in full the entire outstanding amount of the account.


(g)  If a customer is removed from the Budget Billing Plan for any reason, the customer shall not be eligible to participate in the plan again for one (1) year.

(8)  Customer disputes.  A customer disputing the correctness of any utility bill should follow the rules governing complaints as set forth in Section 12-4.1.


Section 12-3. Termination of utility service.
It shall be the responsibility of a customer seeking to terminate utility service to request the City to read the meter.  Failure to do so shall render the customer liable for payment of all utilities registering by the meter from the date of the last meter reading until such time as the City learns of the termination and is able to read the meter, or is otherwise advised of the meter reading.

Section 12-4. Discontinuance of utility service.

(1) Notice of discontinuance.


(a) If any bill for utility services remains unpaid for more than thirty (30) days following the payment due date of the bill, utility service may be disconnected with appropriate notification. The City shall not discontinue the utility service of any customer for violation of any rule of the City and/or for nonpayment of any amount due for utility service except upon written notice mailed by first class mail to the last known address of the customer, or delivered to the customer, at least thirty (30) days after the issued unpaid bill and at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the proposed discontinuance date, advising the customer as to what rule has been violated and/or the amount past due and the date by which the same shall be paid in order to avoid discontinuance. In the event the customer has previously executed a third-party notification form indicating a third party to whom notices of discontinuance are to be sent, written notice also shall be mailed by first class mail or delivered at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the proposed discontinuance date to said third party. The notice of discontinuance shall be conspicuous in nature and in easily understood language. The heading of the notice of discontinuance shall be in block capital letters. The heading shall contain, at a minimum, the following warning:


THIS IS A FINAL NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE OF UTILITY SERVICE AND CONTAINS IMPORTANT INFORMATION INVOLVING YOUR LEGAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.


The heading shall also contain the same warning in Spanish (below), with an additional sentence at the end of the warning stating in Spanish that, if the customer is unable to read the notice, the customer should seek assistance with translation:


ESTE ES UN AVISO DE DISCONTINUAR SUS SERVICIOS DE UTILIDADES Y CONTIENE INFORMACIÓN IMPORTANTE SOBRE SUS DERECHOS Y RECURSOS LEGALES. SI NO SE PUEDE LEER ESTE AVISO EN INGLÉS, ES NECESARIO QUE ALGUIEN LO TRADUZCA.

(Ord. 1991, Sec 12-4 (1)(a), repealed and reenacted, 10/16/15)

(b) At a minimum, said notice shall advise the customer:

(i)  How to contact the City to resolve any dispute with respect to the amount or date due, and/or with respect to violation of any rule.

(ii)  That the customer is entitled to a hearing in person, prior to a discontinuance of service, at a reasonable time and place within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of discontinuance before an impartial hearing officer, to protest or dispute the grounds provided for the proposed discontinuance.

(iii)  That the customer has a right to call witnesses and present evidence at the hearing; that the customer has the right to review records and evidence against the customer prior to the hearing; that the customer has the right to be represented by an attorney at the hearing; that the customer has the right to cross-examine any witness appearing on behalf of the Finance and Accounting Department at the hearing; and that the customer is entitled to have an interpreter present at the hearing if same is requested at the time the request for hearing is made.

(iv)  That the customer who is unable to pay for service as regularly billed by the City may avoid termination of service by paying the current month’s bill in full and entering into a reasonable installment plan with the City to pay any past-due balance in no more than six (6) equal monthly installments.

(v)  That in the event the customer is unable to pay for service as regularly billed by the City, or is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments, and there is a medical certification delivered to the City indicating that termination of service would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household, that there will not be discontinuance of service for sixty (60) days from the date of the medical extension.

(c) If the customer does not request a hearing by the date on which the request must be made, and the required payment is not made by the proposed date of discontinuance, utility service shall be subject to discontinuance.

(d) If the customer requests a hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled and held as soon as practicable following such request.  The impartial hearing officer shall be the City Manager and/or the City Manager’s designee.  The hearing shall be conducted informally and recorded, said recording to be kept for a period of ninety (90) days.  Within five (5) workdays after the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and a statement of the reasons for the decision.  Such decision shall be based entirely on the evidence presented at the hearing.  Utility service shall not be discontinued until after the hearing officer has rendered his or her decision.

(e) Utility service shall not be discontinued:

(i) If all current utility bills are paid when due and all past due amounts are being amortized by reasonable installment payments.  The due date of the bill must specifically be indicated on the bill and the due date shall be no earlier than twenty (20) days subsequent to the mailing or delivery of the bill.  “Current bill” means that portion of the bill which is not twenty (20) days past due.  The minimum reasonable installment payment is that which pays a current bill in full and at least one-sixth (1/6 th ) of any past-due balance.  A reasonable installment payment plan may require that a past-due balance be paid off in no more than six (6) equal monthly installments.

(ii) between 12:00 Noon on Friday and 8:00 a.m. the following Monday, or between 12:00 Noon on the day prior to and 8:00 a.m. on the day following any federal holiday or City-observed holiday.

(iii)  during any period when discontinuance of service would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the residential customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household, and such customer established that he or she is unable to pay for the service as regularly billed, or he or she is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments.

Discontinuance of service that would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the residential customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household means that discontinuance of service would aggravate an existing medical condition or create a medical emergency for the customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household.  Such shall be deemed to be the case when a physician licensed by the State of Colorado makes a certification thereof in writing and said certification is received by the City.

In the event a medical certification, as aforesaid, is delivered to or received by the City, the non-discontinuance of service as herein prescribed shall be effective for sixty (60) days from the date of said medical certification.  One (1) thirty (30) day extension of non-discontinuance of service pursuant to this Section 12-4(c)(1)(iii) may be effected by delivery to or receipt by the City of a second medical certification, as aforesaid, prior to the expiration of the initial sixty (60) day non-discontinuance period.  A residential customer may invoke the provisions of this Section 12-4(c)(1)(iii) no more than once during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.

(iv)  until the City has made a reasonable effort to give notice of the proposed discontinuance in person or by telephone both to the customer (or to a resident of the customer’s household 18 years of age or over) and to any third party who is listed by the customer on a third-party notification form.

(v)  in the event a customer at any time tenders full payment of any utility bill by cash or bona fide check to a service representative.

(f) Any customer who is mailed a notice of discontinuance shall be assessed a Ten Dollar ($10.00) fee to cover administrative costs in addition to the original amount of the utility bill and any penalty assessed.


(g) Wherever reference is made herein to a notice or other document being mailed or delivered, that phrase shall mean that the notice or other document is either deposited in the United States mails, or physically delivered to the address of the addressee, and does not necessarily include actual physical receipt by the addressee.

(2) Discontinuance under hazardous conditions or meter bypass.  These rules regarding discontinuance of service shall not apply where a meter bypass of any kind is discovered on a customer’s service meter, or where any hazardous condition exists on a customer’s premises, or in the case of a customer utilizing utility service in such a manner as to make it dangerous for occupants of the premises, thus making an immediate discontinuance of service necessary.  In such circumstances, utility service will be immediately disconnected and will not be reconnected until the customer pays the following charges to the City:

(a)  A service charge calculated to compensate the City for all reasonable expenses incurred on account of such condition, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, disconnection, reconnection, and service calls, but in no event less than $40.00; and


(b)  The cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility equipment; and


(c)  The actual or estimated charges not previously billed to the customer as a result of any tampering, bypassing, or unauthorized metering.

Section 12-4.1.  Complaints and Related Matters.


(1) Scope. This section sets forth rules governing appeals from the application of any immediate shut-off policy, the handling of complaints of utility customers, and related matters, including the opportunity for such persons to be heard.  These rules are made in the best interests of the City and its utility customers and shall be liberally construed to secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive determination of matters presented under the provisions of applicable law and these rules.  These rules are intended to be fair and simple, and to settle disputes without complex procedures.



(2) Definitions.

(a)  “Customer” shall mean any person who directly receives electrical, natural gas, sewer, and/or water service from the City.


(b)  “Presiding officer” shall mean the City Manager and/or the City Manager’s designee.


(c)  “Outside customers” shall mean and include electrical, natural gas, sewer, and/or water service customers of the City who or which are served outside the corporate jurisdictional limits of the City.

(3) Forms. The attached forms are not a part of these rules, but they should be followed whenever possible and are intended as a guide.

(4)  Deviation from rules.  So long as not contrary to law, deviation from these rules may be permitted for good cause shown or if compliance therewith is found to be impossible, impracticable, or unreasonable, and to promote fairness in dealings between the City and its customers.




(5)  Pleadings.


(a)  Pleadings hereunder before the City are called “Petitions,” “Formal Complaints,” “Motions,” “Notices,” and “Responses.”  A responsive pleading should be filed within ten (10) days, but the presiding officer, in order to promote fairness and a full hearing, may make such rulings as are necessary, desirable, or useful to a full and proper hearing.


(b)  Pleadings should be typewritten or legibly handwritten on an 8 ½” x 11” sheet of paper.  Pleadings should be properly filed with the City and signed by an authorized person.  A pleading shall state the name and address of the party, identify the proceeding, and set forth a clear and concise statement of the matters relied upon as a basis for such pleading, together with an appropriate prayer when relief is sought.


(c)  The presiding officer may permit any pleading to be amended or corrected, or any omission therein to be supplied.  Defects which do not affect important rights of a party shall be disregarded.


(d)  No party shall be required to be represented by an attorney.  Pleadings of a party represented by an attorney shall be signed by said attorney, and shall set forth his or her attorney registration number, address, and telephone number.  The signature of an attorney is a certification that he or she has read the pleading; that to the best of his or her knowledge, information, and belief there is good ground to support it; and that it is not interposed for purposes of delay.

(6)  Parties and non-parties. A person who desires to assist in the just and reasonable determination of a proceeding, and who has been permitted by the presiding officer, may be permitted to do so; however, such person may only present legal argument, either orally or in writing as permitted by the presiding officer.

(7) Representation of parties. An individual who is a party to a proceeding and who wishes to appear by himself may represent only his own individual interest in said proceeding.  A business entity of any type that is a party to a proceeding may be represented by its owner or any officer, manager, or duly-authorized employee.  A party to a proceeding, other than a party appearing by himself, may be represented by an attorney, but need not be.

(8) Changes affecting outside customers.  When the City proposes to change any base rate, charge, or service to outside customers, it shall proceed to do so in the manner provided in Article 3.5 of Title 40, C.R.S.

(9) Immediate shut-offs. When the City immediately shuts off service to a customer without prior notice, such customer may immediately appeal such action to the City Manager by filing a formal complaint generally conforming to Form No. 2 attached to these rules.  The City Manager shall designate a hearing officer to hear and determine complaints filed under these rules, and said hearing officer shall immediately determine any such complaint.




(10)  Informal complaints and formal complaints.


(a) Informal complaints.

(i)  An informal complaint is one that may be resolved without formal order.  Customers must use the informal complaint procedure prior to filing a formal complaint with the City Manager, except for a complaint based upon an immediate shut off under Section 12-4.1(9), which precludes the use of the informal complaint procedure, or unless a proposed increase in rates to outside customers is involved.


(ii)  An informal complaint should be made in writing, or it should be reduced to writing at the earliest possible moment, and contain such facts and other information, including supporting data and documents, to state adequately the circumstances by which any act or thing done or omitted to be done by the City has violated any provision of law or any rule or regulation of the City.


(iii)  An informal complaint shall be referred to the utility Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee, and said Superintendent or designee shall attempt to resolve such complaint, within the law and rules and regulations of the City, as soon as reasonably practicable.  If the said informal complaint is not resolved within thirty (30) days after filing, the same shall be deemed denied.


(iv)  No anonymous informal complaint shall be considered.


(b) Formal complaints.


(i)  When an informal complaint is not resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant, it may be appealed by filing a formal complaint with the City Manager.  A formal complaint filed under this rule shall not be entertained unless said complaint is signed.  If a formal complaint does not substantially comply with these rules, it can be rejected or dismissed for that reason alone.


(ii)  Prior to appealing to the City Manager, the complainant must comply with the informal complaint procedures set forth in Section     12-4.1(10)(a) above.  Nothing said or offered during settlement negotiations of an informal complaint may be used in any complaint to the City Manager against any party who made the statement or offer.


(iii)  The formal complaint shall be in writing, and generally shall conform to Form No. 2 attached to these rules.  The formal complaint shall set forth sufficient facts and other information to state adequately the circumstances upon which the complaint is based.  The complaint may be amended at any time up to ten (10) days before the hearing, if a hearing is held.

(11) Consolidation.  Two or more proceedings may be consolidated where it appears that the issues are substantially similar and that the rights of the parties will not be prejudiced by such consolidation.

(12)  Hearings and notice of hearings.  A formal complaint to the City Manager shall be set for hearing at the earliest practicable time.  A formal complaint may be withdrawn by the complainant at any time, and it shall be dismissed where it has been set for hearing and the complainant fails to appear at the time, place, and date set for hearing without just cause.  The City shall provide written notice of a hearing on a formal complaint by mailing a copy of the notice setting the matter for hearing at least ten (10) days before the first day of hearing, unless shortened by the City Manager or other presiding officer, to (i) each party to the proceeding as of the date of mailing; (ii) any other person who, in the opinion of the City Manager or presiding officer, would be interested in or affected by the proceeding involved in the hearing; and (iii) any person who has asked to receive notice of the hearing.  The Notice of Hearing shall state the time, place, and date of the hearing.



(13) Conduct of hearings.

(a)  Hearings on formal complaints shall be conducted by the presiding officer.  Hearings shall be held in the City Council Chambers, or at such place or places in the City as may be designated in the Notice of Hearing.  Any person who is disruptive, abusive, or disorderly at a hearing may be excluded from the hearing.  Any hearing shall be recorded at the request of any party, including the City; the cost of such recording shall be borne by the party who requested that the hearing be recorded.


(b)  A witness, before being permitted to testify, shall be required to swear or affirm that the testimony he or she is about to give is true.  No witness who refuses to so swear or affirm shall be permitted to testify.


(c)  In order to expedite the hearing, the presiding officer may limit the number of parties who shall be permitted to cross-examine witnesses or argue motions or objections.


(14) Admissibility of evidence. The presiding officer shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence, and no informality in any proceeding or in the manner of taking testimony shall invalidate any order, decision, rule, or regulation made, approved, or confirmed.  However, to the extent practicable, the Colorado Rules of Evidence applicable in civil non-injury cases in the district courts of Colorado will be followed in order to promote uniformity in the admission of evidence.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, when necessary to ascertain facts affecting the substantial rights of parties to the proceeding, evidence not admissible under such rules may be received and considered if such evidence possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.



(15) Burden of going forward and burden of proof.

(a)  In formal complaint proceedings, the burden of going forward and the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.  After the complainant has gone forward, any party who appears in support of the position of the complainant shall go forward.  Then the City or its representative, followed by any party who appears in support of the position of the City, shall go forward.  The complainant shall then have the right to present rebuttal evidence.


(b)  In proceedings other than formal complaint proceedings, the burden of going forward and the burden of proof shall be as determined by the presiding officer.


(16) Additional Guidelines. At any hearing, the presiding officer may be guided by the Rules of Procedure of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado on any of the following subjects if it will help reach a fair and just solution:


(a)  Shortening or lengthening of time for pleadings or for action on pleadings.


(b)  Striking improper matter from pleadings.


(c)  Opening statements, procedure of hearings, and conduct of hearings.


(d)  Continuances or conduct of hearings in the absence of the party.


(e)  Definition of terms.


(f)  Granting permission to customers to appear as a party.


(g)  Permitting non-parties to testify.


(h)  Holding pre-hearing conferences to expedite hearings or settle issues.


(i)  Stipulations and whether they shall be approved or not approved.


(j)  Documentary evidence.


(k)  Interim orders and whether they should be issued.


(l)  Written briefs or statements and whether they should be accepted.


(m)  Whether a hearing shall be reopened and under what circumstances.


(17) Remedies. No customer may make complaint to any agency or court about any matter within the scope of these rules without first following the procedures and exhausting his or her remedies as set forth in these rules.

Section 12-4.1, Form No. 1: Informal Complaint Form

INFORMAL COMPLAINT



NAME:


ADDRESS:


TELEPHONE:             (HOME)


(WORK)



COMPLAINT :

(Please state the specific act or omission complained of, together with such facts as are necessary to provide a full understanding of the situation.)

















Signature of Complainant



FOR OFFICE USE ONLY :


Date Received: , 20 .


Disposition:











Section 12-4.1, Form No. 2: Formal Complaint Form

FORMAL COMPLAINT



BEFORE THE CITY MANAGER OF                   )

THE CITY OF TRINIDAD , COLORADO )                             CASE NO.


FORMAL COMPLAINT OF:







COMPLAINT :

The Complainant(s) respectfully state(s):


1.    The name, business, if any, business or residence address, and telephone number of each Complainant are as follow:



2.    The Complainant(s) will pursue this Complaint in accordance with the City’s rules and regulations and will appear at any hearing thereon if this Complaint is set for a hearing.



3.    The specific act or omission complained of, together with such facts as are necessary to provide a full understanding of the situation, are as follows:


(Note: each allegation of this paragraph should be stated in a separately numbered subparagraph.)



WHEREFORE, Complainant(s) respectfully ask(s) that the City Manager of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, enter its Order granting to Complainant(s) the following relief:




Dated at , Colorado , this day of , 20 .





Signature of each Complainant if filed pro se,

or of attorney for Complainant(s)

(Name, Attorney Registration Number, Address,

and Telephone Number of Attorney)

Section 12-4.2.  Utility rates and finances.


(1)  The City Council shall from time to time fix, establish, maintain, and provide for the collection of rates, fees, and charges for electricity, natural gas, sewer, and water service, and any other utility services furnished by the City.


(2)  Such rates, fees, and charges shall be sufficient, in the City Council’s judgment, to provide good service to the customers, pay all bonded indebtedness, pay legally required refunds, cover the cost of operation, maintenance, additions, extensions, betterments, and improvements, provide a reasonable return on the City’s investment in utility properties and capital investments, and reimburse the general fund for administrative services and overhead provided and incurred by the City on behalf of each utility, together with a sum which, in the City Council’s judgment, is equivalent to that which would have been obtained from taxation and/or a franchise fee assessment if the utility were privately operated.


(3)  The provisions of this section shall be subject to the performance by the City of all covenants and agreements made by it in connection with the issuance, sale, or delivery of any bonds of the City, payable out of the revenues derived from the operation of its electricity, natural gas, sewer, water, and any other utilities, whether such revenue bonds are heretofore or hereafter issued. (Ord. 1924, eff. 12/20/11)

ARTICLE 2.  ELECTRICITY.


Section 12-5.        National Electrical Code - Adoption by reference. (Ord. 1865, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/27/08)


The NFPA 70: National Electrical Code / International Electrical Code Series, 2008 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Mass., 02169-7471, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, except as modified in Section 12-6 of this Code.  One complete copy of the 2008 Edition of the NFPA 70: National Electrical Code / International Electrical Code Series shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk, which copy shall be available for review by the public. (Ord. 1856 eff., 6/27/08)


Section 12-6.        Modifications and additions .  (Ord. 1865, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/27/08)


The said Code is subject to the following modifications:


(1)  Section 230.24 (B)(1) of the National Electrical Code (first two (2) paragraphs) shall be superseded by the following language:


Vertical Clearance from Ground: Service drop conductors where not in excess of 600 volts, nominal, shall have the following minimum clearance from final grade:


12 feet (3.66m) - at the electric service entrance to buildings, or at the drip loop of the building electric entrance, or above areas of sidewalks accessible only to pedestrians, measured from final grade or other accessible surface only for service-drop cables supported on and cabled together with a grounded bare messenger and limited to 150 volts.  (Ord. 1856 eff., 6/27/08)


(2) The following additions to said Code are hereby adopted:


(a) Masts extending over three feet (3') above roof penetrations shall be guyed by not less than two guys.  The angle between guys shall not be less than forty-five degrees (45 E ) if practicable. (Ord. 1856, eff., 6/27/08)


(b) Masts shall be no less than two inch (2") diameter galvanized rigid steel conduit (RGS). (Ord. 1856 eff., 6/27/08)


(c) Meter sockets shall be located not higher than five feet six inches (5'6") above finished grade level. (Ord. 1856 eff., 6/27/08)


(d) Diagram 12-6, Service Mast Diagram, is incorporated herein and made a part of this Section. (Ord. 1856 eff., 6/27/08)





Section 12-7.        Penalty for violations.


An person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1856 eff. 6/27/08, Ord. 1790 eff., 7/1/05)


Section 12-8.        Contractor to furnish plans.


Any electrical contractor applying for a wiring permit, for new construction, from the State Electrical Inspector shall furnish the plans and specifications for the proposed work to the City's Power and Light Department.


Section 12-9.        Disconnecting wires in emergency.


Every person owning or controlling electrical wires and apparatus for the transmission of light, heat or power shall, in time of fire or in case of severe storm, wherein lives or property may be endangered by the operation of such wires and apparatus, upon the order of the Superintendent of Power and Light or his/her designee, disconnect such wires as are designated by such official; such person failing to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and for each hour such order is not complied with shall constitute a separate offense.


Section 12-10.      Illegal acts.


Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article and any occupant or owner of premises where electrical wiring or apparatus is used or to be used, who shall refuse to allow or shall prevent or interfere with the Electrical Inspector or his assistants in the discharge of their duties under this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 7-18.)


Section 12-11.      Meter deposits; meter ownership.


(1)  Every customer applying for electrical service shall be required to make a meter deposit at the following rates and pay the service charge on meter connects as set forth below:


(a)  $  30.00 - Residential

(b)  $  50.00 - Students

(c)  $  50.00 - Temporary service for construction of new homes.

(d)  $  75.00 - Stores, office buildings, etc.

(e)  $500.00 - Large power customers

(f)   $250.00 - Restaurants, bars and taverns

(g)  $  10.00 - Service charge on meter connects.


(2)  Where the deposit is found to be less than the average monthly bill it may be increased at the discretion of the Power & Light Superintendent to an amount sufficient to adequately properly protect the City, upon written notice to the customer thirty (30) days in advance.


(3) REPEALED (Ord. 1512, eff. 8/12/95)

Section 12-12.      Rates for Electric Service, Power, and Energy. (Ord. 1935, repealed and reenacted 2/1/13)


(1)  RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIC SERVICE:


(a)  Applicability:  Available for single-family units and individually metered multi-family units within the utility’s service area for the purpose of lighting, cooking, household appliances, and space heating.  Single-family units and individually metered multi-family units shall be considered as buildings or units used solely as residences.  Residences used for commercial purposes shall be billed at the commercial rate, unless the residential and commercial services are arranged to allow separate metering of the residential portion.


(b)  Character of service: Alternating current, 60Hz, single-phase, 120/240 volts.


(c)  Monthly Rate:   The established rate for electric service, power, and energy delivered shall be as follows, and shall be reflected on utility bills issued on and after June 1 st through the last day of September for Summer rates and on and after October 1 st through the last day of May for Winter rates:

Summer	Winter
(June-September)	(Oct-May)
Monthly Charge:	$9.00	$9.00
First 600 KWH	$0.1500/KWH	$0.1500/KWH
Over 600 KWH	$0.1500/KWH	$0.1200/KWH
(d)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(e)  Tax Adjustment:  All rates are net and subject to applicable taxes.


(f)  Multi-family Dwelling Units:  Where two or more dwelling units are served through one meter, this rate shall apply by multiplying the above KWH blocks of the rate and the minimum charge by the number of dwelling units so served.


(2)  ELECTRIC WATER HEATER SERVICE:

(a)  Applicability:  Available for individual permanently installed storage type electric water heaters of thirty (30) gallons or more capacity and of a type approved by the utility.  Service hereunder shall be supplied through a separate meter.  Each element within the water heater will be non-inductive and controlled by a separate thermostat.  The upper thermostat and element will be interconnected with the lower thermostat and element to permit operation of only one element at any time.


(b)  Character of service:  Alternating current, 60HZ, single-phase, 240 volt.


(c)  Monthly Rate: The established rate for electric service, power, and energy delivered shall be as follows, and shall be reflected on utility bills issued on and after June 1 st through the last day of September for Summer rates and on and after October 1 st through the last day of May for Winter rates:

Summer	Winter
(June-September)	(Oct-May)
Monthly Charge:	$3.00	$3.00
All KWH	$0.1530/KWH	$0.1130/KWH

(d)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(e)  Tax Adjustment:  All charges are net and subject to applicable taxes.


(3)  GENERAL ELECTRIC SERVICE:


(a)  Applicability:  Available for commercial and non-residential customers for lighting and other electric services where the service is taken through one meter and does not require in excess of 50 KVA of transformer capacity.


(b)  Character of Service:  Alternating current, 60Hz, single-phase, 120 volts or 120/240 volts; three-phase, three-wire, 240 volts; three-phase, four-wire, 120/208 volts.


(c)  Monthly Rate:   The established rate for electric service, power, and energy delivered shall be as follows, and shall be reflected on utility bills issued on and after June 1 st through the last day of September for Summer rates and on and after October 1 st through the last day of May for Winter rates: (Ord. 1939, Sec. 12-12(3)(c), repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/14/13)


Summer	Winter
(June-September)	(Oct-May)
Monthly Charge:	$15.00	$15.00
First 500 KWH	$0.1590/KWH	$0.1590/KWH
Next 1,000 KWH	$0.1590/KWH	$0.1390/KWH
Over 1,500 KWH	$0.1590/KWH	$0.1190/KWH


(d)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(e)  Tax Adjustment:  All charges are net and subject to applicable taxes.


(f)  Multiple Meters: All metering points shall be billed as separate customers.


(4)  LARGE LIGHT AND POWER:


(a)  Applicability:  Available for commercial and industrial customers using electricity for lighting and power purposes through one point.


(b)  Character of Service:  Alternating current, 60Hz, single-phase, 120 volts or 120/240 volts; three-phase, three-wire, 240 volts; three-phase, four-wire, 120/208 volts; or at available distribution voltages.


(c)  Minimum Charge:  Demand charge, but not less than eighty percent (80%) of the highest demand of the preceding eleven (11) months or 50 KW, whichever is higher.


(d)  Monthly Rate:   The established rate for electric service, power, and energy delivered shall be as follows, and shall be reflected on utility bills issued on and after June 1 st through the last day of September for Summer rates and on and after October 1 st through the last day of May for Winter rates:

Summer	Winter
(June-September)	(Oct-May)
Monthly Charge:	$25.00	$25.00
Energy:
First 10,000 KWH	$0.1231/KWH	$0.1231/KWH
Next 20,000 KWH	$0.1231/KWH	$0.1131/KWH
Over 30,000 KWH	$0.1231/KWH	$0.1131/KWH
Demand (30 minute integrated):
All KW	$10.00/KW	$ 7.00/KW


(e)  Multiple Meters:  All metering points shall be billed as separate customers.


(f)  Primary Metering Discount:  When service is taken at distribution voltage, without transformation, a three percent (3%) discount will be allowed in both the energy and demand measurements.


(g)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(h)  Tax Adjustment:  All charges are net and subject to applicable taxes.


(5)  SECURITY LIGHTING:


(a)  Applicability:  Available for area lighting, in private areas and grounds, for protective and safety purposes only, where the City installs high-pressure sodium (“HPS”) type lighting fixtures in sizes determined by the City as appropriate for the area to be lit.


(b)  Character of Service:  Dusk-to-dawn operation of utility owned HPS fixtures.


(c)  Installation Fees:  A non-refundable fee for the installation of utility supplied poles shall be Sixty Dollars ($60.00).  The amount necessary for the costs of the wire, connections, and hardware will be calculated and added to the non-refundable fees set forth above.


(d)  Monthly Rate:

Lamp Charge

$/mo.	PCA kWh
175 W	MV	14.00	67
200 W	MV	15.10	76
400 W	MV	29.40	153
100 W	HPS	9.00	38
150 W	HPS	13.50	58
200 W	HPS	19.10	77
250 W	HPS	19.10	96
400 W	HPS	29.30	153
(e)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(f)  Tax Adjustment:  All charges are net and subject to applicable taxes.



(6)  STREET LIGHTING:


(a)  Applicability:  Available for municipal, county, and state street lighting on public roads, streets, and other public areas and grounds, for protective and safety purposes only.


(b)  Character of Service:  Dusk-to-dawn operation of government agency specified street lamps and poles that are utility installed, owned, and operated.




(c)  Monthly Rate: (Ord. 1939, repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/14/13)

Lamp Charge		$/mo.
175 W	MV	12.65
200 W	MV	13.65
400 W	MV	26.62
100 W	HPS	8.16
150 W	HPS	12.24
200 W	HPS	17.34
250 W	HPS	17.34
400 W	HPS	26.52
165 W	INDUCT	12.65
70 W	MH	12.65
65 W	INDUCT	12.65
(d)  Power Cost Adjustment (“PCA”):  When applicable, a power cost adjustment (“PCA”), as specified in subsection (7) herein, shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed for the current month.


(e)  Tax Adjustment:  All charges are net and subject to applicable taxes.


(7)  POWER COST ADJUSTMENT (“PCA”):


(a)  Any bill may be adjusted for variations in the cost of power to the utility.  Such power cost adjustments (“PCAs”) may be recommended from time to time by utility staff and may be authorized by the City Council.  The City Council may authorize a PCA in the event that significant revenue changes are necessary because of unexpected increases in the cost of power, including energy and demand costs; or because of other emergencies that are estimated to be greater than a ten percent (10%) deviation in fiscal year power costs budgeted.


(b)  A PCA shall be calculated as follows:


PCA = (A – 0.1033)(KWH billed during the preceding month) + B

KWH sold during the preceding month


where “A” equals the energy cost per kilowatt hour (“KWH”) billed during the preceding month by the Arkansas River Power Authority, and “B” equals any energy cost adjustment billed during the preceding month by the Arkansas River Power Authority.


(c)  If authorized by the City Council, a PCA shall be effective for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.  After such period, the PCA shall automatically expire unless re-authorized by the City Council.  When applicable, a PCA shall be applied to all kilowatt hours billed in the current month.



Section 12-13.      Establishment of Electric Light and Power Fund; sources.


There is hereby established a fund to be known and maintained as the "Electric Light and Power Fund", to be derived as follows:


(1)  All gross revenues and income from the operation of the electric light and power system;


(2)  All funds arising from the sale of by-products;


(3)  All profits from the sale of appliances and apparatus;


(4)  All funds arising from the sale of materials and equipment removed from the system and no longer required for operation;


(5)  Interest on monies invested from funds resulting from the operation of the system; and


(6)  All other funds derived either from the operation or ownership of the electric light and power system.  (Ord. 948, Sec. 1.)


Section 12-14.      Purposes of Electric Light and Power Fund.


(1)  There shall be first paid the necessary costs and expenses of the maintenance and operation of the Municipal Electric Light and Power System, including necessary repairs and replacements.  Included in the term "operation" shall be such sums as may be needed for salaries, wages, material, equipment, insurance, bank charges, commercial expenses, promotion, payment in lieu of tax to the General Fund in annual amounts not to exceed five percent (5%) of gross receipts, new business and general miscellaneous expenses incurred in connection with the system.


(2) REPEALED (Ord. 1512, eff. 8/12/95)


(3)  After the payments and deductions specified in Subsection (1) and (2), the remaining part of said revenues and income shall be known as "Net Revenues".  Such net revenues shall be deposited each month in an account with a national bank, or authorized depository, which is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, for such future purposes as may be determined by the budgeting process of the City.  (Ord. 1235, 2/15/83.)

Section 12-15.      City to pay for service.


The City will furnish no free service and so long as the City shall use electricity for street lighting and other municipal purposes it shall pay monthly into the Electric Light and Power Fund a fair and reasonable amount for such service, and in determining what shall be a fair and reasonable amount, the City Council shall take into consideration what other cities in Colorado, similarly situated, pay for like service.  In no event shall the City pay a greater amount than would be charged a private consumer.  (Ord. 948, Sec. 2.)


Section 12-16.      Electric system to pay own expenses.


All costs and expenses incurred in connection with or incident to the operation and maintenance of the Electric Light and Power System shall be paid exclusively from the revenues of the System, and in no event shall any of such costs or expenses be paid out of or charged to the general fund or tax levies of the City, either directly or indirectly.  (Ord.  948, Sec. 4.)


Section 12-17.      Connections and extensions.


(1) All customers shall apply in writing to the Power and Light Department before any connection can be made.  The customer shall bear the expenses of all standard connections. (Ord. 1668, eff., 6-29-01)


(2) If any extensions are required in an area, the costs of such installations are to be charged to the customer or customers requiring the same.  The Superintendent of Power and Light is authorized, however, to enter into a contract of service with such customer or customers for a minimum consumption within a limited period of time, having regard to the costs of the installations and requiring a deposit on the cost of such installations to be returned according to the amount of energy used by the customers. (Ord. 1668, eff., 6-29-01)


(3) Customers who are permitted by the City to have their electric services placed underground, shall be charged with the expense of opening and closing the trench, the meter pedestal and ground level handhole, including the conduit, wire, connections, labor and equipment charges. (Ord. 1668, eff., 6-29-01)


(4) There shall be no extension of any electrical service without the approval of the Superintendent or his/her designee, and no one shall be employed to make the connection or installation except the person duly authorized by the City to perform such work. (Ord. 1668, eff., 6-29-01)


Section 12-18.      Compliance with regulations; discontinuance of service for violation.


The provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations established by the Superintendent of Light and Power shall be considered a part of the contract with every customer who is supplied with electricity by the Department, and every such customer by consuming energy shall be deemed to express his/her assent to be bound thereby.  Whenever any of the regulations or any other provision of this Code is violated, service may be discontinued.


Section 12-19.      Granting rights-of-way and rights to alter vegetation.


Before any customer may be served, the owner of the land shall grant to the City a right-of-way for connecting wire over or under the land served, and the right to make all reasonable alterations or repairs on vegetation or any other obstacle that may hinder the attachment of safe connections and maintenance of all electrical wiring appurtenances.  All of the rights-of-way over or under land shall be given free of charge. (Ord. 1668, eff., 6-29-01)


Section 12-20.      Avoiding compliance with Article or payment of charges.


It shall be unlawful for any person to do anything in any manner whatsoever to evade, avoid, or defeat any of the provisions of this Article, or to obtain electrical energy in any manner whatsoever without due and proper payment therefor.


Section 12-21.      Establishment of the Arkansas River Power Authority as a separate governmental entity.


Contingent only upon similar authorizing action being taken by each of the other Municipalities, the City shall contract with the other Municipalities to establish a separate governmental entity to effect the development of electric energy resources and production and transmission of electric energy in whole or in part for the benefit of the inhabitants of the contracting Municipalities, the governmental entity to be known as the Arkansas River Power Authority ("Authority") by the execution and delivery of the ORGANIC CONTRACT ESTABLISHING THE ARKANSAS RIVER POWER AUTHORITY AS A SEPARATE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY ("Organic Contract") in the form of said Organic Contract presented to this meeting and a copy of which shall be retained on file by the City Clerk; and the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute said Contract on behalf of the City. (Ord.  1154, 1979.)




Section 12-22.      Successor to the non-profit corporation.


Upon the effective date of the Organic Contract, the Authority is acknowledged and recognized as the successor to the Non-Profit Corporation and the City does hereby approve, consent and agree that all contracts, agreements, indemnifications, obligations, undertakings or other instruments ("Existing Documents') which this Municipality has heretofore entered into with or on behalf of the Non-Profit Corporation shall, where applicable, be assigned and transferred to the Authority by the Non-Profit Corporation and shall after such transfer and assignment remain in full force and effect according to their respective terms and conditions which the Existing Documents shall include; and the Mayor is hereby authorized to execute any consents to such assignment which may be requested by the Authority. (Ord. #1154, 1979.)


ARTICLE 3.  NATURAL GAS.

(Ord 1866, Article 3 repealed and re-enacted entirely, eff. 11/28/08)


Section 12-23.            Article title and citation.


This Article shall be known as the “Natural Gas Code” of the City, and may be cited as such.


Section 12-24.            Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department and office of Superintendent created.


(1)  The Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department and the office of the Superintendent of the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department are hereby created.


(2)  As used herein:


(a) Department shall mean the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department.


(b) Superintendent shall mean the Superintendent of the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department.


Section 12-25.            Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department — operation and maintenance.


(1)  The City Manager shall have the right and authority to hire all necessary employees for the proper maintenance and operation of the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department.


(2)  The Superintendent of the Department shall have the power and authority to establish rules and regulations consistent with the adopted tariff for the proper operation and maintenance of such Department, subject to the supervision and direction of the City Manager and subject to the approval of the City Council.


Section 12-26.            Service classifications, rates, charges, and regulations — adoption of tariff.


(1)  All service classifications, rates, charges, and regulations regarding the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department’s provision of natural gas service shall be set forth in a gas tariff to be adopted by ordinance.


(2)  The tariff entitled “City of Trinidad, Colorado, Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department, Gas Tariff No. 1” attached hereto is hereby adopted by reference, and shall become effective on December 1, 2008. (3)  One copy of the currently effective gas tariff shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.


(4)  All changes to the tariff shall be adopted by ordinance, which ordinance shall adopt by reference the appropriate tariff sheet(s) to be revised.



Section 12-27.            Natural Gas Fund — creation; purposes.


(1)  There is hereby established and created a fund to be known and maintained as the “Natural Gas Fund,” to be derived as follows: all gross revenues and income from the operation of the natural gas system; all funds arising from the sale of by-products; all profits from the sale of appliances and apparatus; all funds arising from the sale of materials and equipment removed from the system and no longer required for operation of the system; and all other funds derived either from the operation or ownership of said natural gas system as it now exists and as it may be improved and extended.


(2)  The Natural Gas Fund is irrevocably pledged for the purposes and payments herein set forth, to-wit:


(a)  Out of such fund there shall be first paid the necessary costs and expenses of the efficient and economical maintenance and operation of the City’s natural gas system, including necessary repairs and replacements.  Included in the term “operation” shall be such sums as may be needed for salaries, wages, materials, equipment, insurance, bank charges, commercial expenses, promotion, payment in lieu of tax to the General Fund in annual amounts not to exceed five percent (5%) of gross receipts, new business, and general miscellaneous expenses incurred in connection with the system.


(b)  After the payments and deductions specified in Subsection (2)(a) herein, the remaining part of said revenues and income shall be known as “Net Revenues.” Such net revenues shall be deposited monthly or otherwise in an account with a national bank, or authorized depository which is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, for such future purposes as may be determined by the budgeting process of the City.


Section 12-28. Natural gas system to be self-sufficient.


All incidental costs and expenses incurred in connection with or incident to the operation and maintenance of the City’s natural gas system shall be paid exclusively from the revenues of the system, and in no event shall any of such costs or expenses be paid out of or charged to the General Fund or tax levies of the City, either directly or indirectly, except, however, that the City shall pay for natural gas service to City facilities.


Section 12-29.            Tampering with gas system devices prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations provided and established for the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department, or to in any manner tamper with the measuring devices and the meters of the Department, or to in any manner seek to defraud the City in the use of gas.


Section 12-30.            Applicability of Article; exception.


(1)  The provisions of this Article shall be applicable to all users of the City’s natural gas system.


(2)  The Superintendent of the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department, with the approval of the

City Council, may waive or vary the provisions of this Article so that any facility or building owned by the United States, the State of Colorado, or any other political subdivision may be serviced by the Trinidad Municipal Natural Gas Department; provided, however, that safety measures shall not be waived or changed without the adoption of amendments to this Article by the City Council.  Any such gas service so supplied under this provision shall be paid by the user and no cost whatsoever shall be borne by the Department.


ARTICLE 4.  SEWERS .


Section 12-46.   Purpose, policy, definitions and abbreviations.


(a) Purpose and policy .  This Article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).


(b) Definitions .  For the purpose of this Article certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:


ACT or THE ACT means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC § 1251, et. seq.

ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY means the City Manager or his or her authorized representative or such other City official or employee authorized to enforce the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the City.


ANALYSIS PROCEDURES means the Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants:  Final Rule; 40 CFR Part 136.


AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER means:

a. A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation;

b. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;

c. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.


BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°C), expressed in parts per million/milligrams per liter.


BUILDING DRAIN means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5’) outside the inner face of the building wall.


BUILDING SEWER means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.


CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY means any new or existing industry subject to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act.


CITY means the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


CITY MANAGER means the manager of the City of Trinidad, or his designee.


COMPOSITE SAMPLE means a combination of individual samples of water or wastewater taken at selected intervals, generally hourly, for some specified period, to minimize the effect of the variability of the individual sample.  Individual samples may have equal volume or may be proportional to the flow at the time of sampling.


DIRECT DISCHARGE means discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State.


DISCHARGE RATE means that volume of effluent from an industrial or commercial discharger which has been determined by the Utilities Superintendent to be representative of the process effluent from that industrial or commercial operation.  Such effluent shall be based upon metered water usage unless, in the opinion of the Utilities Superintendent, significant amounts of water are diverted and not discharged into the wastewater treatment system.


DISCHARGER means any person who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW.


DOMESTIC (SANITARY) WASTES means liquid wastes:

a.   From the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food;

b. Containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions.


ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.


EXISTING USER means an industrial user which is or was in operation at the time of promulgation of applicable Federal categorical pretreatment standards.


FLOW means volume of wastewater per unit time.


GARBAGE means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, the processing of food by-products, the processing of agricultural products and the handling, storage and sale of produce.


GRAB SAMPLE is a single dip-and-take sample collected, over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes, at a representative point in the discharge system.


INDIRECT DISCHARGE means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the Act, into the POTW (40 CFR 403.3(i)).


INDIVIDUAL (PRIVATE) SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM means a septic tank or similar self-contained receptacle or facility which collects and/or treats or otherwise disposes of wastewater and which is not connected to the POTW.


INDUSTRIAL USER means any sources of indirect discharge (40 CFR 403.3(j)).


I NDUSTRIAL WASTES means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from domestic sewage.  Any domestic waste mixed with an industrial waste is then considered an industrial waste.


INTERFERENCE means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge process, use or disposal; and therefore, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable federal statutes, regulations or permits.


NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users.  This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5.


NATURAL OUTLET means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.


NEW SOURCE means any source in which construction is commenced after publication of an applicable pretreatment standard provided that any of the conditions are met as detailed in 40 CFR 403.3 (m) and 40 CFR 403.6 (b).


NPDES (national pollutant discharge elimination system) means the federally instituted program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters or groundwaters of the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.


NPDES (national pollutant discharge elimination system) PERMIT means a permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable water of the United States pursuant to the Act.


PASS THROUGH means a discharge which exits the POTW into the receiving stream in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit.


PERSON means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group or governmental agency.


pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.


POLLUTANT means any substance which reduces the ability of waters to meet applicable federal, state or local water quality standards.


POLLUTION means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.


PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).


PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a natural pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.


PRETREATMENT STANDARDS means all applicable federal rules and regulations implementing Section 307 of the Act, as well as any nonconflicting standards or regulations; the more stringent thereof shall be applied.


PUBLIC SEWER means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, which is placed in a public right-of-way or dedicated easement, which was constructed according to City specifications for public sewers which were current at the time of its installation or accepted as substantially equivalent in writing by the City, and which is controlled by public authority.


PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act which is owned in this instance by the City.  This definition includes any public sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.  For the purposes of this Article, POTW also includes any public sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City’s POTW.


RECEIVING WATERS means lakes, rivers, streams or other watercourses which receive treated or untreated wastewater.


SANITARY SEWER means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted, including the pipe or conduit system and appurtenances, for the collection, transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage.  This definition also includes the terms PUBLIC SEWER, SEWER SYSTEM, SEWER and COLLECTION LINE.


SEWAGE means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.


SEWER means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.


SHALL and WILL are mandatory; MAY is permissive.


SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS means:

a.  Any discharger subject to categorical pretreatment standards;

b. Any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters) or that contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or

c. Any industrial user that has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.


SLUDGE means the accumulated solids separated from liquids (such as water or wastewater) during processing, or deposits on the channels of receiving waters, or the precipitate resulting from chemical treatment, coagulation or sedimentation of water or wastewater.


SLUG or SLUGLOAD means any discharge of water, sewer or industrial wastes which, in concentration of any give constituents or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any one (1) period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during the normal operation.


STATE means the State of Colorado.


STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, or other facilities used for the drainage of stormwater; but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.


SUBDIVIDER or DEVELOPER means any person who plats and improves undeveloped land for the purpose of industrial, commercial or residential use; or redevelops land or property for industrial, commercial or residential use.


S USPENDED SOLIDS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) means the total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.


TOTAL TOXIC ORGANIC POLLUTANTS means the sum of organic compounds found by use of the methods below, in an industrial user’s wastewater discharge at a concentration greater than the method detection limit.  Total toxic organic pollutants are measured using the methodologies, quality control techniques, sample container requirements and sample preservation techniques which must be followed as published in Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis for Pollutants (Final Rule; 40 CFR Part 136).


TOXIC POLLUTANT means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a).


USER means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the City’s POTW.


UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT means the Superintendent of Water, Gas and Sewer.


(c) Abbreviations .  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:


BMR               Baseline monitoring report

BOD                Biochemical oxygen demand

CFR                 Code of Federal Regulations

CWA               Clean Water Act 33 USC 1251, et. seq.

EPA                 Environmental Protection Agency



mg/l                Milligrams per liter

NPDES            National pollutant discharge elimination system

POTW             Publicly owned treatment works

RCRA             Resource Conservation Recovery Act 42 USC 3251, et. seq.

SER                 State Effluent Regulations

SWQS             State Water Quality Standards

TSS                 Total suspended solids

USC                United States Code



Section 12-47.  Deposit of objectionable wastes unlawful.


It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within the City or in any area under the  jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.


Section 12-47.1.  Discharge of untreated, polluted waters unlawful.


It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where an NPDES permit has been issued and suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the Act.


Section 12-47.2.  Discharge of waters into sanitary sewer prohibited.


No person shall make connection of downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connections are approved by the Utilities Superintendent, for the purpose of disposal of polluted surface drainage, unless such drainage is prohibited by SER and/or SWQS.


Section 12-48.  Disposal facilities to conform to Article.


Except as provided in this Article, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, inceptor or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.


Section 12-49.  Prohibited discharges; exceptions.


(a)  General.  As per 40 CFR 403.5(a), the discharge of any pollutant to a POTW which causes interferences is prohibited.  The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludges of the City wastewater treatment facilities, to injure, interfere with or pass through any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create a public nuisance, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, is prohibited.


(b)  Except as provided in this Article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:



(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65°C) (150°F) at the point of entry to the public sewer or heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant influent exceeds forty degrees Centigrade (40°C) (104°F);


(2)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge of such volume or strength as to cause interference in the operation or maintenance of the wastewater treatment plant;


(3)  Any water or waste which contains more than ten (10) mg/l or petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in any single grab sample using the EPA gravimetric method;


(4)  Any water or waste which contains grease, oil or any other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between zero degrees Centigrade (0°C) (32°F) and sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65°C) (150°F).;


(5)  Waters containing sand and other inorganic particulate matter which will result in a settleable solids concentration greater than twenty-five (25) milliliters per liter in the discharge;


(6)  Materials in sufficient amounts which may cause or do cause excessive coloration or light absorbency including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable

tanning solutions;


(7)  Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair;


(8)  Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-fourth (1/4) inch in any dimension;


(9)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they do not comply with the provisions for Disposal by Release into Sanitary Sewer Systems in the latest edition of Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Radiological Control, published by the Colorado Department of Health;


(10)  Wastewaters at a flow rate or containing such concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation shall be defined as a slug and are prohibited;


(11)  No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or State;



(12)  Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or odor-producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to treatment, which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system, that will pass through the system or that create toxicity in the City’s discharge as measured by the NPDES whole effluent toxicity test;


(13)  Solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the property operation of the wastewater treatment system.  Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, grease, garbage, cement, dirt, rocks, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar substances;


(14)  Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage facilities or to the operation of the system.  At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) meter.  No pollutants shall cause any wastestream to exhibit a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;


(15)  Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the treatment system.  All wastes discharged to the public sanitary sewer system must have a pH value in the range of six point zero (6.0) to nine point zero (9.0) standard units.  Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, concentrated acids, sulfides, chloride or fluoride compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic products;


(16)  Any waters or waste containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant;


(17)  Any water or waste containing any of the following substances shall meet effluent limitations as defined by State Effluent Regulations and/or State Water Quality Standards.

Pollutant	Limitation
Temperature	65°C/150°F
Oil and grease (petroleum or mineral oil origin)	10 mg/L
Explosive vapors	One reading max = 10% LEL
Two successive readings = 5% LEL
<140°F or 60°C closed cup flashpoint
pH	Min. 6.0 standard units
Max. 9.0 standard units
Total toxic organic pollutants	SER/SWQS
Tetrachloroethane	SER/SWQS
Ethylbenzene	SER/SWQS
Xylene	SER/SWQS
Toluene	SER/SWQS





or as otherwise established in the user’s sewer use permit, whichever maximum concentration is less;


(18a)  The following local limitations are established to prevent pass through and interference and to protect receiving water and sludge quality:

Pollutant	Daily Maximum Allowable Industrial Load
Cadmium	SER/SWQS
Copper	SER/SWQS
Hexavalent Chromium	SER/SWQS
Lead	SER/SWQS
Mercury	SER/SWQS
Nickel	SER/SWQS
Silver	SER/SWQS
Zinc	SER/SWQS



or as otherwise established in the user’s sewer use permit, whichever maximum concentration is less.


These Maximum Daily Industrial Loadings shall be allocated through Significant Industrial User permits, and the total loading to all permitted industrial users shall not exceed the limits shown.  All industrial users shall monitor and report daily flows as required by their sewer use permit.  In addition, the Utilities Superintendent may develop specific discharge limitations for any other toxic or inhibiting pollutant which may be determined to be of sufficient quality to cause POTW interference, pass through, endanger the health and safety of the POTW personnel or the general public, produce environmental harm, cause a POTW permit violation or render the POTW’s sludges unacceptable for economical reclamation, disposal or use.


(18b)  The following daily maximum allowable industrial loadings shall be allocated through individual sewer use permits.  The total loading to all permitted industrial users shall not exceed:

Pollutant	Daily Maximum Allowable Industrial Load
BOD	2,750 lbs./day
TSS	250 mg/l



or as otherwise established in the user’s sewer use permit, whichever maximum concentration is less.


(19)  Any material or substance entering into the public sewer which interferes with the treatment process, even if it is within the concentration limits stated in Subsection (19) and (20) above, may be prohibited upon written notice by the Utilities Superintendent;


(20)  Any material or substance not specifically mentioned in this section which in itself is corrosive, irritating or noxious to human beings and animals, or which by interaction with other water or waste in the public sewer system would produce undesirable effects or create any other condition deleterious to structures, treatment processes and quality of the receiving stream, is prohibited;


(21)  Any materials, chemicals or compounds listed by the EPA as toxic, hazardous or explosive or which are otherwise listed by national prohibited discharge standards;


(22)  Any waters or wastes that result in toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems are prohibited.


Section 12-50.  Prohibited wastes; control of discharge.


(a)       Regulatory actions.  If wastewaters containing any substance described in Section 12-49 are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewer system or the City or to any sewer system tributary thereto, the Utilities Superintendent may take any action necessary to:


(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater by issuing a cease and desist order to the discharger identifying the discharge violation and the Utility Superintendent’s intentions for resolving the matter, which may include, but is not limited to, plugging the sewer service;


(2)  Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this Article.  Such in-plant modifications shall be performed at the expense of the discharger;


(3)  Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and regulations;


(4)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the City for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system;


(5)  Temporarily suspend the discharger’s sewer use permit or impose temporary restrictions on discharges where continued discharges would jeopardize the ability of the treatment system to meet water quality standards, threaten damage to the sewer system, or cause a nuisance or unsafe condition to occur;


(6) Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this Article.


(b)       Protection from accidental discharge.  Each industrial user shall provide protection


from accidental discharge of the prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this Article.  Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or operator’s own cost and expense.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Utilities Superintendent for review, and shall be approved by him or her before construction of the facility.  Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his or her facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Article.


(c)       Reporting of accidental discharge.  An accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this Article shall be reported by telephone immediately upon such a discharge to the Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment.  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this Article or other applicable law.


(d)       Notice to employees.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge or prohibited wastes to the public sewer.  Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.


Section 12-51. Interceptors required; construction standards; maintenance of interceptors required.


(a)       All establishments where food is prepared for sale, including restaurants, carry-out facilities, butcher shops and similar establishments, shall install and maintain a grease interceptor.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and for City inspection at all times.


(b)       Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall also be provided when, in the opinion of the administrative authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil or grease in excessive amounts, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity conforming to the Uniform Plumbing Code, as currently adopted by the City and approved by the administrative authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.


(c)       Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.  They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.


(d)       All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.


Section 12-52.  Connection with sewer system – When required.

All residences, factories, mills, business houses, warehouse or any other houses having sewage matter to dispose of and situated on the line of any street or alley where there is a public sewer, shall be connected by the owner of the property or by his agent with such public sewer when possible or whenever required to do so by the Board of Health or declared of record by the City Council, and such declaration is placed on the record of proceedings of the City.  The City Council, in its discretion may adopt policies pertaining to the allowance of Individual Sewage Disposal Systems which shall not be inconsistent with state laws and regulations or this Code.


Section 12-52.1.  Sewer construction – Apportioning cost as to property benefitted.


(1)  The cost of all sewers laid in the streets or alleys shall be paid for by direct assessment upon the lots abutting the sewers in proportion to their frontage upon such streets or alleys.


(2)  The cost of all sewers or drains at street or alley intersections or crossings shall be paid for wholly by the City.


Section 12-52.2.  No permit to connect sewers until assessments paid.


No permit shall be granted for the construction of any private drain or sewer heretofore constructed until the assessment or the assessments against such lot or lots from which such private drain or sewer is connected, shall first be paid.


Section 12-53.      Sewage service rates.


(1)        There shall be assessed and charged the following sewer service rates:

(a)       S-1 URBAN RESIDENTIAL

(I)         Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service within the corporate limits of the City to all residential customers.

(II)       Monthly minimum per living unit in any month water service is furnished by the City shall be twenty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($27.50).

(III)     Monthly incremental charge based upon potable water consumed in the dwelling as measured through the water service meter.  The rate shall be one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per 100 cubic feet of water consumed up to a maximum of 1,000 cubic feet or twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50).  This charge shall be in addition to the monthly minimum charge above.


(IV)  For the user of sewer service of less than a month, the charge shall be as follows:

0 to 10 days---------------1/3 of the monthly minimum

11 to 20 days--------------2/3 of the monthly minimum

21 to 30 days--------------full monthly minimum plus the the monthly incremental charge




(b)       S-2 URBAN COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL

(I)        Large Commercial & Industrial

(A)      Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service within the corporate limits of the City to all commercial and industrial customers served by a water meter larger than a one and one-forth-inch (1 ¼”) meter and not using processed water in a manufacturing, bottling or canning operation.

(B)       The charge per month shall be an amount equal to the greater of:

monthly minimum sewer charge (A) by water meter size set forth in the table below or eighty-five percent (85%) of the same month’s metered water use in hundred cubic feet above minimum water use by meter size in the table below times two dollars and six cents ($2.06) plus monthly minimum sewer charge (B) by water meter size set forth in table below.

Water Meter Size

Minimum Hundred Cubic Feet

Monthly Minimum

Sewer A

Monthly Minimum Sewer B

1 ½-inch

17.5

$48.60

$39.44

2-inch

35.0

$84.69

$70.11

3-inch

70.0

$156.88

$131.47

4-inch

125.0

$270.31

$227.89

6-inch

280.0

$590.00

$499.63

8-inch

500.0

$1,043.75

$885.31

(II)       Small Commercial & Industrial

(A)      Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service within the corporate limits of the City to all commercial and industrial customers served by a water meter larger than a one and one-forth-inch (1 ¼”) or smaller water meter and not using processed water in a manufacturing, bottling or canning operation.

(B)       The charge per month shall be an amount equal to the greater of:

eighty-five percent (85%) of the same month’s metered water use in hundred cubic feet times two dollars six cents ($2.06) plus twenty-six dollars and twenty-eight cents ($26.28), or thirty dollars ($30.00).

(d)       S-4  RURAL RESIDENTIAL.

(I)        Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service to all residential customers outside the corporate limits of the City.

(II)       Monthly minimum per living unit in any month water service is furnished by the City shall be thirty seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50).

(III)      Monthly incremental charge based upon potable water consumed in the dwelling as measured through the water service meter.  The rate shall be one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per 100 cubic feet of water consumed up to a maximum of 1,000 cubic feet or twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50).  This charge shall be in addition to the monthly minimum charge above.


(IV)     For any user of sewer service of less than a month the charge will be as follows:

0 to 10 days----------------1/3 of the monthly minimum

11 to 20 days---------------2/3 of the monthly minimum

21 to 30 days---------------full monthly minimum plus the monthly incremental charge


(e)       S-5 RURAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL



(I)        Large Commercial, Industrial and Association.

(A)      Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service outside the corporate limits of the City to all commercial, industrial and association customers served by a water meter larger than one and one-forth inch (1 ¼”) meter, and not using processed water in a manufacturing, bottling or canning operation.

(B)       The charge per month shall be an amount equal to the greater of the:

monthly minimum sewer charge (A) by water meter size set forth in the table below or eighty-five percent (85%) of the same month’s metered water use in hundred cubic feet above minimum water use by meter size in the table below times two dollars and six cents ($2.06) plus monthly minimum sewer charge (B) by water meter size set forth in table below.


Water Meter Size

Minimum Hundred Cubic Feet

Monthly Minimum

Sewer A

Monthly Minimum Sewer B

1 ½-inch

17.5

$84.69

$70.11

2-inch

35.0

$156.88

$131.47

3-inch

70.0

$301.25

$254.19

4-inch	125.0	$528.13	$447.03
6-inch	280.0	$1,167.50	$990.50
8-inch	500.0	$2,075.00	$1,761.88
(II)       Small Commercial & Industrial

(A)      Applicability.  Applicable for sewage service outside the corporate limits of the City to all commercial and industrial customers served by one and one-forth inch (1 ¼”) or smaller water meter, and not using processed water in a manufacturing, bottling or canning operation.

(B)       The charge per month shall be an amount equal to the greater of:

eighty-five percent (85%) of the same month’s metered water use above the minimum water use of ten hundred cubic feet (7,500 gallons) times three dollars forty-four cents ($3.44) plus thirty-nine dollars and twenty-two cents ($39.22), or

thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50).

(Ord. 2013, Sec. 12-53(1)(a)(b)(c)(d)(e), repealed and reenacted, eff. 7-19-16)


(2)  Additional revenues generated by the rate structure changes contained in Sections 12-53 (1)(a) and (1)(d) as a result of the adoption of Ordinance No. 1482, shall be set aside specifically for the wastewater treatment plant expansion/modification to bring the wastewater treatment plant into full compliance with present and anticipated Environmental Protection Agency and Colorado Department of Health Rules and Regulations, as well as to increase the capacity of the plant to accept additional flow demand as new development takes place within the corporate limits of the City and the Trinidad Industrial Park. (Ord. No. 1482, 9/6/94.)


Section 12-54.      Sewer main taps.


(1) Before a City sewer service shall be allowed or approved for any premises in any territory, area or subdivision, developed or undeveloped, there shall be made an initial sewer service charge to compensate the City partially for the treatment facilities and mains required to provide service.  Such a charge, generally referred to as the plant Investment Fee, shall be as follows: (Ord. 1579, eff. 3-14-98)

SEWER PLANT INVESTMENT FEE


In-City            Outside City

4" tap - $1,500        4" tap - $3,000

6" tap - $2,250        6" tap - $4,500

8" tap - $3,375        8" tap - $6,750


(2)  These charges are exclusive of the actual costs in physically tapping the sewer main by City forces or private plumbing contractors.


(3)  Any sewer user with an existing tap wishing to increase the size of his/her service shall be charged a Plant Investment Fee equal to the difference in Plant Investment Fee charges between the old size and the new size tap.  The tap on the sewer main shall be the basis of the Plant Investment Fee.


(4)  Abandonment of a sewer tap shall not entitle the owner to a Plant Investment Fee refund.


(5)  Where a tap is made on the main serving a business or industry established and operating within the legally defined perimeter of the Trinidad Industrial Park, the Sewer Plant Investment Fee shall be the same as that for a like tap inside the City.


(6)  All Plant Investment Fees shall be placed in a special fund and the monies from the Plant Investment Fees will be used only for replacement or construction of capital facilities.


(7)  All taps on City sewer mains shall be done by licensed Master Plumbers and shall be charged to the person requesting the tap.


(8)  All taps on City sewer mains shall be issued by the Wastewater Superintendent, who shall determine the point of tap, minimum size of tap, sewer main extensions, manhole placement and improvements as needed.  Copies of the permit shall be issued to the Plumbing Contractor and the City Building Inspector.


(9)  All service lines from the main sewer line to the property served shall be vitreous clay pipe or PVC pipe conforming to ASTM (latest issue) D1784 for PVC compounds with the requirements of ASTM (latest issue) D3034 Type PSM for PVC sewer pipe and fittings.  The service lines shall be installed by City forces or by a Colorado licensed Master Plumber with all work so performed and materials installed meeting the requirements of Standard Specifications provided by the City Engineering Department and Utilities Departments herein adopted by reference and shall be available upon request.


(10)  Property to be served must be adjacent to City Mains and must be served directly therefrom.

(11)  No sewer service shall be connected from the service of one (1) building to any other building, vehicle, trailer, mobile home or other structure or facility, fixed or mobile.


(12)  Any complex of buildings containing ten (10) or more separate dwelling units, whether the same be apartments, houses, duplexes, or otherwise, but not including sleeping rooms, and owned by any one (1) person or a licensed trailer coach park are located on one (1) contiguous tract of ground owned by one (1) person, shall be allowed to install one (1) or more service lines and may make such taps from these service lines as are approved by the City Engineering Department and Wastewater Superintendent  from plans submitted in advance of construction.  No additional taps shall be made on these service lines until revised plans are submitted and approved.  No tap shall be made to sell or give away to any agency, corporation or person.  It is further provided that in the event any part of such tract owned by such person is sold or disposed of, the purchaser of said part may request individual service lines provided that all applicable ordinances are complied with including but not limited to, Uniform Building Code, Zoning Ordinances, and Uniform Plumbing Code.


(13)  If the City initiates a main installation for replacement of or substitution for an existing City Main, the City shall bear the cost of the transferring taps and "tying over" the customers' service lines.


(14)  Where a sewer tap has been granted and where such service is abandoned, either by non-use for a period of two (2) years or longer, or because of deterioration of the sewer service line and/or the building being served is razed, the customer's service shall be disconnected, capped or closed and the applicable Sewer Plant Investment Fee must be repaid unless a waiver or time extension is granted to the owner/customer by the Wastewater Superintendent.


Section 12-55.      Sewer system extensions.


(1)  The City shall make or cause to be made such extensions or replacements to the collection system of the sewer facilities as it deems necessary and feasible to serve any dwelling, commercial or industrial establishments, or property situated within the service area of the City utilities.  Such extensions or replacements shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 12-54.


(2)  All sewer main extensions of the City utility systems are to be under the exclusive control and ownership of the City.  Upon written request, and the furnishing of satisfactory evidence that the request for a main extension is justified, the City will either make the extension or cause the extension to be made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  The City shall have sole discretion in making main extensions and construction of appurtenant facilities both inside and outside the corporate limits of the City.


Section 12-56.      General requirement for main extensions.


(1)  All requests for main extensions, whether they be for a single customer or developer of an area, shall be submitted to the City in writing so that the City Engineering and Wastewater Superintendent, and other departments as may be required, may review and consolidate their planning.  Plans shall be approved in advance of any construction.


(2)  All new sewer services shall be served from mains only, and from mains adjacent to the property being served.


(3)  Design of within-city extensions shall be done by the City Engineer.  Developers of outside-city properties shall submit plans for approval that shall include such information as street widths, lot size, street names, utility easements, and utility design, and other information as may be required by City departments.


(4)  Agreements on cost-sharing distribution shall be worked out prior to construction, and, rather than assessment of a front foot cost, the developer of an area may elect to include price of the utilities in the cost of the lot.


(5)  Owners of properties either inside or outside the City requiring the construction of new mains in order to be served by the utilities shall bear the cost of such main extensions.  Cost shall include design, supervision, piping, manholes and appurtenances.


(6)  Mains shall be laid only in platted streets or in recorded right-of-way easements with provisions for access to maintain the facilities.


(7)  The City shall bear the cost of main extensions only under the following circumstances:

(a)  Lines laid by the City for the exclusive use as transmission or trunk lines, or lines laid for general system upgrading, or multiple feeding for greater reliability, shall be at City expense. A person allowed to tap such lines shall pay to the City a front foot cost as though the main were laid for his/her service.


(b)  Lines laid to municipal development such as parks or city owned industrial parks shall be at city expense.


(8)  No services will be provided for unplatted properties located within the City.


Section 12-57.      Elements in planning, constructing and financing main extensions.


(1)  The location, route, and length of main extensions shall be determined by the City Engineer and the Wastewater Superintendent, based upon convenience, economy, service requirements and capabilities, and ultimate requirements of the City utility system.  The size, materials, piping, manhole placing, and other engineering considerations shall be determined by the City Engineer and Wastewater Superintendent for inside-city extensions.   Outside-city extensions by developers shall be designed by competent personnel subject to approval of the design by the City Engineer and the Sewer Superintendent.


(2)  No sewer main shall be laid within the city service area within the public right of way smaller than eight (8") inches in diameter.


(3)  No tap shall be allowed on a main to serve a property until the main is extended to the far property line, unless the owner of the property signs an agreement approved in form by the City Attorney that he/she will pay the front foot costs for such main extension to or beyond his/her far property line.  Such agreement shall contain the total amount of monthly payment installments to be made not to exceed twelve (12) months without authorization of City Council.  City Council may waive this requirement if it finds and determines that no practical or useful purpose would be served by extending the main to the far property line or beyond.


(4)  A main may be extended to serve a single customer, a group of customers, a "pocket" consisting of a house or houses between developed areas, or a development.  At the option of the City, and depending on the availability of city funds for investment in new mains, any of the following means of financing may be arranged:


(a)  If the City elects to lay a main either with City forces or by contract at city expenses, no service shall be allowed to any customer until front foot costs are paid for that property or until arrangements are agreed to for deferred payment.


(b)  Main extensions to serve a subdivision, development, or area generally will be financed by the person developing the property. Within the development, all costs of the mains shall be absorbed in the development costs, including those at street and alley intersections, between the property line of the development and the attachment to existing City mains.  Front foot costs may be recovered by the developer by a reimbursement contract over a period of fifteen (15) years.  Each contract shall be individually negotiated with a developer and approved by the City Council, but may contain such provisions as:


(I)  Payments to developer of front foot charges by new customers wishing service off the mains.

(II)  Payment to the developer by the City of front foot charges and Plant Investment Fee charges collected from within the development, but in no case to refund to the developer more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the cost of the mains plus interest at one-half percent (½%) per month for the balance of the seventy-five percent (75%) outstanding over the fifteen (15) year period.

(5)  In submitting a main extension proposal, a developer, before doing the design, shall submit two (2) copies of a preliminary plat on which the City Engineer and the Wastewater Superintendent can indicate hydrant locations, valuing, points of connection to existing City mains, existing lines or structures, and other pertinent factors controlling line sizing and grades.  Two (2) copies of the final plat shall be submitted for approval to the City Engineer and Wastewater Superintendent.


(6)  Upon completion of the development project, the developer shall furnish the Engineering Department and Wastewater Superintendent with Mylar or linen as-built plats.  Upon approval of the materials and construction by the City Engineer and Wastewater Superintendent, these privately constructed mains shall become the property of the City.


(7)  The City may assume all or a portion of the cost of replacement of undersized or deteriorated mains which the city deems to have served their useful purpose.  At its discretion, the City may assume all or a portion of the cost of main extensions to properties within City limits already having sewer service.


Section 12-57.1.  Additional requirements.


No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer, State Health Department or EPA.  All categorical industrial users shall comply with the categorical pretreatment standards set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.  The City reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the general purpose and policy presented in this Article.


Section 12-57.2.  Violations; liability.


Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation.

ARTICLE 5.  WATER.


Section 12-58.      Definitions.


As used herein:


(1) City Forces shall mean the City of Trinidad employees.


(2) City Water Department shall mean the Water Department of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(3) Developer/customer shall mean an applicant for extension of facilities to supply domestic, commercial, industrial or fire protection water service to property comprised of a platted subdivision, a group or groups of platted or re-subdivided lots, a land tract, etc., upon which more than one (1) residential, commercial, or industrial establishment is erected.


(4) Front-foot costs shall mean an assessment per front foot of property or lot(s) owned by a customer to which water service is made available by main extension.  The per front foot assessment is determined by apportioning the main extension cost including design, supervision, valuing, fire hydrants, and appurtenances.  The City shall have sole discretion in determining the frontage or frontages which shall serve as the bases for apportioning the cost of a main extension, subject to State law provisions.


(5) Plumbing shall mean the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing appliances and plumbing appurtenances in connection with any of the following:  sanitary drainage or storm facilities and venting systems and the public or private water supply systems, within any building, structure or conveyance.


(6) Private main shall mean main constructed within the public right of way prior to the enactment of this Chapter by a person or persons to serve property or properties.  Said main was contracted for or installed directly by the customer in lieu of a City main of standard and approved size, location and materials.


(7) Privately constructed main shall mean any main connected to and becoming a part of the City utility system which main was constructed directly by private funds and located in public right of way.  Said main was designed or approved by the City and its installation inspected by the City Inspector.  The size, materials and location were approved by the City and equal to that which would have been provided by the City.


(8) Service area shall mean that area of land, whether it be a lot or lots, tract or parcel of land, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or for future building development, either industrial, commercial or residential, but excluding agriculture or farm land, which is subject to annexation on the date of the enactment of this Chapter or in the foreseeable future is economically feasible to develop and supply water from the City as shall be determined in the discretion of the City Council for growth and expansion of the City and its water supply.  The service area as defined herein shall be that area of land within a radius of one and one-half (1 ½) miles from the corporate limits of the City, except, however, the City Council shall have the power to prescribe such other legally defined service area by resolution as it may deem necessary and in the best interest of the City.


(9) Single customer shall mean an applicant for extension of facilities to supply domestic, commercial,  industrial, or fire protection water service for one (1) lot or building site, for a single family dwelling, or a multiple family dwelling, a commercial or industrial building, or other establishment, whether existing or to be erected.


(10) Superintendent shall mean the department head or official in charge of the Water Department or the person designated by the City Manager to be in charge of the water works system of the City.


(11) Transmission mains shall mean water mains which are used exclusively for the transmission of water and not for distribution to single customers.  Unless otherwise designated by the City, these mains are fourteen inches (14”) and larger.  The direct connection of single customer service lines is not permitted except in the circumstance that a tap was existing or committed prior to the enactment of this Chapter.


(12) Water association shall mean an association, partnership, co-partnerships and bodies political and corporate including one (1) or more persons or corporations or other legal entity formed to distribute water to others in order to contract with the City for municipal water services.


Section 12-59.      Water Department created; duties of City Manager; Power of City Council.


There is hereby created a Water Department for the City. The City Manager is authorized to hire such employees and to perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of the Water Department.  The City Council shall have the power to prescribe rates, rules and regulations by resolution as it may deem necessary.  Rates for outside customers not living in the corporate limits of the City shall be set by ordinance.


Section 12-60.      Customer to abide by contract.


The Water Department agrees to furnish water for a certain specified price.  If any customer violates his/her contract with the City or permits water to be taken without the knowledge or consent of the Water Department he/she shall be required to pay double the price of water so used, and the City reserves the right to shut off the supply for abuses of water privileges.  When the water has been turned off for violation thereof, the water will not be turned on again until all water rent and penalties have been paid.


Section 12-61.      Use of water during fire alarm prohibited.


During all alarms of fire the use of hose and all outlets where a constant flow of water is maintained is forbidden.


Section 12-62.      Water use restrictions.


In the case of water shortage, scarcity, or conservation purposes, the City Council may be resolution

place any restrictions that it deems necessary upon the use of water for irrigation, sprinkling, or outdoor use. (Ord. 1741, eff., 12-12-03)


Section 12-63.      Priority of City users over outside users.


Use of water outside the corporate limits of the City shall be subject to the paramount rights of users within the corporate limits.  In case there shall be insufficient water to provide for users both within and without the corporate limits, the City may reduce, curtail or shut off the users outside the corporate limits during such period of water shortage or scarcity.


Section 12-64.      Standpipes and fire lines.


Regular customers of the City Water Department, using water for domestic or industrial purposes, wishing to install fire lines to serve fire sprinkler systems in commercial, industrial or public buildings to be used exclusively for the fighting of fires shall be permitted, upon approval of plans by the City Engineer, the Water Superintendent and the Fire Chief, to connect to the City mains at their own expense.  Use of water from standpipes and fire lines shall be for the purpose of fighting fires only.


Section 12-65.      Metered service.


All water service shall be metered.


Section 12-66.      Location of water meters.


(1)  Residential meters shall be located at the property line in fibre, CMP, or concrete pipe pits with double-lid pattern cast iron meter box covers.  The meter shall be cradled in a copper meter yoke with a stop valve, with the top of the meter within the top four inches (4") of the fibre, CMP or concrete pipe.  If, because of concrete or asphalt paving or because some structure interferes, on approval of the Water Superintendent, the meter may be placed elsewhere in an accessible place.  All water services shall have curb stops in stop boxes at some point between the curb line and the property line.  Curb stops shall have stop boxes in good condition that are conspicuous and accessible.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/developer to pay for the above mentioned meter pit, meter yoke, curb stop and miscellaneous materials as outlined in Section 12-69 (1) as applicable.


(2)  Commercial or industrial meters shall be located at the property line, if possible, in a vault suitable for the meter size.  Vaults shall have an eleven inch (11”) lid placed so the meter register can be easily read, and a flange or manhole cover that can be removed for access to the meter.  As with residential meters, commercial or industrial installations placed indoors or in inaccessible locations shall have remote reading registers.  All commercial or industrial services shall have either curb stops between the curb line and property line or, in services over two inches (2”) in diameter, a shut-off valve in a vault or valve box that can be operated from the ground surface with a two inch (2”) square extension handle.


(3)  Services to water customers off the transmission line shall have curb stops in stop boxes in good condition, conspicuous and accessible.  Outside-City property owners shall be responsible for protection of their meters from frost and physical damage, and shall maintain their service lines to the meter in such a condition as to prevent wastage of water of water-caused damage.  All work done on outside-City water services from the main to the water meter shall be done by a plumber licensed in the State, by City forces, by a contractor working for the City or by a contractor working for a developer. All work so performed shall be under City inspection.


(4)  Cost of relocating a meter setting shall be borne by the customer unless the move is caused by a public works project.


(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open, interfere with, injure, or deface, or in any way impair the working of any water meter.  It shall also be unlawful for any person, other than a City employee of the Water Department, to remove any meter from its setting, except for removal of an outside-City meter by a licensed plumber for repairs by the City.


Section 12-67.      Plant Investment Fee.

Before a City water service shall be allowed or approved for any premises in any territory, area or subdivision, developed or undeveloped, there shall be an initial water service charge to compensate the City partially for the base water supply, treatment facilities and mains required to provide service. Such a charge, generally referred to as the Plant Investment Fee, shall be as follows:

(1)       Water Plant Investment Fee - Inside City

3/4" tap $ 1,250.00

1" tap $ 2,250.00

1-1/2" tap $ 3,500.00

2" tap $ 4,000.00

3" tap $ 7,000.00

4" tap $ 12,500.00

The Plant Investment Fee for a 6" or larger tap is subject to negotiation, to be based on projected revenue from the project.

(a)       Where a tap is made on the main to serve any non-metered private fire hydrant, fire sprinkler system, or standpipe, and a smaller tap is made for metered domestic, commercial or industrial use, the Plant Investment Fee shall be based on the size of the metered tap.

(b)       These charges are in addition to the actual costs in physically tapping the main by City forces.

(2)       Water Plant Investment Fee - Outside City

3/4" tap $ 3,200.00

1" tap $ 4,750.00

1-1/2" tap $ 7,250.00

2" tap $ 9,500.00

3" tap $ 21,500.00

4" tap $ 37,500.00

The Plant Investment Fee for a 6" or larger tap is subject to negotiation, to be based on projected revenue from the project.

(a)       Where a tap is made on the main to serve any non-metered private fire hydrant, fire sprinkler system, or standpipe, and a smaller tap is made for metered domestic, commercial or industrial use, the Plant Investment Fee shall be based on the size of the metered tap.

(b)       These charges are in addition to the actual costs in physically tapping the main by City forces.

(Ord. 1952, Sec. 12-67(1) and (2) repealed and reenacted eff. 2/18/14)


(3)  Any water user with an existing tap wishing to increase the size of his/her service shall be charged a Plant Investment Fee equal to the difference in Plant Investment Fee charges between the old size and the new size tap.  The tap on the water main shall be the basis of the Plant Investment Fee.  Abandonment of a tap shall not entitle the owner to a Plant Investment Fee refund.


(4)  Where a tap is made on a main serving a business or industry established and operating within the legally defined perimeter of the Trinidad Industrial Park, then the Water Plant Investment Fee shall be the same as that for a like tap inside the City.  (Ord. 1169, 5/20/80.)


(5)     (a) All Plant Investment Fees resulting from authorized taps inside the corporate limits of the City shall be used only for replacement or construction of water system capital facilities.


(b) The monies derived from Plant Investment Fees and additional payments received pursuant to Resolution No. 1036 resulting from authorized taps outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be placed into a restricted account to be used solely for the purpose of furthering the development of the City’s water rights, including any possible water rights acquisition and the engineering and legal expenses associated with conversion of agricultural rights to municipal and industrial uses.  (Ord. 1360, Sec. 2, 9/5/89./ Ord. 1580, eff. 3-14-98)


(6)  Repealed (Ord. 1661, eff. 4-13-01)


(7)  The City Council shall, not later than its last regularly scheduled meeting of the month of April of each year, review the Plant Investment Fee and make a determination as to the adequacy of the fee to meet purpose which it serves and increase or decrease the fee as circumstances require.  (Ord. 1169, 5/20/80.)


Section 12-68.            Charge for private fire hydrants.


(1)  Private nonmetered fire hydrants (those not belonging to the City but served from City mains) may be authorized if the City water supply is adequate and City mains four inches (4") or larger are available to be tapped.  All costs in tapping the main and installing the fire hydrants shall be paid by persons wanting this service, and a payment of Sixty-Two and 50/100 Dollars ($62.50) per year for each hydrant shall be paid in advance to the Consolidated Billing Department of the City.


(2)  All plans for such installations shall be approved in advance of construction by the City Engineer and Water Superintendent.


(3)  Unless a private fire hydrant is on a metered service, water shall not be used from the hydrant for any purpose other than to fight fires.


Section 12-69.            Water main taps.


(1)  All taps on the City mains shall be done by City forces and shall be charged to the person requesting the tap.  Materials will be charged at City cost plus fifteen percent (15%) to cover handling equipment at the current departmental rate, and labor at the hourly rates paid by the City.  Sales taxes shall be charged where applicable.  Said fee shall be payable upon completion of the work.


(2)  All service lines from the main to the meter shall be Type K soft copper.  Service lines from the main to the property line shall be installed by City forces, by a contractor working for the City, by a plumber licensed in the State or by a contractor working for a developer.  All work so performed shall be under City inspection.


(3) Where a meter location other than at a property line is authorized, the City or a City licensed contractor shall construct the service from the main to the property line.  A City licensed contractor or the property owner shall continue the service line from the property line to the building.


(4)  The owner or lessee of any premises to which any water connection shall be made to City mains shall keep all pipes and fixtures from the water main to the meter in good repair and protected from frost to prevent the wastage of water.


(5)  If no emergency exists, upon notification of the owner or lessee by a Water Department employee that his/her service line is leaking, he/she shall have five (5) days in which to obtain a plumber to repair the leak.  In the event of noncompliance, the City may turn the water service off at the meter, the stop box, or the corporation stop.  Any expenses the City may incur in turning the service off shall be borne by the customer.


(6)  If, in establishing a new grade for a street, the grade is lowered more than one foot (1'), causing the water service to have less than three feet (3') of burial, the City shall replace the line, except that if the changing of the grade is part of an improvement district project the charges shall be borne by the project.


(7)  Property to be served must be adjacent to City mains and must be served directly therefrom.


(8)  No tap shall be made in a City main until the applicable Plant Investment Fee and front foot costs for mains have been paid or deferred payment arranged.  No service shall be provided from a tap until all service charges by the City have been paid or deferred payment arranged.


(9)  No water service line shall be connected from the service of one (1) building to any other building, vehicle, trailer, mobile home or other structure or facility, fixed or mobile.


(10)  Any complex of buildings containing ten (10) or more separate dwelling units, whether the same be apartments, homes, duplexes, or otherwise, but not including sleeping rooms, and owned by one (1) person or a licensed trailer coach park owned by one (1) person, if the said buildings or trailer coach park are all located on one (1) contiguous tract of ground owned by one (1) person shall be allowed to install one (1) or more metered service lines, and may make such taps from these service lines as are approved by the City Engineer and Water Superintendent from plans submitted in advance of construction.  No additional taps shall be made on these service lines until revised plans are submitted and approved.  No tap shall be made to sell or give away water to any agency, corporation or person.  It is further provided that in the event any property or properties owned by such person, shall be sold or disposed of, and such property or properties shall not have a separate service line, the new owner must immediately install a separate service line.


(11)  If an owner has a bona fide tap on a City main not adjacent to the property served, and a new main is installed adjacent to the property, the City will relocate the tap to the main charging the owner for cost of materials and cost of killing the old service at the main.  No Plant Investment Fee will be charged.


(12)  If the City initiates a main installation for replacement of an existing City main, the City shall bear the cost of transferring taps and "tying over" the customers' service lines.


(13)  Where tapped couplings are provided in the laying of a water main, no connection shall be made to these fittings until the applicable Plant Investment Fee and front foot costs have been paid.


(14)  Where water service is abandoned and/or the building being served is razed, the customer's service shall be disconnected from the main at the customer's expense and the corporation stop capped and closed.  If the line is not of Type K soft copper, service will not be re-established until the line is replaced at owner's expense.  Service will not be re-established for any use other than that originally authorized unless approved in advance by the City.


Section 12-70.            Water system extensions.


(1)  The City shall make or cause to be made such extensions or replacements to the distribution system of the water facilities as it deems necessary and feasible to serve any dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment, or property situated within the service area of the City utilities.  Such extensions or replacements shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Sections 12-71 and 12-72.


(2)  All water main extensions of the City utility systems are to be under the exclusive control and ownership of the City.  Upon written request, and the furnishing of satisfactory evidence that the request for a main extension is justified, the City will either make the extension or cause the extension to be made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  The City shall have sole discretion in making main extensions and constructing appurtenant facilities both inside and outside the corporate limits of the City.


Section 12-71.            General requirements for main extensions.


(1)  All requests for main extensions, whether they be for a single customer or developer of an area, shall be submitted to the City in writing so that the City Engineer and Water Superintendent and other departments as may be required, may review and consolidate their planning.  Plans shall be approved in advance of any construction.


(2)  All new water services shall be served from mains only, and from mains adjacent to the property being served.


(3)  Design of within-City extensions shall be done by the City Engineer and Water Superintendent.  Developers of outside-City properties shall submit plans for approval that shall include such information as street widths, lot size, street names, utility easements, and utility design, and other information as may be required by City departments.


(4)  Agreements on cost-sharing distribution shall be worked out prior to construction, and, rather than assessment of a front foot cost, the developer of an area may elect to include price of the utilities in the cost of the lot.


(5)  Owners of properties either inside or outside the City requiring the construction of new mains in order to be served by the utilities shall bear the cost of such main extensions.  Cost shall include design, supervision, valving, fire hydrants, and appurtenances.


(6)  Mains shall be laid only in platted streets or in recorded right of way easements with provisions for access to maintain the facilities.


(7)  The City shall bear the cost of main extensions only under the following circumstances:


(a)  Where the City requires a larger main for purposes of system improvement or system extension not required by proper hydraulic sizing of lines to serve a customer or a developer's present and anticipated needs in completely developing his/her property, the City shall pay the estimated cost of over sizing over design requirements not to exceed the oversize over the cost of an eight inch (8") water main.


(b)  Lines laid by the City for the exclusive use as transmission or trunk lines, or lines laid for general system upgrading to provide better pressure, or multiple feeding for greater reliability, shall be at City expense.  A person allowed to tap such lines shall pay to the City a front foot cost as though the main were laid for his/her service.


(c)  Lines laid to municipal development such as parks or City owned industrial parks, shall be at City expense.


(8)  No services will be provided for unplatted properties located within the City.


Section 12-72.            Elements in planning, constructing and financing main extensions.


(1)  The location, route, and length of main extensions shall be determined by the City Water Superintendent based upon service requirement capabilities, and ultimate requirements of the City utility system.  Generally, properties shall be serviced from mains in the street fronting the property and water mains laid within the City's corporate limits within the public right-of-ways shall be no smaller than six inches (6") in diameter.


(2)  The size, materials, valving, fire hydrant placement and other main extension requirements shall be determined by the City Water Superintendent for extensions within the corporate limits of the City.  Extensions of such water system beyond the City corporate limits shall be designed subject to approval by the City Water Superintendent, prior to the authorization of such work and materials.


(3)  The American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standards, 1995 Edition, published by the American Water Works Association, 6666 West Quincy Ave., Denver, Colorado 80235 is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated fully as if set out at length herein.  Not less than two (2) copies of the said 1995 edition of the AWWA Standards as set forth above shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and the Office of the City Water Superintendent.


(4)  No tap shall be allowed on a main to serve a property until the main is extended to the far property line, unless the owner of the property signs an agreement approved in form by the City Attorney that he/she will pay the front foot costs for such main extension to or beyond his/her far property line.  Such agreement shall contain the total amount of monthly payment installments to be made not to exceed twelve (12) months without authorization of City Council.  City Council may waive this requirement if it finds and determines that no practical or useful purpose would be served by extending the main to the far property line or beyond.


(5)  A main may be extended to serve a single customer, a group of customers, a "pocket" consisting of a house or houses between developed areas, or a development.  At the option of the City, and depending on the availability of City funds for investment in new mains, any of the following means of financing may be arranged:


(a)  If the City elects to lay a main either with City forces or by contract at City expense, no service shall be allowed to any customer until front foot costs and Plant Investment Fee are paid for that property or until arrangements for deferred payment have been agreed to.


(b)  Main extensions to serve a subdivision, development, or area generally will be financed by the person developing the property.  Within the development, all costs of the mains shall be absorbed in the development costs, including those at street and alley intersections, between the property line of the development and the attachment to existing City mains.  Front foot costs may be recovered by the developer by a reimbursement contract over a period of fifteen (15) years.  Each contract shall be individually negotiated with a developer and approved by the City Council, but may contain such provisions as:


(I)  Payments to developer of front foot charges by new customers wishing service off the mains.


(II)  Payment to the developer by the City of front foot charges and Plant Investment Fee charges collected from within the development, but in no case to refund to the developer more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the cost of the mains plus interest at one-half percent (½%) per month for the balance of the seventy-five percent (75%) outstanding over the fifteen (15) year period.


(6)  In submitting a main extension proposal by a developer, before doing the hydraulic design, the developer shall submit two (2) copies of a preliminary plat on which the Engineering Department and the Water Superintendent can indicate hydrant locations, valving, points of connection to existing City mains, existing lines or structures, and other pertinent factors controlling lines sizing and grades.  Two (2) copies of the final plat shall be submitted for approval to the City Engineer and Water Superintendent.


(7)  Upon completion of the development project, the developer shall furnish the Engineering Department with Mylar or linen as-built plats.  Upon approval of the materials and construction by the City Engineer and the Water Superintendent, these privately constructed mains shall become the property of the City.


(8)  The City may assume all or a portion of the cost of replacement of undersized or deteriorated mains which the City deems to have served their useful purpose.  At its discretion, the City may assume all or a portion of the cost of main extensions to properties within City limits already having water service.


Section 12-73.      Exemption from front foot charges.


All properties abutting existing City mains prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be exempt from front foot charges, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  At the City's discretion, payment for main extension and Plant Investment Fees may be in cash, or by a ten percent (10%) down payment with the balance handled as a utility bill by consolidated billing apportioned over no more than ten (10) years, with a handling charge of one-half percent (½%) per month on the unpaid balance.  The outstanding balance shall constitute a lien on the property served.


Section 12-74.      Water service rates - Schedule.


(1)       A proportion of the revenues generated by the following established Water

Service Rate Schedule in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) per month per customer shall be set aside in a restricted water fund to provide for payment of bonded indebtedness retirement, loan repayment, and capital improvements as provided for in the annual budgets of the Water Department:

(a) W-1 Urban Residential and Small Commercial.

(I) Applicability.  Applicable for water service within the corporate limits of the City to all services with a smaller than one and one half inch (1-1/2”) meter.


(II) All water usage shall be billed at a rate of one dollar and sixty-five cents ($1.65) per 100 cubic feet (750 gallons) beyond the minimum amount.


(III) Minimum charge per month:                         Water Amount:

Meter smaller than 1-1/2”                              1,000 cubic feet

($16.50)                                                          (7,500 gallons)


(b) W-2 Urban Large Commercial and Large Residential.


(I) Applicability.  Applicable for water service within the corporate limits of the City to all services with a one and one half-inch (1-1/2”) meter or larger.


(II) All water usage shall be billed at a rate of one dollar and sixty-five cents ($1.65) per 100 cubic feet (750 gallons) beyond the minimum amount.




(III) Minimum charge per month:                         Water Amount:


1-1/2” meter   $28.88                                     1,750 cu. ft. (13,125 gallons)

2”        meter   $57.75                                     3,500 cu. ft. (26,250 gallons)

3”        meter   $115.50                                   7,000 cu. ft. (52,500 gallons)

4”        meter   $206.25                                 12,500 cu. ft. (93,750 gallons)

6”        meter   $462.00                                28,000 cu. ft. (210,000 gallons)

8”        meter   $825.00                                50,000 cu. ft. (375,000 gallons)


(c) W-3 Rural Residential and Small Commercial


(I) Applicability.  Applicable for water service outside the corporate limits of the City to all services with a smaller than one and one half inch (1-1/2”) meter.


(II) All water usage shall be billed at a rate of two dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75) per 100 cubic feet (750 gallons) beyond the minimum amount.


(III) Minimum charge per month: Water Amount:


Meter smaller than 1-1/2”:  $27.50   1,000 cubic feet (7,500 gallons)


(d) W-4 Rural Large Commercial, Industrial and Association.


(I) Applicability.  Applicable for water service outside the corporate limits of the City to all services with a one and one-half inch (1-1/2”) meter or larger.


(II) All water usage shall be billed at a rate of three dollars and thirty cents ($3.30) per 100 cubic feet (750 gallons) beyond the minimum amount.


(III) Minimum charge per month:   Water Amount:


1-1/2”  meter   $57.75                            1,750 cu. ft.  (13,125 gallons)

2”        meter   $115.50                          3,500 cu. ft. (26,250 gallons)

3”        meter   $231.00                          7,000 cu. ft. (52,500 gallons)

4”        meter   $412.50                       12,500 cu. ft.  (93,750 gallons)

6”        meter   $924.00                       28,000 cu. ft.  (210,000 gallons)

8”        meter   $1,650.00                    50,000 cu. ft.  (375,000 gallons)


(Ord. 1952, Sec. 12-74(1) repealed and reenacted, eff. 2/18/14)


(2)  Connection and disconnection fee.


(a)  In any case where any water service of any kind is connected or disconnected by the City or its authorized agents, thereof shall be paid a   fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00) for said connection or disconnection if the      work is done during normal working hours.  If done other than during normal working hours, or on weekends or holidays, the fee shall be Twenty Dollars ($20.00) for the connection.


(b)  The said fee shall be paid within seven (7) days after the work is done upon proper invoice or statement to the customer.  (Ord. 1220, 4-13-82).


Section 12-75.      Regulations part of contract.


All regulations contained in this Article shall be considered a part of the contract of every person taking water from the waterworks of the City, and every person taking water shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby.


Section 12-76.      Unlawful acts.


It shall be unlawful for any person to use or take water from the City waterworks without a permit therefor, or to make any fraudulent representation for the purpose of obtaining water, or for any person to take or use water from the waterworks for a different purpose than that provided in the customer's permit, or for any person to violate any of the regulations set forth in this Article.


Section 12-77.      Right of City to shut off water in mains; precautionary measures by customer; Nonliability of City.


The City reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or for other necessary purposes, and all persons having boilers or other appliances on their premises depending on the pressure of the pipes to keep them supplied with water, are hereby cautioned against danger from these sources, and are required to provide, at their own expense, suitable safety appliances to protect themselves against such danger.  In any event, it is expressly provided that no claim whatever shall be made against the City by reason of any damage resulting from water having been cut off, either through accident or necessity. (Ord. 1958, Sec. 29-42.)


Section 12-78.      Right of entry to repair; notice to owner to make repairs.


The Superintendent or such other person as may be directed by the Superintendent shall be authorized to enter and have free access at all reasonable hours to premises to ascertain the location or condition of all hydrants, pipes or other fixtures attached to said water works.  In the event he/she finds that water is wasted on account of negligence or for want of repairs, and if such waste is not immediately remedied, the water leading to such premises shall be turned off.  It shall be the duty of such officer if he/she discovers any defect in a private pipe between the City main pipe and the stopcock to give notice in writing to be left at the premises, if occupied, and if not occupied, with the owner or his/her agent, and if the necessary repairs are not made within five (5) days thereafter, unless an emergency exists requiring a shorter time period, the water shall be turned off.

Section 12-79. Using water in violation of sprinkling restrictions.


It shall be unlawful for any person to use the water for irrigation, sprinkling or any other purposes in violation of restriction on such use imposed by City Council pursuant to Section 12-62.


Section 12-80.      Using water or appurtenances without authority.


It shall be unlawful for any person to use the water from any part of the waterworks or to open any fire plug, stopcock, or valve, or other fixture appertaining to such works, after the same has been shut off as provided in this Article or otherwise without lawful authority, or let or shut off water into or from any pipe, without lawful authority.


Section 12-81.      Polluting water in waterworks; obstructing conduits.


It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast or put any substance into any reservoir, storage tank, stream, trench, pipe, drain, ditch or conduit, used in and necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation of the waterworks, and which substance shall tend to fill up such reservoir, or to fill up or obstruct the flow of water in any such stream, trench, pipe, ditch, conduit, or to throw, cast, or put into any such reservoir, trench, stream, ditch, pipe, or conduit, any toxic or unwholesome substance that shall tend to pollute the water therein.


Section 12-82.      Polluting water source prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast into a stream or any source from which water for the City waterworks is taken, for five (5) miles above the point which it is taken, any filthy or other substance that shall tend to pollute the water therein.  (Ord. 1958, Sec.  29-49.)


Section 12-83.      Injuring or damaging waterworks property.


It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or deface, impair or destroy any part of any appurtenances of the waterworks or any property belonging to the waterworks or used in connection therewith.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 29-51.)


Section 12-84.      Covering up curb box.


It shall be unlawful for any person to build over or cover up any curb box or stopcock belonging to the City waterworks or used in connection therewith.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 29-52.)


Section 12-85.      Permit to re-sell water.


(1) Any person wishing to re-sell water obtained from the City Water Utility shall first obtain an annual permit from the City Manager to re-sell water and pay a fee of $125.00.  The permit shall expire one year after its issuance.  The permittee may apply for a renewal within ninety (90) days before the expiration date.  The permit for resale of water is required in addition to any of the other permits required for water connections prescribed by this chapter.  The City Manager shall not issue a water resale permit without first finding that:


(a) The applicant has already obtained the required permit for main connections with City Water Utility;


(b) The applicant has obtained product insurance to protect and hold the city harmless in the event there is any damage or injury resulting from the quality of the water sold to and resold by the permit holder; and


(c) The estimated quantity of water to be resold will not be of such a volume to interfere with the water service to be provided to existing water utility customers.

(Ord. 1952, Sec 12-85(1) repealed and reenacted eff. 2/18/14)


(2) The issuance of such permit shall be conditioned on the following: (Ord. 1603, eff., 3-27-99)


(a) The applicant observes all Colorado Department of Health Regulations, and city and county health requirements; and (Ord. 1603, eff., 3-27-99)


(b) The applicant signs an agreement evidencing the understanding that this permit can be suspended if required by the water needs of the City. (Ord. 1603, eff., 3-27-99)


(3)  Failure to satisfy any of the conditions set forth in subsection (2) shall constitute grounds for the revocation of this permit by the City Manager.  (Ord. 1603, eff., 3-27-99)


(4) Any person who resells water obtained from the City Water Utility without obtaining the required permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall also be subject to termination of his/her residential and/or commercial water service. (Ord. 1603, eff., 3-27-99)


(5) Any person who resells water obtained from the City Water Utility must have an additional meter installed on his/her residential and/or commercial water tap to separately measure the volume of water used for resale purposes.  Such person shall be charged a base amount of $11.00 per 1,000 gallons (133 cubic feet) used for resale purposes. (Ord. 1952, Sec 12-85(5) repealed and reenacted eff. 2/18/14)


(6) The resale of water shall be limited to residents of Las Animas County.  No out-of-county sales shall be permitted.  Water shall be resold for residential and domestic use only.  No water shall be resold for commercial, industrial, or fire-fighting purposes. (Ord. 1699, eff., 8-30-02)


(7) Water resold in quantities greater than those identified in the water resale contract and or water re-sale permit shall be subject to a surcharge of no less than the rate as identified above in the W-4 Rural Large Commercial, Industrial and Association rate in addition to the base amount above. (Ord. 1699, eff., 8-30-02)


Section 12-86.  Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connections


(1)  Definitions

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:

a.       "Approved backflow prevention assembly" means a backflow prevention assembly described in Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research's (FCCC&HR) most current "list of approved backflow prevention assemblies" or American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE).

b.       "Backflow" means the undesirable reversal of the direction of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any source(s) caused by backpressure and/or backsiphonage.

c.       "Backflow preventer" means a device designed to prevent backflow created by backpressure or backsiphonage.

d.         "Backpressure" means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or means that could create an elevated pressure within the nonpotable system greater than the supply pressure.

e.         "Backsiphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by negative or sub-atmospheric pressure in the potable water supply system.

f.        "Certified cross-connection control technician" means a person who has the responsibility for the testing, operation and maintenance of cross-connection control devices and is certified as specified in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of the Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

g.         "Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual" means the most recent edition of a manual that has been published by the state addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for the utility in implementing a cross-connection control program as outlined in Section 12-86(2)

h.         "Containment" means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device, or method, on the water service line(s), so that water delivered to the service line cannot return to the City potable water distribution system due to any backpressure and/or backsiphonage condition which might arise.

i.          "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.

j.          "Cross-connection" means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, four-way valve connections, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections.

k.       “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Trinidad or, if this person is not available, his or her subordinate designated by the City Manager in writing.

l.        "Hazard degree” means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

m. "Isolation" means a backflow device installed on a branch of the internal plumbing to protect the customer's water system.

n. "Non-potable water" means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality.

o.         “Plumbing Codes” means the most recent edition of the plumbing codes that has been published by International Code Council and adopted by city ordinance.

p.       "Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness.

q. "Potable water" means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical and radiological quality shall conform with State of Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

r. "Utility" means the City of Trinidad's Water Department, a water activity enterprise of the City of Trinidad.

s.        "Water service connection" means the customer's water service connection from the point of tap on the public potable water system; to the point where the service line enters the customer's structure (residential or business) including the customer's stop box or shut-off valve or meter, whichever comes first, from the utility water main. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include any other temporary or emergency water service connections from a fire hydrant or any connection to the public potable water system.

(2) Requirements

a. Implementation and Enforcement of a Cross-Connection Control Program

(I) The City Manager and/or his or her designee is vested with the authority and responsibility for implementing and enforcing an effective cross- connection control program in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

b.         Backflow Preventers Required At All Service Connections.

(I)  The City Manager and/or his or her designee will identify those customers who are likely to have a cross connection and an approved backflow preventer shall be required to be installed at any uncontrolled water service connection for the safety and protection of the City’s water supply system and water users connected to that system.

(II)       Property owner’s and/or Agent’s of the property shall be required to obtain a Backflow Service Permit (BSP) prior to the installation of the backflow prevention device.  The installation of the backflow preventer must be performed by a licensed plumber or certified cross connection control technician.  The city reserves the right to impose a fee for the issuance of the Backflow Service Permit.

c.       The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall have the authority to specify the type of backflow preventer to be installed at each service connection. The decision with respect to the type of backflow preventer that will be required in any specific situation shall be based upon:

(I)  The degree of hazard posed by the facility connected or to be connected to the City water supply system.

(II) The degree of hazard shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, depending upon the circumstances of each particular case.

(III) In making determinations as to the degree of hazard and the type of device required, owners shall rely upon the latest published edition of the Colorado Cross- Connection Control Manual for guidance and may rely upon other generally accepted authorities, including but not limited to the official publications of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering and Section 608 of the International Plumbing Codes.

(IV) The City Manager and/or his or her designee may give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the customer's premises.

d.       Inspections and Testing Procedures

(I) The City Manager and/or his or her designee has the authority to inspect any system owned and maintained by a utility customer to determine the extent and degree of hazard.

e.         The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall notify the utility customer/owner at any premises where containment backflow preventers are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installation of the containment device and at least once per year thereafter.

(I) The City Manager and/or his or her designee may require certified tests at more frequent intervals if the potential hazard is deemed to be great enough. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified cross-connection control technician.

f.          The City Manager and/or his or her designee reserves the right to inspect or require the inspection of installed backflow preventers at any time to ensure the devices are in proper working order. The devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. These inspections, tests and repairs shall be at the owners' expense. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul, including materials and parts changed, shall be filed with the City Manager’s office within ten days of such activities. The Utility shall keep and maintain such records in accordance with the requirements of applicable law.

(I) Containment devices will be tested annually according to the Colorado Revised Statutes and Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

(II) If such devices are allowed by the City Manager and/or his or her designee as an acceptable alternative to total containment, isolation devices used to isolate and lower the overall degree of hazard for a property will be tested on a schedule determined by the City Manager and/or his or her designee.

(III) Isolation devices used on lawn irrigation sprinkler devices will be tested upon installation, repair or relocation, but in any event no less often than once annually.

g.        Policy

(I)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by Colorado Revised Statutes, the regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and by this Chapter.

(II)  Water service to any premises shall be denied or discontinued, as the case may be, by the Utility if:

(A)  A backflow preventer required by this Chapter is not installed within the time period specified; or

(B)  An approved backflow preventer has been removed or bypassed; or

(C)  An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises; or

(D)  An approved backflow preventer is not maintained.

(III)  Whenever service is denied or discontinued, it shall not be provided or restored until the condition or defect identified in subparagraph 12-86(2)(g)(II) has been corrected.

(IV)  The customer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City Manager and/or his or her designee to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations exist.


(V)  When, as a result of an inspection, a condition involving a violation results in a health or sanitary hazard is determined to exist, or a utility customer and/or owner fails to properly test, repair, or otherwise maintain a backflow preventer as required, the City Manager and/or his or her designee shall have the option of immediate discontinuance of water service to the premises until the condition has been corrected, or may specify a date for compliance after which time the City Manager and/or his or her designee may discontinue service until the customer has corrected the condition.

h.         Installations of Back flow Prevention Devices

(I)  At the customer’s expense, backflow preventers shall be installed immediately downstream of the water service customer's water meter, whether the meter is a pit set or an interior set. In all cases, backflow preventers must be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line.

(II)  With the City Manager and/or his or her designee approval, a backflow preventer may be installed to isolate a hazard and lower the degree of hazard for containment. Such approval shall not be given unless the City Manager and/or his or her designee is convinced that the use of the isolation device will pose no threat to the public water supply system.

(III)  All backflow preventers shall be located and installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and in accordance with the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual. The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall review and approve all plans as to the type, location and installation of backflow prevention devices.

(IV)  Utility customers and/or owners shall be responsible for the design, installation and maintenance of properly sized and located drains and drain systems whenever the type of backflow preventer specified or approved by the City Manager and/or his or her designee requires a drain.

(V)  Plans shall not be modified relative to the type, location or installation of any backflow preventer approved by the City Manager and/or his or her designee without the City Manager and/or his or her designee’s prior knowledge and written authorization.

(VI)  If the location or removal of the backflow preventer results in the meter becoming contaminated, the customer shall bear the cost of decontamination.

i.          Device Testing Equipment

(I)  The acceptability of any testing gauge or apparatus shall be determined by the City Manager and/or his or designee .

(II) Any testing gauge, apparatus or scientific instrument utilized for the testing of backflow prevention devices shall be checked for accuracy at least yearly and be in calibration as certified by the cross connection technicians who perform the testing. The City Manager and/or his or her designee may require written certificates or other proof of calibration for such items to be filed with the utility.

(III)  At a minimum, all test gauges must meet ASSE-1064 Standards for Gauges.

(IV) All Certified Cross-Connection Technicians who perform work in the City shall obtain a contractor’s license and file copies of their licenses.

j.        Listings Identifying Approved Backflow Prevention Devices

(I) Any approved backflow prevention assembly required shall be of a type and size approved by the City Manager and/or his or her designee and listed in the FCCC & HR's List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies, American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) Series 5000 and/or Colorado Plumbing Codes.

(3)  Compliance Procedures

a.         Installation of Required Devices

(I)  Upon completion of inspection of the premises, or, in the case of new construction, on review of the construction plans, the City Manager and/or his or her designee shall notify the owner in writing of the type of device that will be required at each service connection within the owner's facility.

(II) The owner shall, at its expense, purchase and install the device and any necessary plumbing or construction. Such plumbing and construction shall meet all provisions of the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual, Plumbing Codes and/or City of Trinidad design standards and construction specifications and must be inspected and approved by the City Manager and/or his or her designee. The device, including any device installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be the property of the owner.

b.         Compliance Required

(I) The utility will take necessary action to ensure compliance with the Colorado Department of Health, Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 5 CCR 1003-1, and more specifically Article 11 thereof, and the Colorado Revised Statues, Section 25-1-114, as amended.

(II) The owner of the premises is required to permit entry to the premises for inspection, testing and maintenance purposes at reasonable times. Failure to permit entry to the premises will result in the premises being regarded as a high hazard, and a reduced-pressure-principle device will be required to protect the City of Trinidad’s water supply system.

(III) The owner is required to provide all necessary plumbing and construction needed for the installation of the device. Failure to provide such required plumbing and           construction will result in action being taken as provided for in Section 12-86(6).

(IV)  A member of the board of appeals or employee of the       City of Trinidad charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relived from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.  Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provision of this code shall be defended by a legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.   The City Manager or any subordinate shall not be liable for the cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.

(4)  Appeals

a. Any decision of the City Manager and/or his or her designee concerning the type of backflow preventer required with respect to any water service connection, may be appealed to the City of Trinidad Board of Building Code Appeals, provided the owner files a notice of appeal to the Office of the City Clerk within 15 days following the date upon issuance of the city’s written notice.

b. The notice of appeal shall identify the property owner by name, mailing address, telephone number and email address, if any, and include the address of the owner's facility. In addition, the notice shall:

(I) Identify the City Manager and/or his or her designee’s decision, which is being appealed; and
(II) Identify the type of backflow preventer that the owner believes should be installed at the owner's facility; and
(III) Include the owner's reasons for preferring such backflow preventer, instead of the backflow preventer designated by the City Manager and/or his or her designee, with or without written documentation supporting the owner's position.
c. After owner’s and/or agent’s filing of the notice of appeal, the City Clerk, by written notice specifying the date, time and place of the hearing, shall schedule a hearing. Such hearing shall be conducted within 20 days following the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed, unless the owner and the City Manager both agree to a later hearing date. At the hearing, the owner may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the owner's position and the City Manager and/or his or her designee may present testimony, evidence and arguments in support of the City Manager and/or his or her designee’s decision.

d. The City Manager’s and/or his or her designee’s decision shall be affirmed unless the Board of Building Code of Appeals finds that the City Manager’s and/or his or her designee’s decision was arbitrary or capricious or that such decision violates applicable federal, state or local law. The Board of Building Code of Appeal’s decision shall be rendered at the said hearing and the decision shall be final.

e. The paramount issue with respect to any appeal will be whether the type of backflow preventer authorized will adequately protect the public water supply system.


f. Before deciding any appeal, the Board of Building Code of Appeals shall consider:

(I)  W hether the backflow preventer specified by the City Manager and/or his or her designee is necessary to adequately protect the City's water supply system;

(II)  Whether the backflow preventer preferred by the owner would adequately protect the City's water supply system;

(III) Whether the use of the backflow preventer preferred by the owner, when compared to the backflow preventer designated by the City Manager and/or his or her designee, is likely to result in a material decrease in the level of protection to the public water supply system.

g. In cases where an existing structure is being remodeled or reconstructed or where a change in the use of an existing structure will or may create a greater degree of hazard to the public water supply system than previously existed, the City Manager may consider:

(I) Differences in the type of devices and backflow prevention assemblies, when comparing the type of backflow preventer specified by the City Manager and/or his or her designee to the type of backflow preventer preferred by the owner;

(II) Differences in the installation and maintenance of the two types of backflow preventers being compared;

(III) Other significant differences or practical difficulties associated with the use, installation and/or maintenance of the backflow preventers being compared;

(IV) Other relevant life, safety or health concerns raised by the City Manager and/or his or her designee or the owner.

(5) Jurisdictional issues and conflicts:

In the event the provisions of 12-86 are in conflict with the requirements of any plumbing code or regulation applicable in the City of Trinidad, the provisions of 12-86 shall apply to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict and shall be binding upon all plumbing officials performing official duties within the City.

(6)  Violations and Penalties

a. The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises of a violation of this Chapter. The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation in the specified time, the City Manager and/or his or her designee may, if in his or her judgment decide the connection poses an imminent health hazard, suspend water service to the building or premises. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following suspension of service.

b. Violations of this Chapter may be prosecuted in municipal court and, upon conviction thereof, a violator may be fined at a minimum of $300 and not to exceed $2,650 per violation, per day.

(Ord. 1959, Sec. 12-86, eff. 5/16/14)

CHAPTER 13.  PARKS AND RECREATION .


Sections:


13-1    Discharging firearms in Monument Lake Park not permitted.

13-2    Public Parks, Property, and Trails – Hours Closed.

13-3    Unauthorized vehicles in Public Parks prohibited.

13-4    Penalty for violation.

13-5    Rules and regulations for fishing in Central Park Lake.



CHAPTER 13.  PARKS AND RECREATION .


Section 13-1.        Discharging firearms in Monument Lake Park not permitted.


No person shall discharge any gun, fowling piece, pistol, revolver or firearm of any kind or description in or upon lands and premises owned by the City know as and called Monument Lake Park, which lands and premises are described as follows:


NE 1/4 of NE 1/4, SE 1/4 of NE 1/4, NE 1/4 of SE 1/4, SE 1/4 of SE 1/4, in Section 36, Twp. 32, South of Range 69 West; NE 1/4 of NE 1/4 of Section 1, Twp. 33, South of Range 69 West; NW 1/4 of NW 1/4, SW 1/4 NW 1/4, NW 1/4 SW 1/4, SW 1/4 of SW 1/4, and that part of the SE 1/4 of SW 1/4 lying south of the Maxwell Land Grant line, all in Section 31, Twp. 32 South, Range 68 West; NE 1/4 of NW 1/4, NW 1/4 of NW 1/4, Section 6, Twp. 33, South of Range 68 West; all in Las Animas County, comprising 480 acres.  (Ord. 1958, Sec. 23-9.)


Cross reference :  As to prohibition against discharging firearms in City, see Section 16-23.


Section 13-2. Public Parks, Property, and Trails – Hours Closed.

It shall be unlawful for any person to be within the bounds of any public park, public property, or public trail between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except as authorized by the City. (Ord. 2002, Sec. 13-2 repealed and reenacted, eff. 4-19-16)

Section 13-3. Unauthorized vehicles in Public Parks prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse, team, or other animal, motorcycle, automobile or other motorized vehicles within the boundaries of any public park except as authorized by the City. (Ord. 2002, Sec. 13-3 repealed and reenacted, eff. 4-19-16)


Section 13-4.        Penalty for violation.


Any person who shall violate either Section 13-2 or Section 13-3 of this Code shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-8 of this Code.

Section 13-5.        Rules and regulations for fishing in Central Park Lake.


(1)  Fishing is hereby permitted in Central Park Lake during daylight hours.

(2)  Fishing by persons over the age of Sixteen (16) years of age at Central Park Lake is prohibited; except that handicapped persons of any age requiring wheelchairs shall be permitted to fish in Central Park Lake. (Ord. 1534, 7/13/96.)

(3)  Persons over the age of Sixteen (16) years of age shall be permitted to assist any child Sixteen (16) years of age or younger in fishing at Central Park Lake. (Ord. 1534, 7/13/96.)


(4)  All fishing at Central Park Lake shall be from the shore line only.



(5)  Any manager or officer of the Colorado Division of Wildlife shall be authorized to enforce the rules and regulations in this Section and to issue summonses and complaints for any violations of this Section into Municipal Court.


(6)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).


(7)  Any manager or officer of the Colorado Division of Wildlife shall have the authority to enforce any State Statutes or Regulations pertaining to fishing at Central Park Lake.  (Ord. 1423, Sec. 1, 06/23/92.)

CHAPTER 14.  PLANNING AND ZONING.


ARTICLE 1.  SUBDIVISIONS REGULATIONS.


Sections:

14-1                       Title and authority.

14-2                       General provisions and intent.

14-3                       Interpretation of conflicting regulations.

14-4                       Definitions.

14-5                       Plat approval required.

14-6                       Variances.

14-7                       Subdivision of land:  procedures, expiration of approval, and penalty for violation.

14-8                       Types of subdivision applications submitted to the Commission: requirements and processes.

14-9                       Minor lot line adjustment, minor lot line elimination.

14-10                     Dedication of land for mini parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, district parks, linear parks in the form of trails, and regional open space; reservation of land for public uses.

14-11                     Standards and specifications.

14-12                     Public improvements, improvement guarantees, development agreements, construction plans, inspections, and maintenance of dedicated improvements.

14-13                     Annexation.


ARTICLE 2.  CITY PLANNING, ZONING AND VARIANCE COMMISSION.


14-14                     City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission; establishment.

14-15                     Powers and duties of Commission.

14-16                     Adoption of master plan - Procedure.

14-17                     Filing and approval of plats.

14-18                     Building and improvement requirements.


ARTICLE 3.  TRINIDAD METRO AREA COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN.


14-19                     Repealed


ARTICLE 4.  ZONING ORDINANCE.


DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


14-20                     Title.

14-21                     Purpose.

14-22                     Authority.

14-23                     Definitions.

14-24                     Establishment of zone districts.

14-25                     Zoning map and boundaries.

14-26                     General district regulations.

14-27                     Uses by right, conditional uses and special uses.

14-28                     Zone district classifications.

14-29                     Uses not itemized.


DIVISION 2.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE O - OPEN DISTRICT.


14-30                     Uses permitted by right.

14-31                     Conditional uses.

14-32                     Uses allowed by special permit.

14-33                     Building height limit.

14-34                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 3.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE RE - RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT.


14-35                     Uses permitted by right.

14-36                     Conditional uses.

14-37                     Building height limit.

14-38                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 4.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE LDR - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


14-39                     Uses permitted by right.

14-40                     Conditional uses.

14-41                     Building height limit.

14-42                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 5.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE MDR - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


14-43                     Uses permitted by right.

14-44                     Conditional uses.

14-45                     Building height limit.

14-46                     Area regulations.

14-47                     Density regulations.


DIVISION 6.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HDR -HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


14-48                     Uses permitted by right.

14-49                     Conditional uses.

14-50                     Building height limit.

14-51                     Area regulations.

14-52                     Density regulations.


DIVISION 7.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE MHR - MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


14-53                     Uses permitted by right.

14-54                     Conditional uses.

14-55                     Building height limit.

14-56                     Area regulations.

14-57                     Design requirements.


DIVISION 8.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE NS - NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT.


14-58                     Uses permitted by right.

14-59                     Conditional uses.

14-60                     Building height limit.

14-61                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 9.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE CC - COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.


14-62                     Uses permitted by right.

14-63                     Conditional uses.

14-64                     Building height limit.

14-65                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 10.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE I - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.


14-66                     Uses permitted by right.

14-67                     Conditional uses.

14-68                     Uses by special permit.

14-69                     Building height limit.

14-70                     Area regulations.

14-71                     Industrial performance standards.


DIVISION 11.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.


14-72                     Purpose.

14-73                     Uses permitted by right.

14-74                     Conditional uses.

14-75                     Maximum density, height and area regulations.

14-76                     Standards and design requirements.

14-77                     Procedure.

14-78                     Review and approval.

14-79                     Failure to meet development schedule.

14-80                     Zoning review.

14-81                     Completion of planned unit development.

14-82                     Conformance with subdivision regulations.

14-83                     Subdivision and resale.

14-84                     Fees for planned unit development district application.


DIVISION 12.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HP - CORAZON DE TRINIDAD HISTORICAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT.


14-85                     Uses permitted by right.

14-86                     Conditional uses.

14-87                     Building height limit.

14-88                     Area regulations.


DIVISION 12.1  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HP – CORAZON DE TRINIDAD HISTORIC PRESERVATION MIXED-USE DISTRICT.


14-88.1                  Purpose.

14-88.2                  Definitions.

14-88.3                  Uses.

14-88.4                  Conditional Uses.

14-88.5                  Building and Area Regulations.

14-88.6                  Parking.

14-88.7                  Architectural and Design Standards.

14-88.8                  Historic structure preservation, restoration and rehabilitation.

14-88.9                  Signage.


DIVISION 13.  SIGNS.


14-89                     "Signs" defined.

14-90                     Exclusions from definition.

14-91                     Sign definitions.

14-92                     General regulations.

14-93                     Measurement of signs.

14-94                     Limitations based on zone district.

14-95                     Limitations based on type of sign.

14-96                     Nonconforming signs.

14-97                     Abandoned, damages, destroyed, or hazardous signs.

14-98                     Enforcement.

14-99                     Exception or variance to sign regulations.


DIVISION 14.  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.


14-100                   Off-street parking.

14-101                   Additional height and area regulations.

14-102                   Basic consideration for conditional uses and uses by special permit.

14-103                   Mini-warehouses

14-104                   Nonconforming uses and structures.


DIVISION 15.  ADMINISTRATION.


14-105                   Enforcement.

14-106                   City Planner.

14-107                   Inspection.

14-108                   Penalty.

14-109                   Injunction.

14-110                   Liability for damages.


DIVISION 16.  AMENDMENTS.


14-111                   Authority.

14-112                   Declaration of policy and standards for rezoning.

14-113                   Procedure for amendments in general.

14-114                   Amendments to the Official Zoning Map.

14-115                   Data to be submitted.


DIVISION 17.  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.


14-116                   Powers of the Commission.

14-117                   Procedures.

14-118                   Criteria for consideration of variance requests.

14-119                   Effect of decision by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


DIVISION 18.  FEES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE.


14-120                   Purpose.

14-121                   Repealed.

14-122                   Fees for outdoor advertising signs.

14-123                   Fee for Initial Zoning Classification or Rezoning.

14-124                   Repealed.

14-125                   Variance fee.




DIVISION 19.  LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS.


14-126                   Severability clause.

14-127                   Conflict.

14-128                   Interpretation.

14-129                   Repeal of conflicting ordinances.



ARTICLE 5.  PROTECTION OF FLOOD PLAINS.


14-130                   Statutory Authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.

14-131                   Definitions.

14-132                   General Provisions.

14-133                   Administration.
14-133.1                Penalties for Noncompliance

14-134                   Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.

14-135                   Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones).

14-136                   Properties Removed from the Floodplain by Fill.

14-136.1                Standards for Critical Facilities.



ARTICLE 6.  BOARD OF APPEALS.


14-137                   City Council designated as Board of Appeals.

14-138                   Powers and duties.

14-139                   Appeals from Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission -  Procedure.

14-140                   Appeals from orders of Building Inspector - Procedures.

14-141                   Conduct of hearing.


ARTICLE 7.  VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS


14-142                   Purpose

14-143                   Definitions

14-144                   Notice and hearing

14-145                   Approval - effective date amendments

14-146                   Notice of approval

14-147                   Payment of costs

14-148                   Other provisions unaffected

14-149                   Limitations


ARTICLE 8.  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES


14-150                   Findings

14-151                   Purposes

14-152                   Definitions

14-153                   Development of Towers

14-154                   Setbacks

14-155                   Structural requirements

14-156                   Separation or buffer requirements

14-157                   Method of determining Tower height

14-158                   Illumination

14-159                   Exterior finish

14-160                   Landscaping

14-161                   Access

14-162                   Stealth Design

14-163                   Telecommunications Facilities on Antenna Support Structures

14-164                   Modification of Towers

14-165                   Certifications and inspections

14-166                   Maintenance

14-167                   Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications

14-168                   Abandonment

14-169                   Severability

14-170                   Conflicts


ARTICLE 9.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.


14-171                   Purpose and Intent.

14-172                   Definitions.

14-173                   Lighting regulations.

14-174                   Location of sexually oriented businesses and design of same.

14-175                   Measurement of distance.

14-176                   Other locational regulations.

14-177                   Stage required in adult cabaret and adult theater.

14-178                   Conduct in sexually oriented business.

14-179                   Employee tips.

14-180                   Unlawful acts.

14-181                   Exemptions.

14-182                   Regulation of peep booths.

14-183                   Hours of operation.

14-184                   Minimum age.

14-185                   Signs for sexually oriented businesses.

14-186                   Right of entry.

14-187                   Penalty Provision.



ARTICLE 10. SIDEWALK CAFÉ REQUIREMENTS.


14-188                   Definitions.

14-189                   Exception For City Uses.

14-190                   Sidewalk Café License Authorization.

14-191                   Restrictions On Features Of Sidewalk Café.

14-192                   Authorized Applicant.

14-193                   Application Required.

14-194                   Review, Findings, and Determination.

14-195                   Denial Of Application; Reconsideration.

14-196                   License Agreement Execution And Delivery.

14-197                   Assignment Or Termination Of License.

14-198                   Furnishing Rearrangement.

14-199                   Offenses and Penalty.

14-200                   Severability.



ARTICLE 11. RESERVED


ARTICLE 12. MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND RETAIL MARIJUANA


14-201.                  Purposes, intent and other laws.

14-202.                  Definitions.

14-203.                  Licensing authority created.

14-204.                  Composition of the Authority.

14-205.                  Functions of the Authority.

14-206.                  License required; term of license; renewal application; taxes.

14-207.                  Application requirements.

14-208.                  Denial of application.

14-209.                  Hearings required.

14-210.                  Transfers of Ownership; Modification of Premises.

14-211.                  Locational criteria and numerical limit on retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers.

14-212.                  Marijuana Cultivation Outdoors.

14-213.                  Inspection of licensed premises.

14-214.                  Fees.

14-215.                  Prohibited acts generally.

14-216.                  Additional operational limitations.

14-217.                  Off-site storage facilities prohibited.

14-218.                  Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.

14-219.                  Violations and penalties.

14-220.                  No City liability; indemnification; no defense.

14-221.                  Definition of Primary Residence.

14-222.                  Limits on Medical and Recreational Use in Residences.



ARTICLE 13. CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT.


14-245.                  Historic Preservation Commission

14-246.                  Powers, Duties and Authority of the Commission

14-247.                  Local Historic Landmark Designation

14-248.                  Local Historic District Designation

14-249.                  Revocation of a Designation

14-250.                  Landmark Alteration Certificates

14-251.                  Criteria to review alteration certificate

14-252.                  Non-locally Landmarked Properties on the National and/or State Historic Register

14-253.                  Penalties and Sanctions

CHAPTER 14. PLANNING AND ZONING.


ARTICLE 1. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.

(Ord. 1818, eff 7/15/16)


Section 14-1. Title and authority.

These regulations shall be referred to as the "City of Trinidad Subdivision Regulations," and are enacted in accordance with the authority of the Charter of the City and applicable laws and statutes of the State of Colorado. No sketch plan, preliminary plat, or final plat of a subdivision shall be accepted or approved unless it complies with the provisions of these regulations.


Section 14-2. General provisions and intent.

The provisions of this Article, the Subdivision Regulations, shall apply to any and all development of land located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Trinidad. All layouts of proposed subdivisions located outside the City but located within the territorial limits of the City as established under the statutes of the State of Colorado shall be submitted to the City for approval, and shall be evaluated based on subdivision design, traffic, circulation, and conformity with the City's Comprehensive Plan.


No development shall be undertaken without prior and proper approval or authorization by the City pursuant to the terms of these Regulations. All development shall comply with the applicable terms, conditions, requirements, standards and procedures established in this Article.


Except as herein provided, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, moved or structurally altered except in conformance with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, nor shall a yard, lot or open space be reduced in dimensions or area to an amount less than the minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter.


This Article, in conjunction with the Zoning Code, establishes procedural and substantive rules for obtaining the necessary approval to develop land and construct buildings and structures. Development applications will be reviewed for compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan and with adopted regulations, plans, policies and other guidelines.


This Article is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Trinidad by:


(1) Encouraging new subdivision developments to relate to the City’s historic development pattern.


(2) Promoting compact, well-defined, stable, and sustainable neighborhoods that create a healthy living environment for the residents of the City and enhance the City’s character.


(3) Retaining or creating livable neighborhoods that foster a sense of community.


(4) Encouraging the proper arrangement of streets and building orientation in relation to existing or planned streets and ensuring streets facilitate safe, efficient and pleasant walking, biking and driving experiences.


(5) Providing a variety of lot sizes and housing types throughout the City.


(6) Protecting sensitive natural and historic areas, including views of the area’s geological features, and the City’s environmental quality.


(7) Ensuring that public facilities, including parks and recreational areas, are provided in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.


(8) Providing for adequate law enforcement and fire protection facilities.


(9) Providing for an efficient, adequate and economical supply of utilities and services to land proposed for development, in order to assure that governmental costs are minimized to the greatest extent possible.


(10) Ensuring at the time of subdivision that adequate storm drainage, sewage disposal and other utilities, services and improvements needed as a consequence of development or subdivision of land are provided.


(11) Providing for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles, recreation, light and air.


(12) Providing for minimal light pollution.


(13) Providing for adequate storm water management.


(14) Providing protection from geologic hazards and flood prone areas.


(15) Ensuring compliance with the Zoning Code, the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and other plans, policies, guidelines and studies adopted by the City Council.


(16) Regulating such other matters as the City Council may deem necessary in order to protect the best interest of the public.


Section 14-3. Interpretation of Conflicting Regulations.

Where any provision of this Article imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or

limitations than are imposed or required by any other ordinance or the statutes of the State of Colorado, then the provisions of this Article shall govern.


Section 14-4. Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any office referred to in this Article by title shall include the person employed or appointed for that position or his duly authorized deputy or representative.  Terms, phrases or words not expressly defined in this section are to be construed in accordance with the Zoning Code or other applicable ordinance of the City, or in the absence of such ordinance in accordance with the customary usage in municipal

planning and engineering practices.


(1) "Adequate public facilities" means those facilities determined to be capable of supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed subdivision as determined by the City Council based upon specific levels of service.


(2) "Alley" means a public way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.


(3) "Applicant" means the owner of land, the owner’s authorized representative, or the optionee of the land.


(4) "Block" means a unit of land, or a group of lots, bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public lands, or other rights-of-way other than an alley, waterways or any barrier to the continuity of development, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision tract.


(5) "Building" means any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, which is governed by the following characteristics:


(a)     Is permanently affixed to the land.

(b)     Has one (1) or more floors and a roof.


(6) "Building code" means the set of standards that is adopted by the City Council that must be followed in the construction and remodeling of all buildings and structures.


(7) "Butt lots" means lots that have rear lot lines which abut the side lot lines of other lots platted in the same block and not separated by an alley or open space.


(8) "Collector street" means a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residential developments and the primary circulating streets within such developments.


(9) "Commission" means the City of Trinidad Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


(10) "Common open space" means a parcel of land, an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a site or development designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and property owners of the site or development.


(11) "Comprehensive Plan" means the master plan developed and adopted by the Commission for the growth and development of the City and its environs, including any and all elements of such plan, addressing such topics as land use, natural resources, streets and thoroughfares, public facilities, utilities, drainage, cultural assets, parks, open space, as well as other related topics.


(12) "Condominium" means a unit that is available for individual sale in fee simple. Such units are contained in a multi-occupancy project which is subject to covenants and restrictions placing control over common facilities in an elected board.


(13) "Conservation easement" means a right of the owner of the easement to prohibit certain acts with respect to the property in order to maintain the property in a manner that will preserve its value for recreation, education, habitat, open space, or historical importance. See also §38-30.5-102 C.R.S.


(14) "Covenants" means a private written agreement outlining regulations specific to a development. As private restrictions, they are not enforced by the City. In the event of conflict between the covenants and this Article, this Article controls.


(15) "Cross access" means the construction of driveways within private property which interconnect the driveways of two (2) or more abutting nonresidential properties. Cross access provides motorists the ability to move between developments without using the roadway. Cross access reduces traffic on the roadway and reduce the potential for conflict between entering, exiting and through traffic.


(16) "Crosswalk" means a pathway marked off for pedestrians to cross a street.


(17) "Cul-de-sac" means a local street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal of traffic movement.


(18) "Cultural assets" means buildings, locations and other features considered historically or socially significant to the City.


(19) "Dedicated land" means land, typically for the purposes of developing parks or open space, as determined by the City Council, which is transferred to the City by platting, title, deed or other legal method approved by the City Attorney, land dedicated to another governmental entity recognized as such by the State of Colorado, or land dedicated to a homeowners or owners association, which is recognized as such by the State of Colorado.


(20) "Design standards" means the design requirements, standard construction details, and other standards to be followed when designing, improving, repairing, constructing or performing modifications of any kind to infrastructure.


(21) "Detention basin" means a man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and sub-surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of property, into natural or manmade outlets.


(22) "Developer" means any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a development.


(23) "Development" means the carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, or the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. When appropriate in context, development shall also mean the act of developing or to the result of development.

(a)   Development shall also include:


(I)  Any construction, placement, reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land;


(II)  Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on a tract of land or a material increase in the intensity and impacts of the development;


(III) Any change in use of land or a structure;


(IV) Any alteration of a shore or bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, reservoir or wetland;


(V)  The commencement of drilling oil or gas wells, mining, stockpiling of fill materials, filling or excavation on a parcel of land;


(VI) The demolition of a structure;

(VII) The clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;


(VIII) The deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land;


(IX)  The installation of landscaping within the public right-of-way, when installed in connection with the development of adjacent property; and


(X)  The construction of a roadway through or adjoining an area that qualifies for protection as a wildlife or natural area.


(b)   Development shall not include:


(I) Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company for the maintenance or improvement of a road or railroad track, if the work is carried out on land within the

boundaries of the right-of-way;


(II) Work by any public utility for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, renewing or constructing, on established rights-of-way, any mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, or the like; provided, however, that this exemption shall not include work by a public entity in constructing or enlarging mass transit or fixed guide way mass transit depots or terminals or any traffic-generating activity;


(III) The maintenance, renewal, improvement, or alteration of any structure, if the work does not prompt the loss of nonconformance under the provisions of Section 14-104;


(IV) The use of any land for an agricultural activity;


(V) A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or structure; or


(VI) The creation or termination of rights of access, easements, covenants concerning development of land, or other rights in land.


(24) "Driveway" means a surfaced area providing vehicular access between a public street or a private street and an off-street parking or loading area.


(25) "Dwelling unit" means a residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family, including permanent provisions for sleeping, living, cooking and sanitation. Dwelling units may be detached, attached, single-family, multi-family, sold or leased.


(26) "Easement" means a right to land generally established in a real estate deed or on a recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for specified uses.


(27) "Environmentally sensitive areas" means aquifer recharge areas, significant wildlife habitat and migration corridors, unique vegetation and critical plant communities, and ridge lines.


(28) "FEMA" means Federal Emergency Management Agency.


(29) "Final plat" means a complete and exact subdivision plan which has been accurately surveyed, has been prepared in accordance with this Article, and is in a form suitable to be recorded with the Las Animas County Clerk.


(30) "Floodplain or flood hazard area" means areas which have been designated by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Colorado Water Conservation Board or FEMA as susceptible to flooding.


(31) "Flood prone" means areas subject to flooding which have not been designated by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Colorado Water Conservation Board or FEMA.


(32) "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.


(33) "Gateways" mean designated thoroughfares, including the interstate system, state highways, and designated scenic byways, which provide vehicular access into and out of the City of Trinidad.


(34) "Geologic hazards" means unstable or potentially unstable slopes, undermining, faulting, landslides, rockfalls, coal mine shafts, flood, wildfire or similar naturally occurring dangerous features or soil conditions or natural features unfavorable to development.


(35) "Grade" means:


(a) The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground,  paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building.


(b) The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.


(36) "Grade, finished" means the final elevation of the ground surface after development.


(37) "Grade, natural" means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made alterations.


(38) "Historic preservation easement" means a legal agreement that enables a historic property owner to establish certain preservation restrictions while retaining possession and use of the property. There are three general types of historic preservation easements: facade; interior space; and, development rights.


(39) "Homeowners association," or "owners association," means the association, incorporated or not, which has been set up to enforce the covenants and maintain all common areas and buildings for a development.


(40) "Infill development" means development designed to occupy scattered or vacant or

undeveloped parcels of land which remain after the majority of development has occurred in an area.


(41) "Infrastructure" means those man-made structures which serve the common needs of the population, such as: potable water systems; wastewater disposal systems; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; storm drainage systems; electric, gas or other utilities; bridges; roadways; bicycle paths or trails; pedestrian sidewalks, paths or trails; and transit stops.


(42) "Inter-neighborhood connections" means connections (such as trails and roads) between neighborhoods.


(43) "Landowner" means any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, and includes the heirs, successors, and assign of such ownership interests.


(44) "Lot" means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat or subdivision of at

least a sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use and area in accordance with the Zoning

Code, and to provide required yards and other open spaces in the zoning district in which the lot is located, and which has direct access onto a public or private street. Lots are typically contained in a block and are designated on a subdivision plat by numerical or letter identification.


(45) "Lot, double frontage" means lots which front on one (1) public street and back on another.


(46) "Lot, flag" means a lot so shaped and designed that the main building site area is set back from the street on which it fronts and includes an access strip connecting the main building site with the frontage street.


(47) "Lot line, front" means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot only one (1) street line shall be considered as a front line.


(48) "Lot line, rear" means the line opposite the front lot line.


(49) "Lot, reverse corner" means a corner lot having its side street line substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.


(50) "Lot line, side" means any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line.


(51) "Lot size" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot; synonymous with area of lot.


(52) "Lot width" means the distance parallel to the front lot line, measured at the front building setback line. Lot width on a curving front lot line means the distance parallel to the tangent of the front lot line at the building setback line. The lot width and the lot frontage may have different lengths on an irregularly shaped lot as they are measured at different points on the lot.


(53) "Major street" means a public thoroughfare, as designated on the City's thoroughfare plan, having a high degree of traffic continuity requiring a minimum width of eighty (80) feet.


(54) "Major subdivisions" mean all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions.


(55) "Minor subdivisions" mean those subdivisions consisting of either a condominium form of ownership to be located within existing buildings or those subdivisions consisting of three (3) or fewer residential lots fronting an existing public street, not involving the need for any new street or road, or the extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements, except for curb, gutter and sidewalks, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Zoning Ordinance, the City's Comprehensive Plan, or this Article.


(56) "Neighborhood" means a geographical area, the focus of which are residential uses, but also may include a mixture of activities that people need to live. A neighborhood may include a diversity of housing types, schools, parks, shopping and jobs (frequently service-type), and a civic component.


(57) "Neighborhood Park and Recreation Improvement Fund" means a special fund established by the City Council to retain monies contributed by developers in accordance with the "cash-in-lieu of parkland" provisions of this Article.


(58) "Nonresidential subdivision" means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial.


(59) "Off-site improvements" mean public improvements occurring off-site that are necessary to serve the development.


(60) "Oversized improvements" mean public improvements larger than necessary for the immediate development.


(61) "Open space" means any land or water area with its surface open to the sky, which serves specific uses of: providing park and recreation opportunities, conserving natural areas and environmental resources, structuring urban development form, and protecting areas of agricultural, archeological or historical significance. Open space shall not be considered synonymous with vacant or unused land but serves important urban functions. Usable open space shall exclude areas used for offstreet parking, off-street loading, service driveways and setbacks from oil and gas wells and their appurtenances, or other hazards to the public.


(62) "Outlot" means a measured piece of land contained within subdivided land that is not a building lot. An outlot may be conveyed to the public for open space or other public purposes, be retained by the developer for later subdivision, or be conveyed to an owners association.


(63) "Owner" means the person or entity that owns the property under consideration.


(64) "Parcel" means a tract or plot of land.


(65) "Performance criteria" means regulation of development based on open space ratio, impervious surface ratio, density, and floor area ratio.


(66) "Preliminary plat" means a map or plan of a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with this Article, illustrating the features of the development for the review and preliminary approval of the Commission.


(67) "Permanent monument" means any structure of masonry and/or metal permanently placed on or in the ground, including those expressly placed for surveying reference.


(68) "Phase" means a portion of property that is being platted and engineered for development at the same time.


(69) "Plan" means the map(s) and supporting documentation for a development which includes but is not limited to, lots, blocks, easements, rights-of-way, pedestrian ways, park and school sites, open space areas, and conservation areas in accordance with the requirements of this Article.


(70) "Proof of ownership" means ownership as specified in a recorded deed, a title insurance commitment or policy, or certification of title, issued by a title insurance company licensed by the State of Colorado, which is dated less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the application. Where the owner of the property is an entity, it must be stated who the owners/managers of the entity are, i.e., officers, directors, and shareholders of corporations, managers and members of Limited Liability Corporations (LLCs), general and limited partners for limited partnership, partners in partnerships. In instances where the applicant is not the owner of the property, an authorization from the owner for the non-owner applicant to proceed must be included with the above-referenced proof of ownership.


(71) "Property" means all real property subject to land use regulation by the City.


(72) "Property line" means the boundary of any lot, parcel or tract as the same is described in the conveyance of such property to the owner; and does not include the streets or alleys upon which the said lot, parcel or tract abuts.


(73) "Public areas" mean streets, parks, open spaces and other property designated or described as for public use on a map or plat of the City and fee title is vested in the City, other public body or a special district as defined in 32-1-103 C.R.S.


(74) "Public facilities" means those constructed facilities, including but not limited to, transportation systems or facilities, water systems or facilities, wastewater systems or facilities, storm drainage systems or facilities, fire, police and emergency systems or facilities, electric, gas, telecommunication utilities or facilities, and publicly owned buildings or facilities.


(75) "Public use" means uses which are owned by and operated for the public by the City, County, state or federal governments or by school districts.


(76) "Public utility" means a common carrier supplying electricity, wire telephone service, natural gas, water, wastewater or storm water service or similar public services, but shall not include railroads or other forms of rail mass transit or depots or terminals supporting the same, or wireless telecommunication facilities.


(77) "Quasi-public" means having the nature or characteristics of being public, but owned by a private or not-for-profit entity.


(78) "Resubdivision, or replatting," means the changing of any existing lot or lots, street rights-of-way or easements of a subdivision plat previously recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder.


(79) "Retention basin" means a pond, pool or basin used for permanent storage of water runoff.


(80) "Right-of-way" means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another special use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the

dimensions of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use on the plat on which such right-of-way is established.


(81) "Schedule of required copies" means the "Schedule of Required Copies--City of Trinidad Subdivision Regulations."


(82) "Setback" means the required unoccupied open space between the nearest projection of a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located.


(83) "Setback, front yard" means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the front lot line.


(84) "Setback, rear yard" means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the rear lot line.


(85) "Setback, side yard" means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the side lot line.


(86) "Shade tree" or "street tree" means a tree in a public place, street, special easement, or right-of-way adjoining a street as provided in this Article.


(87) "Sketch plan" or "conceptual plan" means a sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this Article.


(88) "Shared parking" means that parking spaces are shared by more than one user, which allows parking facilities to be used more efficiently. Shared Parking takes advantage of the fact that most parking spaces are only used part time by a particular motorist or group, and many parking facilities have a significant portion of unused spaces, with utilization patterns that follow predictable daily, weekly and annual cycles.


(89) "Sidewalk" means the hard surface path within the street right-of-way for use by pedestrians and/or bicyclists.


(90) "Sight distance triangle" means the area at the four corners of an intersection that is to be kept free of shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, structures, or other materials or items greater than thirty (30) inches in height. Trees shall not be planted in the triangular area. The size of the sight distance triangles is determined as follows:


(a)  At the intersection of any two streets or where a street intersects with an alley, a triangle measuring thirty (30) feet along each curb or edge of roadway from their point of intersection, the third side being a diagonal line connecting the first two.


(b) At the intersection of a driveway or private access and a street, a triangle measuring fifteen (15) feet in length along the edge of the driveway and along the curb or edge of roadway from their point of intersection, the third side being a diagonal line connecting the first two.


(91) "Significant wildlife habitat and migration corridors" mean areas designated by the Colorado Division of Wildlife and/or the Colorado Natural Diversity Information Source as areas of landscape that provide food, cover and water sufficient to meet the needs of a given species to survive and reproduce.


(92) "Street, private" means a private thoroughfare, not dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular access from a public street to more than two (2) residential dwelling units, or two (2) or more commercial or industrial buildings or parking areas.


(93) "Street, public" means any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, dedicated for public use, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land.


(94) "Structure" means anything constructed or erected.


(95) "Subdivider or developer" means any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a development.


(96) "Subdivision" means the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land, by plat, map or description, whether undeveloped, vacant, or developed, into two (2) or more lots, plots or sites, or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of (a) transfer or division of ownership; (b) rental or lease; (c) building development; or, (d) redevelopment, including all changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes, in parcels of five (5) or more acres not involving any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted. Subdivision includes resubdivision and condominium creation or conversion.


(97) "Tentative or conditional approval" means an approval with recommended alterations or conditions given to a plat application by the Planning Commission. Accordingly, all recommended alterations or conditions must be met for a sketch plan application before a preliminary plat application may be submitted, all conditions must be met for a preliminary plat application before a final plat application may be submitted, and all conditions for a final plat application must be met before a final plat may be released for recordation.


(98) "Title commitment" means formal documentation from a title company listing the name of the owner of the property under consideration, the legal description of the property and any legal holdings on the property such as easements, rights-of-way or liens.


(99) "Title report" means a report prepared and executed by a title company authorized to do business in the State of Colorado certifying the true owner of the property and describing all encumbrances of record which affect the property.


(100) "Traffic Impact Study" means a report analyzing anticipated roadway conditions and addressing such related areas as access and circulation, within and outside of a development.


(101) "Trail" means a linear feature, or corridor, constructed for the purposes of providing access to/from residential and nonresidential uses, access to the City's cultural assets, and recreational opportunities to pedestrians and bicyclists.


(102) "Trip" means a single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. “Trips” can be added together to calculate the total number of vehicles expected to enter and leave a specific land use or site over a designated period of time.


(103) "USGS datum" means United States Geological Survey basis of elevations.


(104) "Undeveloped land" means land that has never been developed.


(105) "Vacant land" means land that was previously developed, but no longer in use.


(106) "Viewshed protection" means to minimize the impact of man-made structures and grading on the ridges of hills, mesas, mountains, open spaces, and similar natural features, when within view from public rights-of-way.


(107) "Walkway" means:


(a) A right-of-way dedicated to public use that is not within a street right-of-way, to facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision block by means of a hard surface path.


(b) Any portion of a parking area restricted to the exclusive use of pedestrian travel.


Section 14-5. Plat approval required.

(1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any tract, lot or parcel of land within the City or its planning area unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved in accordance with the terms of this Article. Unless and until a final plat, plan or replat of a subdivision shall have been first approved in the manner provided in this chapter by the City Council, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any street, utility facility, building, structure or other improvement on any lot, tract or parcel of land within such subdivision except as specifically permitted in this Article.


(2)   No permit shall be issued by the City for the construction or repair of any structure on a lot or tract in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved by the City Council and filed for record, except as specifically allowed in this chapter. No permit shall be issued by the City for the construction or repair of any structure on a lot or tract in a subdivision in which the permanent public improvements have not been approved and accepted by the City.


(3)    The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any street or public utility service, or authorize the sale or supply of water or sewer service, in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved by the City Council and filed for record. The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any street or public utility service, or authorize the sale or supply of water or sewage service, in any subdivision in which the permanent public improvements have not been approved and accepted by the City.


Section 14-6. Variances.

(1)    The rules and regulations provided in this Article or incorporated herein are the minimum standards and requirements of the City. Upon application by the developer, a variance from any such rule or regulation may be granted by the Commission upon a good and sufficient showing by the developer that:


(a) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question;


(b) Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will deprive the applicant of a substantial property right; and


(c) If a variance is granted it will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or property rights in the vicinity.


(2)   The application for a variance shall be made on a form prescribed by the City, and shall specifically identify the provision of this Article from which a variance is sought and the specific circumstances and conditions which the applicant believes will support and justify the granting of such variance. If more than one variance is sought, each shall be specifically identified in the application and the specific circumstances and conditions justifying each request shall be provided with the application. Each and every application for a variance shall be decided solely and entirely on its own merits, and the disposition of any prior or pending application for a variance shall not be allowed to enter into or affect any decision on the application in question. Pecuniary interests shall not be considered as a basis for the granting of a variance.


(3)   No application for a variance will be considered unless submitted, in writing, no later than the date the application for final plat approval is submitted. An application for a variance must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount specified in the schedule of fees for the City. Multiple copies of the application for variance shall be provided in accordance with the schedule of required copies.


Section 14-7. Subdivision of land: procedures, expiration of approval, and penalty for violation.

(1)    Before creating a subdivision, as defined by the provisions of this Article, a subdivider shall:


(a)    File an application with the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission to subdivide in accordance with the provisions contained in this section.  Such applications shall consist of no fewer than the number of copies required in the schedule of required copies maintained by the City Planning Department, and shall be submitted no later than twenty (20) business days before a scheduled meeting of the Commission.  Applications shall be examined for completeness within three (3) business days of their submittal to the City Planning Director. This initial examination period may be extended for a specified period of time if the City Planning Director deems it necessary and notifies the applicant of such extension before the end of the initial examination period. Applications may be rejected as incomplete and returned to the subdivider with an explanation before the end of the examination period(s). Once deemed complete, applications shall be processed and reviewed by City staff prior to consideration by the Commission. Notice of consideration of such applications by the Commission and the City Council shall be sent to abutting property owners and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad a minimum of one time at least ten (10) days prior to such considerations. The Commission shall, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the next regular meeting following such filing, forward its recommendations for approval, tentative or conditional approval or disapproval to the City Council. A subdivider is expected to meet all conditions of approval issued by the Commission, where applicable, prior to City Council consideration. The City Council shall review the application at its next available meeting, and shall either approve, with or without conditions, deny the application, or postpone its consideration as needed.


(b)    Except as provided herein, file all preliminary plat applications associated with an approved sketch plan within a one (1) year after receiving approval from the City Council for the sketch plan. The City Council may, upon receipt of a written request from the subdivider, extend this term of approval for any time period not to exceed an additional one (1) year.


If a subdivider fulfills all conditions of approval adopted by the City Council for a final plat or plats covering a portion of a sketch plan area prior to its expiration date, the remainder of the sketch plan shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date on which its original approval was granted. If a subdivider fulfills all conditions of approval adopted by the City Council for approval of additional preliminary plat or plats covering another portion of the sketch plan area within the last 12 months immediately prior to expiration of the two-year period from the date on which the original sketch plan approval was granted, the plan shall be valid for a third year or upon expiration of the final or preliminary plat, whichever is later.


The extension policy may continue as long as platting activity is continued within one (1) year after successive anniversaries of the original sketch plan approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may, in its discretion, extend such period of validity for an additional term to be fixed by the City Council. Revised sketch plans may be required as deemed necessary by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission or the City Council.


(c)    After obtaining approval of a preliminary plat application from the City Council, a subdivider shall file a final plat application with the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission no later than one (1) year after receiving approval from the City Council.


(d)    Following final approval by the City Council, the approved final plat and associated restrictive covenants may be recorded with the Las Animas County Clerk in compliance with State statutes and in a form acceptable to the County. Approval of the final plat by the City Council shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 180 days after the date of approval.  The City Council may, upon receipt of a written request from the subdivider, extend this term of approval for any time period not to exceed an additional 180 days.


(e)    A subdivider shall not record or attempt to record a plat with the County Clerk until such plat has received approval by the City Council and all required City signatures have been affixed to the plat. Platting will not be considered complete until the subdivider has furnished the City with sufficient copies of the recorded plat and associated documents, including restrictive covenants.


(2)    Restrictive Covenants, Deed Restrictions. The City of Trinidad shall have the right to confer with the subdivider regarding the type and character of the development that will be permitted in the subdivision and may require certain minimum regulations be incorporated in the subdivision and/or restrictive covenants or deed restrictions. The intent of such regulations is to protect the character and value of the development within the subdivisions and to protect the value of surrounding properties.


(3)    Penalty for violation. Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall upon conviction be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.


Section 14-8. Types of subdivision applications submitted to the Commission : requirements and processes.

(1)    General Requirements.


(a) All maps and supporting documentation included in subdivision applications submitted to the City of Trinidad shall be prepared in a clear and legible manner by a professional land surveyor licensed in the State of Colorado or by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado. Plat maps shall be prepared in the following sizes: Full size - twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide; and,  Reduced size (not required to be to scale) - eight and one-half (8 1/2) inches high and eleven (11) inches wide. Maps shall include:


(I) The title of proposed subdivision, the date of preparation, and the total acreage.


(II) The names and addresses of the property owner, the developer, and the person who prepared the survey and land design.


(III) A vicinity map, drawn to a scale, and depicting major streets, subdivisions, watercourses and significant physical features within no less than one-quarter mile of the boundaries of the subdivision area.


(IV) A statement or certificate, in separate writing, executed by the person who prepared the plat map, which certifies that all existing easements, rights-of-way, and significant topographical features on the proposed subdivision are fully shown and accurately identified on the face of the map, and further stating whether the map being submitted includes all of the contiguous land which the subdivider owns directly or indirectly, or has a legal or beneficial interest in, or whether the subdivider owns or has a legal interest in any adjacent property.


(V) The boundary of the proposed subdivision, locations of existing and proposed roadways, and shall include existing and proposed land uses.


(VI) Orientation to the north and a north arrow.


(VII) The average lot size and the proposed density for residential developments.


(VIII) Any land existing or proposed as dedication of park land, open space, rights-of-way, and easements, including their uses, owners, and area dimensions.


(IX) Locations of existing buildings and structures, including fences, within the proposed subdivision, including their current uses and their future status within the proposed subdivision.


(X) Any unique historical, archeological, scenic or other noteworthy features within or in proximity to the proposed subdivision.


(XI) Adjacent properties identified by property owner, subdivision name, and zoning district.


(b) Appropriate zoning must be in place before subdivision commences. The subdivider is responsible for ensuring that adequate area is available within all lots and tracts to meet the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district.


(c) Access, in accordance with state statutes, shall be provided to all lots or tracts.


(d) Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one (1) plat, nor shall more than one (1) plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be included on one (1) plat, provided that all owners join in the dedication and acknowledgment.


(e) All subdivision applications shall include the following:


(I) A completed application form as provided by the City Planning Department.


(II) Payment of the applicable fee as adopted by the City Council.


(III) Proof of ownership as required by the provisions of Section 14-4.


(IV) An accurate legal description for the proposed subdivision that includes an enumeration of the total acreage of the proposed subdivision. If a metes and bounds description is prepared, such must be signed and sealed.


(V) A list of property owners and their mailing addresses of properties located within 100 feet, minus public rights-of-way, of the proposed subdivision.


(VI) A list of any lienholders, subsurface mineral interests in the proposed subdivision and their lessees, if any, and their mailing addresses.


(VII) Any variance application to the City's Subdivision Ordinance.


(VIII) Documentation attesting that all past and current ad valorem taxes due to all applicable taxing entities are paid up-to-date.


(2)   Major Subdivisions


(a) Major Subdivision Requirements and Process. In addition to the requirements set forth herein, requirements and processes for major subdivisions consist of the following:


(I)  Sketch Plan.


(A) Specific requirements. A sketch plan application is required only if a developer plans to submit multiple preliminary plat applications for a development.


The City shall evaluate the applicant’s sketch plan application in accordance with the following criteria: The land use mix within the project conforms to the City’s Zoning District Map, Future Land Use Plan, and availability of public services and furthers the goals and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan including: That utilities and services are available to adequately serve the development; That the proposed development promotes the City’s historic small town character; That proposed residential development adds diversity to the City’s housing supply; That proposed commercial development will benefit the City’s economic base; That parks, trails and open space are incorporated into the site design; That the proposed project protects the City’s environmental quality; and, That the proposed development enhances the City's cultural, historical, educational and/or human service opportunities.


The sketch plan application package shall also include:


(i) A preliminary utility plan with calculations.


(ii) Sketch Plan Map - The sketch plan map shall show the proposed development in relation to land uses in the surrounding area (one [1] mile radius around the property). At a minimum, the map shall provide the following information:


1.  Graphics drawn to scale (not greater than 1" = 200', unless a smaller scale has been approved by the City Planning Director) on full size maps.


2. Major existing and proposed streets (show and label street names, if applicable).


3. Existing utility lines and utility easements, and preliminary connections, and information regarding the availability of utilities and public safety facilities.


4. Location(s) of local and regional recreational/open space/trails.


5.  Locations and areas of major arroyos, ditches, rivers and other bodies of water, including any known, identified or designated 100-year flood plains and any other natural hazards within and adjacent to the proposed development.


6. Locations and areas of major canyons, hills, ridges, mesas, buttes, and other natural physical and geological features within and adjacent to the proposed development.


7.  Geologic hazards and soils reports.


8. Topographic information indicating the directions of surface water flow, and a preliminary drainage plan, noting all areas with a slope in excess of 20%.


9.  A wildfire mitigation plan, if determined by the City to be required.


10.  A traffic impact study, if determined by the City to be required.


(B) Process. The sketch plan review/consideration process is as follows:


(i) Pre-Application Conference with City staff.


(ii) Application Submittal.


(iii) City staff determines that the application is complete or not complete. If deemed complete, staff starts processing the application.


(iv) City staff schedules the public hearing and completes the public notification process.


(v) Staff reviews the application and prepares comments.


(vi) The applicant meets with City staff and responds to staff's comments.


(vii) Planning Commission Public Hearing and Recommendation.


(viii) Applicant Meets Planning Commission Conditions.


(ix) City Council Public Hearing and Action.


(x) The applicant addresses the City Council's conditions, if sketch plan was approved, and meets all conditions before submitting any preliminary plat applications.


(II) Preliminary Plat


(A) Requirements. A preliminary plat application may be submitted in lieu of a sketch plan application if one preliminary plat application is submitted for the entire development. A preliminary plat application may also be submitted concurrently with a sketch plan application, at the applicant's risk, if subsequent preliminary plats are planned for a development.


The preliminary plat application package shall also include:


(i) An acknowledgement that notice of the subdivision was provided to all utility companies, whether public or private, the applicable school district(s), and, as applicable, any special district(s). Such notices shall contain the statement of the intent to subdivide, the intended use of the property within the subdivision, a copy of the preliminary plat map, and a referral to direct comments to the City prior to the date of the

Commission's consideration.

(ii) A preliminary grading and drainage plan and report with calculations. The proposed drainage system shall be indicated by a single line drawing showing the proposed direction sheet flow through the subdivision. Detention analysis and calculations, where required, shall be submitted.


(iii) A master utility plan prepared by a registered professional engineer. Proposed locations of utility infrastructure, including water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer, approved by the City, shall be submitted.


(iv) Preliminary construction plans for public improvements.


(v) A copy of the proposed restrictive covenants and architectural design guidelines. Restrictive covenants shall address the maintenance and funding of maintenance of any private roadways and driveways, and private park land, recreational amenities and open space.


(vi) A wildfire mitigation plan, a traffic impact study, a geologic hazards report, and a soils report, if not submitted previously with a sketch plan application, and as determined to be required by the City.


(vii) A preliminary landscape plan.


(vii) At the discretion of the City Council, an applicant may be required to provide the City with a Colorado Historical Society records listing historically or archaeologically significant findings on the property being subdivided. If a listing shows a significant finding, a site-specific historic survey will be required of the applicant. The survey shall provide the following information:


1.  Site identification:

a.    State site number;

b.    Site address;

c.    Site location/access;

d.    Type and description of finding; and,

e.    Owner’s name and address.


2.   Eligibility assessment for historic designation.


3.   Statement of significance.


4.   Management and administrative data:

a.   References;

b.   Photographs of the site;

c.   Maps of the site;

d.   Name, address, phone number and qualifications of person completing the survey; and

e.   Date of completion of the survey.


If, in coordination with the subdivider, the City Council decides to protect an historic resource, a protection plan must be prepared by the subdivider. (viii) Preliminary Plat Map - The preliminary plat map shall show the proposed development in relation to land uses in the surrounding area (one-quarter [0.25] mile radius around the property). At a minimum, the map shall provide the following information:


1.   Graphics drawn to scale (not greater than 1" = 100', unless a smaller scale has been approved by the City Planning Director) on full size maps.


2.   The plat shall be drawn with heavy lines to indicate the subdivision area, with overall survey dimensions and bearings.

Lines outside the plat boundary shall be drawn as dash lines.

An accurate location of the subdivision shall be provided by reference to an established survey or section corner, subdivision corner, or other known point.


3.  Accurate existing contours at intervals of two (2) feet or less; except that intervals of five (5) feet will be acceptable for very rough topography. The contours shall be extended onto adjacent property a sufficient distance to establish proper topographical relationships (contours shall be based on USGS datum and tied to the City's coordinate system).


4.  Lots, blocks, and street layout with approximate dimensions and square footage of each lot.


5.  Consecutive numbering of all lots and blocks, and a lot and street layout indicating scaled dimensions.


6.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements on and within 100 feet of the plat.

7.  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property.  Indication of any private streets.


8. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed sewer lines, water lines and fire hydrants, gas lines, electric service lines, street lights, telephone and cable lines, fiber optic lines, and similar utilities located within the plat and within 100 feet of the plat.


9. Existing and proposed curb cuts on and adjacent to subject property.


10.  Location by field survey or aerial photography of existing and proposed water courses and bodies of water such as rivers, arroyos, creeks, irrigation ditches and lakes, with the direction of flow indicated.


11. Floodplain boundary with source of information indicated, including FEMA map number and effective map date and zone. If a floodplain does not exist, this must be indicated on the plat.


12. Proposed grading including approximate street grades.


13. Approximate radii of all street curves.


14. Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of any private park land or open space.


15.  Land Use Table - The table shall include: land uses, approximate acreage of each land use, and percentage of each land use.


16.  Total number of lots, blocks, and tracts.

17.  Number of each type of dwelling unit proposed.


18.  Dimensions of building setback lines.


19.  Indication of existing easements and/or previously recorded plats requested to be vacated.


20.  Means of providing vehicular access to adjoining properties.


(B)  Process. The preliminary plat review/consideration process is as follows:


(i) Pre-Application Conference with City staff.


(ii) Application Submittal.


(iii) City staff determines that the application is complete or not complete. If deemed complete, staff starts processing the application.


(iv) City staff schedules the public hearing and completes the public notification process.


(v) Staff reviews the application and prepares comments.


(vi) The applicant meets with City staff and responds to staff's comments.


(vii) Planning Commission review and consideration/action.


(viii) Applicant Meets Planning Commission Conditions.


(ix) City Council Public Hearing and Action.


(x) The applicant addresses the City Council's conditions, if preliminary plat was approved, and meets all conditions before submitting any final plat applications.


(III)   Final Plat


(A)   Requirements. All conditions on the preliminary plat application must be met prior to the submittal of a final plat application. The final plat application package shall also include:


(i)     A final grading plan and final drainage plan or report.


(ii)    A copy of the final draft restrictive covenants and architectural design guidelines, ready for filing.  Restrictive covenants shall include the maintenance and funding of maintenance of any private roadways and driveways, and private park land, recreational amenities and open space.


(iii)   Final construction plans for public improvements.


(iv)   A final landscape plan.

(v)    As required by the City Council, a Historic Protection Plan.


(vi) Final Plat Map - The final plat map shall show the proposed development in relation to land uses in the surrounding area (one- quarter [0.25] mile radius around the property). At a minimum, the map shall provide the following information:


1.  Graphics drawn to scale (not greater than 1" = 100', unless a smaller scale has been approved by the City Planning Director) on full size maps.


2.  Basis for establishing bearing.


3.  Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions.


4.  Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.


5.  Bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent links for the perimeter and all lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements.


6.  Location and description of monuments.


7.  The plat shall be drawn with heavy lines to indicate the subdivision area, with overall survey dimensions and bearings. Lines outside the plat boundary shall be drawn as gray-scaled dash lines.


8.  Lots, blocks, and street layout with exact dimensions and square footage of each lot.


9.  Consecutive numbering of all lots and blocks, and a lot and street layout indicating scaled dimensions.

10.  Existing and planned rights-of-way and easements, with dimensions, within the plat and within 100 feet of the plat.

11.  Existing and planned street names for all streets within and adjacent to the plat.  Designate any private streets.


12.  Total number of lots, blocks, tracts in the title block.


13. Designation of entity responsible for common areas. The legal entity responsible for the maintenance of any building, park, recreational area, open space, equipment, pool or private driveway which is to be owned and shared by the owners of real property in the proposed subdivision shall be designated by appropriate articles of incorporation, contracts, restrictions or other method. The means of securing payment for

maintenance and operating expenses and any method of terminating such obligation shall be stated in the creating documents. If such entity is responsible for the maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas or open spaces, the following note shall be indicated on the face of the plat: "The City of Trinidad, Colorado, shall not be responsible for maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas, and open spaces; and, the ________________ Homeowners' / Property Owners' Association shall be responsible for such maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas and open spaces."


14.  Proof of adequate, suitable access must be provided and clearly indicated on the face of the plat. If access is not directly gained from public right-of-way, a separate access easement must be provided and referenced on the plat.


15.  Indication of existing easements and/or previously recorded plats requested to be vacated.


16.  Dedication statements as plat notes: Statements of land to be dedicated to the City for parks, public streets and alleys, and grants of easements.


17.  Sidewalks, curb and gutter. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, the following plat note shall be indicated: "Sidewalks, curb and gutter shall be installed along all streets In accordance with subsection 17-43 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado."


18.  Development of area subject to code:  A statement that development of the plat is subject to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


19.  Statement of performance guarantee regarding public improvements. The following plat note shall be indicated: "The development shall comply with the provisions of subsection 14-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado."


20.  Certificate blocks for notarized signatures of owner, lienholders, preparer, and City approvals, as applicable. The signature of the mortgagee, if any, consenting to the execution of the plat and any dedications is required.


21.  Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the plat have been paid in full.


(B) Process. The final plat review/consideration process is as follows:


(i)  Pre-Application Conference with City staff.


(ii)  Application Submittal.


(iii)  City staff determines that the application is complete or not complete. If deemed complete, staff starts processing the application.


(iv)  City staff schedules the public hearings and completes the public notification process.


(v)  Staff reviews the application and prepares comments.

(vi)  The applicant meets with City staff and responds to staff's comments.


(vii)  Planning Commission Public Hearing and Recommendation.


(viii)  Applicant Meets Planning Commission Conditions.


(ix)  City Council Public Hearing and Action.


(x)  The applicant addresses the City Council's conditions, if plat was approved.


(xi) The applicant records the Final Plat when all conditions have been met.


(xii)  The applicant submits copies of recorded documents to the City before submitting any construction permit applications.


(3) Minor Subdivisions.


(a)   Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection 14-8(1), applications for minor subdivisions must also meet the requirements for minor subdivisions as set forth in subsection 14-4. The minor subdivision plat application package shall also include:


(I)  A completed application form as provided by the City Planning Department.


(II)  Payment of the applicable fee as adopted by the City Council.


(III) General Development Information - Provide a written description addressing how the proposed development complies with the City's Land Use Code and the City's Comprehensive Plan.


(IV) An acknowledgement that notice of the subdivision was provided to all utility companies, whether public or private, the applicable school district(s), and any special district(s). Such notices shall contain the statement of the intent to subdivide, the intended use of  the property within the subdivision, a copy of the plat map, and a referral to direct comments to the City prior to the date of the Commission's

consideration.


(V) A copy of the final draft restrictive covenants and architectural design guidelines, ready for filing, if applicable.


(VI) The minor subdivision plat shall provide the following information:


(i)     Graphics drawn to scale (not greater than 1"=100', unless a smaller scale has been approved by the City Planning Director) on full size maps.


(ii)    Basis for establishing bearing.


(iii)   Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions.


(iv)   Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.


(v)    Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals.


(vi)   Existing and proposed curb cuts within and adjacent to the plat.


(vii)  The perimeter survey description of the proposed subdivision shall include at least one (1) tie to an existing section monument of record and a description of monuments. The survey shown shall not have a closure error greater than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000).


(viii)  Bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent links for the perimeter and all lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements.


(ix)    Lot and block numbers, numbered in consecutive order, and square footage of each lot or tract.

(x)     Excepted parcels from inclusion noted as “not included in this subdivision” and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.


(xi)    Location and dimensions of planned utility easements required for the plat's development and approved by the City.


(xii)   Indication of existing easements requested to be vacated.


(xiii)  Location and description of monuments.


(xiv)  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plat).


(xv)   Locations of existing streets and their names for all streets adjacent to the plat.


(xvi)  Location and dimensions of existing and planned sewer lines, water lines and fire hydrants, gas lines, electric service lines, street lights, telephone and cable lines, fiber optic lines, and similar utilities located within the property and within 100 feet of the property.


(xvii)  Total number of lots, blocks, tracts in the title block.


(xviii) Designation of entity responsible for common areas.  The legal entity responsible for the maintenance of any building, park, recreational area, open s pace, equipment, pool or private driveway which is to be owned and shared by the owners of real property in the proposed subdivision shall be designated by appropriate articles of incorporation, contracts, restrictions or other method. The means of securing payment for maintenance and operating expenses and any method of terminating such obligation shall be stated in the creating documents. If such entity is responsible for the maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas or open spaces, the following note shall be indicated on the face of the plat: "The City of Trinidad, Colorado, shall not be responsible for maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas, and open spaces; and, the ________________ Homeowners' / Property Owners' Association shall be responsible for such maintenance of driveways, park areas, recreational areas and open spaces."


(xix)  Dedication statements as plat notes: Statements of land to be dedicated to the City for parks, public streets and alleys, and grants of easements.


(xx)   Sidewalks, curb and gutter. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, the following plat note shall be indicated: "Sidewalks, curb and gutter shall be installed along all streets in accordance with subsection 17-43 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado."


(xxi)  Development of plat subject to code: A statement that development of the plat is subject to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(xxii) Certificate blocks for notarized signatures of owner, lienholders, preparer, and City approvals, as applicable. The signature of the mortgagee, if any, consenting to the execution of the plat and any dedications is required.


(xxiii) Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the plat have been paid in full.


(xxiv)  Certificate blocks for notarized signatures of owner, lienholders, preparer, and City approvals, as applicable.


(xxv)   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the plat have been paid in full.


(b)    Process. The minor subdivision review/consideration process is as follows:

(I) Pre-Application Conference with City staff.


(II) Application Submittal.


(III) City staff determines that the application is complete or not complete. If deemed complete, staff starts processing the application.


(IV) City staff schedules the public hearings and completes the public notification process.


(V) City staff reviews the application and prepares comments.


(VI)  The applicant meets with City staff and responds to staff's comments.


(VII)  Planning Commission Public Hearing and Recommendation.


(VIII) City Council consideration and action.


(IX) If approved, the Applicant addresses the City Council's conditions before recording the Minor Subdivision Plat with the County.


(4)    Minor amendments to recorded plats. Minor amendments which are filed with the County Clerk and Recorder to correct minor survey or drafting errors on a recorded plat shall be prepared in the form of an affidavit or, where deemed necessary for clarity, a revised plat certified by a land surveyor licensed with the State of Colorado. All affidavits or corrected plats indicating minor amendments shall be reviewed and approved by the City administratively. However, substantial changes shall require approval of a new plat by the City Council after the Commission has considered a recommendation. Written notice of all minor amendments to recorded plats shall be provided to the Commission and the City Council.


(5)    Resubdivision of land or changes to a recorded plat. Except as provided  herein, the resubdivision of land or changes to a recorded plat shall be considered a subdivision, and it shall comply with this Article except that the City may require that the subdivider to start with the submission of a preliminary plat or a final plat application. The determination shall be based on the extent to which the proposal differs in density and/or intensity from the recorded plat.


Section 14-9. Minor lot line adjustment, minor lot line elimination.

(1)    Minor lot line adjustment.


(a) Purpose. The purpose of the lot line adjustment is to allow administrative review of minor adjustment to legally subdivided lots and  building envelopes.


(b) Applicability. The City Planning Director shall be authorized to grant lot  line adjustments that meet all of the following conditions:


(I)   The adjustment shall affect only two (2) adjacent lots or building envelopes. No new parcels, lots or building  envelopes shall be created.


(II)  The lot line adjustment shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this Code, including development standards.


(III)  The adjustment shall not cause either of the two (2) adjacent lots or building envelopes to shift to a new zoning district.


(IV)  The adjustment shall not diminish in size parks, open space, or other protected environments.


(V)   The use of a lot line adjustment shall be limited to one time by the affected lots or building envelopes. Additional adjustments shall be considered a resubdivision and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 14-8.


(c) Submittal requirements. All requests for approval of a lot line adjustment shall contain all items listed in this subsection unless specifically waived by the City Planning Director on the grounds that such information is not required to accurately determine the impacts of the adjustment.


(I)   Application form. A completed application form as provided by the City Planning Director.


(II)    Fee. Payment of the applicable fee as adopted by the City Council.

(III)   Proof of ownership. Proof of ownership as required by the provisions of Section 14-4.


(IV)  Final plat plan. A final plat plan with the following format and information:


(A)   Format. The final plat plan shall be prepared in full size - twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide.


(B)   Contents. The final plat plan shall contain the information required for final plats in this Article, and any additional information as determined necessary by the City Planning Director.


(d) Criteria for approval.


(I)    Conformity with the Code. The proposed lot line adjustment substantially conforms to all applicable requirements of the City's Code of Ordinances, including area standards of the zone district(s) in which it is located, as modified by any PUD or variance for the property.


(II)   Conformance with other applicable regulations. The proposed lot line adjustment conforms to any other applicable regulations and requirements including but not limited to provisions of state law, the City's Code of Ordinances, and any requirements set by any capital improvement plan or program, or any approved subdivision improvements agreement or development agreement for the property.


(III)  Compatibility with surrounding area. The proposed lot line adjustment shall be compatible with the character of existing land uses in the area and shall not adversely affect the future development of the surrounding area.


(e) Term effect of approval.


(I)    Approval of a lot line adjustment shall be final when the City Planning Director's signature has been affixed on the final plat.


(II)    A lot line adjustments must have an approved final plat recorded with the county clerk and recorder within ninety (90) days of approval or the approval shall be considered null and void.


(III)   Lot line adjustments shall run with the land unless and until amended.


(2) Minor lot line elimination.


(a) Purpose. The purpose of a lot line elimination is to allow administrative review to remove interior lot lines of a parcel comprised of two (2) or more separate lots with contiguous ownership.


(b) Applicability. The City Planning Director shall be authorized to grant lot line eliminations which meet all of the following conditions:


(I)    The elimination shall affect five (5) or less lots. Lot line eliminations that affect more than five (5) lots shall be processed in accordance with the final plat section of this Article.


(II)    Lot line eliminations shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this Code.


(c) Submittal requirements. All requests for approval of a lot line elimination shall contain all of the items listed in this subsection unless specifically waived by the City Planning Director on the grounds that such information is not required to accurately determine the impacts of the elimination.


(I)    Application form. A completed application form as provided by the City Planning Department.


(II)   Fee. Payment of the appropriate fee as adopted by the City Council.


(III)  Proof of ownership. Proof of ownership as required by the provisions of Section 14-4.


(IV)   Site plan. A site plan with the following format and information shall be submitted:


(A)    Format. The site plan shall be prepared in full size - twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide pages in standard final plat format.


(B)   Contents. All site plans shall contain the information required for final plats in accordance with this Article, and any additional information as determined necessary by the City Planning Director.


(C)   Additional submittals. The City Planning Director may require additional materials if he/she determines that such materials are necessary to evaluate potential project impacts.


(d) Criteria for approval.


(I)     Conformity with the Code. The proposed lot line elimination conforms to all applicable requirements of the City's Code of Ordinances, including the dimensional standards of the zone district(s) in which it is located, as modified by any PUD or variance for the property.


(II)    Conformance with other applicable regulations. The proposed lot line elimination conforms to any other applicable regulations and requirements including but not limited to provisions of state law, the City's Code of Ordinances, and any requirements set by any capital improvement plan or program, or any approved subdivision improvements agreement or development agreement for the property.


(III) Compatibility with surrounding area. The proposed lot line elimination shall be compatible with the character of existing land uses in the area and shall not adversely affect the future development of the surrounding area.


(e) Term effect of approval.

(I) Approval of a lot line elimination shall be final when the City Planning Director's signature has been affixed on the document to be filed with Las Animas County.


(II)   A lot line elimination must be recorded with the county clerk and recorder within ninety (90) days of approval or the approval shall be considered null and void.


(III)  Lot line eliminations shall run with the land unless and until amended.

Sec. 14-10. Dedication of land for mini parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, district parks, linear parks in the form of trails, and regional open space; reservation of land for public uses.


(1)    Purpose of land dedication requirements.


(a) This section is adopted to provide recreational areas in the form of mini parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, district parks, linear parks in the form of trails, and regional open space as a function of subdivision and site development in the City of Trinidad. This section is enacted in accordance with the home rule powers of the City of Trinidad, granted under the Colorado Constitution, and the statutes of the State of Colorado.  This section is administered in a manner consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and with adopted regulations, plans, policies and other guidelines.


The primary cost of parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. All park land dedication proposals involving land areas shall also include park amenity development plans that require the approval of the City Council.  Construction of approved amenities, including their associated costs, shall be the responsibility of the developer. Native and drought-tolerant vegetation, in addition to subsurface irrigation systems to sustain newly installed plant life, shall be constructed in such areas.


It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form of mini parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, district parks, linear parks in the form of trails, and regional open space are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property or subdivisions, whether such development consists of new residential construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on previously developed land. (Ord. 1881, amended, eff 5/1/09)


(b)    Types of parks.


(I)     “Mini parks” provide places within walking distance of a neighborhood for supervised play for young children and unstructured activities for residents. Mini parks are less than two (2) acres in size, and are located within 1/4 mile of the residents that they serve. At a minimum, a mini park shall include live ground cover

and trees, plus one of the following: playground equipment, contemplative garden or other active or passive recreation opportunities for the neighborhood. Notwithstanding other requirements in this section, developers will be expected to provide a minimum of one 1-acre mini park per 200 dwelling units in central locations to the dwellings they are to serve.


(II)   “Neighborhood parks” are places for recreation and social gatherings, typically 2-5 acres in size, which are located within ½ mile of the residents that are to be served. At a minimum, a neighborhood park shall include a multiple-use lawn area, a picnic area, playground equipment, landscaping, lighting, signage, access to trails, and/or community gardens, plus at least one of the following: a pavilion or a court

game facility.


(III)   "Community parks" are places for recreation, typically larger than 5 acres in size, which serve the residents of more than one neighborhood. Community parks are located within two (2) miles of the residents that are to be served, and are located on or near arterial streets at the edge of residential areas or in nonresidential areas to minimize the impact of organized recreational activities such as those that require lighted competition fields. At a minimum, a community park shall include an indoor

recreation center, indoor or outdoor swimming pools, competitive and practice ball courts and fields, skateparks, and/or skating and hockey rinks, as well as landscaped areas, lighting, signage, trail access, restrooms, and off-street parking areas.


(IV)   "District parks" are places for recreation that serve the residents of the entire City, as well as people who may live outside of the community. These parks are typically located to take advantage of special natural settings, including lakes, forests, and geological features, including but not limited to ridgelines, mesas and mountains.

At a minimum, a district park shall contain campsites, a lake with canoe/kayak/boat ramps, restrooms, educational signage, and off-street parking.


(V)   "Linear parks in the form of trails" provide recreational opportunities and access that connect neighborhoods, parks, schools, businesses, open spaces, community facilities and neighboring areas located outside of the City. The construction of trails within such facilities, in accordance with City standards, shall be required for developers to receive credit as park land. The construction of amenities, including exercise stations, water fountains, and educational signage, where appropriate and practical along trails, shall be required.


(VI)   "Regional open space" includes natural areas, natural area buffer zones, areas of geological, archeological or historical significance, floodplains, wetlands, subsidence areas, and agricultural preservation areas. Access to and within such areas is generally limited to unpaved trails. Amenities such as educational signage, water stations, and off-street parking shall be provided in these parks.


(2)    Park land dedication required; manner of dedication.


(a) Land dedication. Whenever a final plat is filed of record with the County Clerk and Recorder of Las Animas County for development of a residential area in accordance with this Article, such plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of an area of land to the City for park purposes, which area shall equal no less than 1,000 square feet of area per each proposed dwelling unit. Any proposed sketch plan and/or preliminary plat submitted to the City for approval shall indicate the location of land area proposed to be dedicated under this section. Except as provided herein, all park land dedication proposals shall be approved by the City Council.


(I)Land areas not requiring additional subdivision that have not yet fulfilled the park land requirement, shall meet the provisions of this section through payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication per dwelling unit, which is based upon a fee schedule specifically established and adopted by the City Council by resolution to promote infill development and affordable housing in the City.  Such fees must be paid before a building permit will be issued for the following:  upon the construction of a new residential dwelling unit, upon the relocation of an existing residential dwelling unit, or upon the reconstruction and/or the refurbishment of a previously uninhabitable residential dwelling unit; or upon the reconstruction and/or refurbishment of a previously non-residential use into a residential dwelling unit.


(A) This fee shall be administratively collected on a one-time basis per dwelling unit and shall not require any appraisals or City Council action on individual applications.


(B) Upon application by an individual property owner, the City Council may on a case-by-case basis reduce the amount of the fee, postpone its payment, or waive its payment.


(C) The fee schedule shall be reviewed annually beginning in January, 2008, by the City Manager and any necessary changes will be made by resolution of the City Council.


(b)    Acceptance of drainage areas. Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a public park land dedication if the channel is constructed in accordance with City requirements; and provided the City determines that the land is appropriate for park use; and provided no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel.


(c)    Alternatives to land dedication. Pursuant to the provisions of this section, the required

park land dedication may be alternatively met by a payment of money in lieu of land and/or the provision of private park land.

(d)    Minimum acreage. In instances where an area of less than two (2) acres is required to

be dedicated, the City shall accept or reject the dedication of such public park within 60 days

following approval of the preliminary plat after consideration by the Commission. If the City determines that sufficient park area already is in the public domain in the area of the proposed development, or if the recreation potential for that area would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks, then the proposed dedication will be disallowed and the developer shall be required to make payment of cash in lieu of land as provided by subsection 3 of this section.


(e)    Method of dedication. The dedication required by this section shall be made by filing of the final plat or by separate instrument at the City’s election.


(f)     Additional dedication required. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional dedication shall be required, and shall be made by payment of the cash in lieu of land amount provided by subsection 3(c) of this section, or by the conveyance of additional land by amendment of plat or by separate instrument.


(g)    Access. Each park facility must have access to those it is to serve, most typically by a street, trail, and/or sidewalk.


(3)     Cash payment in lieu of dedication of land for new subdivisions.


(a)      Cash payment alternative. Subject to City Council approval, a developer responsible for dedication under this section may elect to meet the requirements of subsection 2 of this

section in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth in this section. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made at or prior to the time of final plat approval; provided that the final plat includes the following notation: “No building or other permit, except permits for construction of public improvements, will be issued by the City of Trinidad, Colorado, for construction within the subdivision until such time as the payment of money in lieu of park land required under the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, has been submitted to and accepted by the City.” If the developer places this notation upon the final recorded plat of the subdivision in lieu of making the payment of money in lieu of park land, the City shall not issue any permits for construction within the subdivision, except permits to construct public improvements, until such time as the payment in lieu of park land required by subsection 3 of this section is submitted to and accepted by the City.


(b) Park land purchased by the City in anticipation of development. The City may, from time to time, decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of actual or potential development. If the City does purchase park land, the City may elect to have subsequent park land dedications for that area be in cash only, and calculated to reimburse the City’s actual cost of acquisition and development of such land for parks. The cash amount shall be equal to the sum of (a) the average price per acre of such land, and (b) the actual cost of adjacent streets and on-site utilities, or an estimate of such actual cost provided by the City Manager.


(c) Amount of cash payment. To the extent that subsection 3(b) of this section is not applicable, the dedication requirement shall be met by a payment of cash in lieu of land. Cash payments may be used only for acquisition or improvement of parks located in proximity as to adequately serve the residents of such development. The payment shall comply with the following requirements unless otherwise provided for by this Code:


(I)     Payment shall be based on the requirements set forth in subsection 2(a) and shall be based on the fair market value of the entire property as it is valued after platting and shall include the value of the construction of adjacent streets and utilities required to serve park land.


(II)   The value of the land shall be based upon an appraisal by a competent, independent appraiser selected by the City, whose costs are reimbursed to the City by the applicant. The suitability of the land to be dedicated for public purposes and the credit to be given toward the land dedication requirement is at the City’s sole

option and discretion. The City Manager may waive the requirement of an appraisal where the owner/developer provides sufficient documentation evidencing the land's fair market value.


(III)   Combination of land dedication and cash-in-lieu:


(A)   The applicant, at the option of the City Council, may meet the dedication requirements through a combination of cash-in-lieu and land dedication in those cases where a portion of the dedication of land is not desired.


(B)    The value of the combination of both the land dedication and the cash-in-lieu of land shall not exceed the full market value of the total required dedication of sites and land areas.


(4)     Provision of private park land in lieu of dedication of land.


(a)  Amount of credit. Subject to City Council approval, a developer responsible for dedication under this section may elect to meet up to 100 percent of the requirements of subsection 2 of this section by the provision of private park land.


(b)   Suitability. Any land dedicated to the City or provided as private park land under this section must be appropriate for park and recreation purposes.  The City reserves the right to reject any land which it deems as unsuitable for such purposes.


(c) Accessibility and development. The land offered as private park land must be open and accessible to all residents of the platted subdivision. Land or facilities which are excluded to a portion of the subdivision residents will not be considered as private park land meeting the requirements of this section.



(d)   Type of private dedication.


(I)    Unencumbered. Land which is unencumbered by easements, detention areas, lake and drainage channel borders, or other similar characteristics will qualify for private park land at full credit.  Land which has recreational facilities on it such as tennis courts, swimming pools, playing fields, recreation buildings, etc.,

will also qualify for full credit.


(II)    Encumbered. Land which has the following type of encumbrances may be used to satisfy the private park land option on the basis of partial credits as recited herein:


(A)   Land encumbered by easements, detention ponds and detention areas, arroyos, drainage channel borders, or other similar characteristics will qualify for private park land on the basis of one-half credit.


(B)    Except as provided herein, land which is generally undeveloped and unsuitable for organized recreational activities without substantial development effort, but that does provide desirable aesthetic qualities, such as wetlands and other wooded areas, will qualify for private park land on the basis of one-quarter credit. Land areas consisting of ridges on the tops of hills, mesas, mountains, and similar geological features, and having minimum elevations of 6,250 feet shall qualify for private park land on the basis of full credit. Lakes shall also qualify for private park land on the basis of full credit.


(III)  Limit on encumbered land. Not more than 50 percent of the private park land provision may be satisfied with land possessing the encumbrances set forth as qualifying for partial credit in this subsection.


(e)    Responsibility for maintenance. Maintenance responsibility for areas offered as private park land must be identified with the submission of a preliminary plat. Private park land and open space shall be owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or landowner.


(f)    Areas less than one-quarter acre. Land offered for private park land credit which is less than one-quarter acre in size is generally discouraged unless it is an integral part of the park, recreational and open space provisions of the subdivision. A list of landscaping and other improvements of special uses planned for areas of land less than one-quarter acre in size shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.


(5)    Disposition of funds paid in lieu of dedication of land.


(a)    Special fund established. There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all sums paid in lieu of land dedication under this section, which fund shall be known as the park land dedication fund.


(b)    Accounting; expenditures; refunds. The City shall account for all sums paid in lieu of land dedication under this section with reference to the individual plats involved. Any funds

paid for such purposes must be expended by the City within ten (10) years from the date

received by the City for acquisition or development of a park as defined in this section.

Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis for each area of the City. If not so expended, then on the last day of such period the then-current owners of the property for which money was paid in lieu of land dedication shall be entitled to a pro rata refund of such sum, computed on a square footage basis. The owners of such property must request such refund within one (1) year of entitlement, in writing, or such right shall be barred.

(6)   Administration.


(a)   Review of proposals. Unless provided otherwise in this section, an action by the City shall be by the City Council, after consideration of the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


Sec. 14-11. Standards and Specifications.


No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the City, and no permit shall be issued for construction of any improvement intended for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots or tracts within the subdivision, and no improvement intended for public use shall be accepted by the City, unless such subdivision and public improvements comply with the standards and specifications in this subsection.  Minimum standards for surveying and engineering in the preparation of maps and plans submitted to the City shall be based on the requirements of the State of Colorado and on the accepted best practices for the applicable profession.


(1)     General Site Considerations.


(a)   The future character and environment of the City will be greatly affected by the design of subdivisions and plats that are approved by the City.  Planning, layout and design of a subdivision are of utmost concern.  Residents must have available to them within their neighborhoods, safe and convenient access and movement to points of destination or collection. Modes of travel to achieve this objective should be varied and should not conflict with each other or abutting land uses. Lots and blocks should provide desirable settings for the buildings that are to be constructed, make use of natural contours, protect views, and provide privacy of residents and protection from adverse noise, lighting and vehicular traffic. Natural features and vegetation of the area should be preserved. Schools, parks, churches and other community facilities should be planned as integral parts of neighborhoods.


(b)   All portions of a tract being subdivided, unless otherwise permitted, shall be designed as lots, streets, planned open spaces, or other uses to avoid creation of vacant landlocked spaces. The design of subdivisions shall provide for efficient traffic flow, proper mixing of land uses, and a logical link between nearby existing developments, and the proposed subdivision.  The City's Comprehensive Plan is to be used as a guide in determining if the design of a proposed subdivision is proper. The City Council shall have the authority to deny a plat or to request a redesign, if, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans or policies, the proposed layout is not suitable for the site, or if the development of the subdivision would be premature.


(c)   Subdivisions and land developments shall be designed to prevent excessive erosion by the forces of wind and/or water, and shall be laid out so as to avoid the necessity for excessive cut and fill.


(d)  Whenever possible, developers shall preserve trees and other vegetation, waterways such as creeks and arroyos, viewsheds and scenic points, cultural and historic sites and resources, and other local assets and landmarks.


(e)  Where feasible, conservation of energy through the use of solar and wind systems in accordance with federal guidelines is encouraged.


(f)   Drainage areas, whenever possible, should be left in a natural state and no encroachments shall be made on the natural channel area. Drainage designs of subdivisions shall be engineered using accepted best management practices, and so as to not increase historic drainage patterns or flows off site.


(g)   Any land subject to flooding shall be platted in accordance with any applicable floodplain ordinances, statutes and/or laws. The following should be indicated as a plat note, where applicable: "Homebuilders are required to provide a floodplain elevation certificate prior to or with a building permit application. All plans and specs are required to meet FEMA guidelines for flood mitigation." Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health, or property, and land deemed to be unsuitable from the standpoint of geology, soil conditions, or topography, shall not be platted for residential occupancy or other such purposes as may increase danger to health, life, or property, not aggravate erosion or flood hazard, unless such hazards are properly mitigated through the subdivision planning process as provided in this Article.


(h)   Where a subdivision borders a railroad right-of-way or principal arterial street, design of the subdivision shall include adequate provisions for the reduction of noise.


(i)   Except as provided herein, all subdivisions shall have frontage on and direct access to a public right-of-way. In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the traffic-carrying capacity of the street system, the City Council shall have the right to restrict and regulate points of access to all property from the public street system.


(2)    Blocks.


(a)    General standards. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:


(I) The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the specific needs of the type of use contemplated.

(II) Requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.


(III) Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.


(IV)  The limitations or opportunities of the topography of the subdivision.


(V)   The limitations and characteristics of the soil and slope relative to the requirements for the installation of utilities.


(b)   Length, width and shape.


(I)     Blocks should not exceed 1,320 feet in length unless topographic conditions or other physical constraints justify a longer length. In general, blocks should not be less than 300 feet in length.


(II)    Blocks should be designed so as to provide two (2) tiers of lots.


(III)   Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided they are harmonious with the overall pattern of blocks in a proposed subdivision.


(3)   Lots.


(a)  Lots shall meet all applicable zoning requirements.


(b)  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from an orientation to both streets.


(c)   Lots should be designed, as far as possible, with side lines being at right angles or radial to any adjacent street right-of-way line.


(d)   Except to accommodate drainage in easements, minimal grades shall be maintained along lot lines.


(e)   Double-frontage lots shall be prohibited in residential areas except where essential to provide separation from principal arterial streets or from incompatible land uses. A landscape buffer located in an easement or a tract dedicated for such of at least twenty (20) feet in width and across which there will be no vehicular right of access, may be required along the lot line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other incompatible uses.


(f)   Each lot shall have vehicular access to a public or private street, as approved by the City Council.


(g)   Prior to recording the final plat, all boundary, block and lot corners shall be marked by iron monuments no smaller than 5/8 inch in diameter with suitable caps and statue markings and 2 feet in length, driven into the ground flush with the existing ground surface.


(4)   Easements.


(a)  Public utility easements. Though it is preferable to locate public utilities within public rights-of-way, easements may be required to locate facilities necessary to provide water, electrical power, natural gas, telephone, cable television and sanitary sewer services. Storm sewers or open drainageways must not be constructed within utility easements unless specifically approved by the City.


(b)  Drainage easements. Any required drainage easements must be located and dedicated to accommodate the drainage requirements for the property within the subdivision boundaries and within the natural watershed in conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of the City. Drainage easements along proposed or existing open channels shall provide sufficient width for the required channel and such additional width as may be required for maintenance and adequate slopes necessary along the bank of the channel. Drainage easements shall also be provided for emergency overflow drainageways of sufficient width to contain within the easement stormwater resulting from a 100-year frequency storm event less the amount of stormwater carried in any enclosed drainage system. The needed width of drainage easements shall be substantiated by a drainage study and drainage calculations or other criteria submitted to and approved by the City.


(c)  Floodway easements. Floodway easements may be required along natural drainageways and lakes or reservoirs. Floodway easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water surface elevation resulting from a 100-year frequency storm, plus such additional width as may be required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for

the protection of adjacent property.


(d)    Restrictions on use of drainage and floodway easements. A suitable note on the subdivision plat must restrict all properties within the subdivision to ensure that drainage and floodway easements within the plat boundary shall be kept clear of fences, buildings, plantings and other obstructions to the operations and maintenance of the drainage facility, and abutting properties shall not be permitted to drain directly into such easements except by means of a drainage structure approved by the City.


(e)    Easements created prior to subdivision. All easements created prior to the subdivision of any tract of land must be shown on a subdivision plat of the land with appropriate notations indicating the name of the owner of such easement, the purpose of the easement, the facilities contained therein, the dimensions of the easement tied to all adjacent lot lines, street rights-of-way and plat boundaries, and the recording reference to the instruments creating and establishing the easement. In those instances where easements have not been defined by accurate survey dimensions, the subdivider should request the owner of such

easement to accurately define its limits and the location of the easement through the property within the plat boundaries. If the holder of such undefined easement does not define the easement involved and certifies his refusal to define such easement to the City, the subdivision plat must provide adequate information as to the centerline of the location of all existing facilities placed in accordance with the easement holder's rights.  Except for historic preservation easements, building setback lines must be established at least 30 feet from and parallel to the boundary of the easement. The subdivider shall obtain from the holder of any private easement within the plat to be crossed by proposed streets or other public easements an instrument granting to the public the use and benefit of the private easement for the construction, operation and maintenance of such public streets and easements. This instrument shall be delivered to the City at the time the final plat application is submitted for review.   The subdivider shall also furnish the City with a letter from the holder of the private easement stating that arrangements for any required adjustments to pipelines, electrical transmission lines or other similar facilities have been made to the satisfaction of the holder of the easement.

(5)    The following improvements shall be constructed by developers unless waived by the City Council:

(a)       Road grading and surfacing.


(b)       Curbs and gutters.


(c)       Street lights.


(d)       Sidewalks.


(e)       Sanitary sewer collection system.


(f)        Storm sewers or storm drainage system, as required.


(g)       Potable water distribution including fire hydrants.


(h)       Utility distribution system for parks and open space.


(i)        Street signs at all street intersections.


(j)        Permanent reference monuments and monument boxes.


(k)       Underground telephone, cable, electricity and gas lines.


(l)        Berms or fencing along major arterial streets.


(m)      Underdrains.


(n)       Required floodway improvements.


(o)       Required irrigation ditch improvements.


(6)     Minimum standards for public improvements. No final plat shall be approved without receiving a statement from the City Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the City and, as established by the City Engineer, that they comply with the following minimum standards:


(a)   Streets and alleys.


(I) All streets in subdivisions shall be paved and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City requirements. The right-of-way shall be graded to provide suitable finish grades for utilities, pavement, sidewalks and planting strips, with adequate surface drainage and convenient access to the lots. The street system pattern proposed in any subdivision must comply with the provisions of this Article and other applicable provisions of the City's Code of Ordinances, and shall:


(A)    Be designed to be logically related to topography so as to produce reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage, suitable building sites, and provide for horizontal sight distances on all curves depending on design speed.


(B)    Provide for adequate vehicular access to all properties within the proposed subdivision plat boundaries.


(C)    Provide adequate street connections to adjacent properties to ensure adequate traffic circulation within the general area.


(D)    Provide a local street system serving properties to be developed for residential purposes which discourages through traffic while maintaining sufficient access and traffic movement for convenient circulation within the subdivision and access by fire, police and other emergency services.


(E)    Provide a sufficient number of continuous streets and major thoroughfares, particularly in those areas designated for the development of high density multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial land uses, to accommodate the increased traffic demands generated by these land uses.

(F)    When necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets in alignment therewith.  When conditions permit, centerline offsets should be at least 125 feet. Greater centerline offsets may be required by the City when necessary for traffic safety. Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to or at the end of an existing street which will afford primary or significant access to the proposed subdivision and is determined by the City Engineer, in accordance with traffic engineering principles and practice, to be of inadequate design or construction, the developer will be required to improve, reconstruct, widen or make any other alterations to the existing street as deemed necessary by the City in order to provide appropriate and safe access to the subdivision.


(G)    Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the City may require the arrangement of streets in the subdivision to make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas.


(H)    Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practical giving due regard to terrain, topography, sight distances and safety.


(II)   Grades of streets shall not be in excess of five percent (5%) on major or collector streets, nor in excess of eight percent (8%) on other streets.


(III) All proposed subdivisions of greater than sixteen (16) residential dwelling units or greater than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area for nonresidential subdivisions shall submit a traffic impact study with the preliminary plat application. Such traffic impact study shall demonstrate that the proposed subdivision will not create traffic conditions that result in a level of service (LOS) that fails to meet the standards set forth in subparagraph (A) below.


(A)   The street system within the proposed subdivision shall provide LOS

"A" on all proposed streets and at all proposed intersections, and shall be adequate to maintain current LOS's on all existing abutting streets and intersections. The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall not forward a positive recommendation, and the City Council shall not approve any subdivision that fails to meet this standard unless the subdivider provides traffic mitigation measures that will maintain or improve the current LOS on such adjacent streets and intersections.


(B)   A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a professional traffic engineer, and shall contain the following additional requirements:


(i) An inventory of existing conditions within one (1) mile of the proposed subdivision including: roadway network and traffic control; existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and average daily traffic (ADT); planned roadway improvements; and, intersection levels of service.


(ii)  Projected site-generated traffic volumes in terms of:  peak hours and ADT; approach/departure distribution including method of determination; site traffic volumes on roadways; and, comparison of existing conditions to proposed site generation.


(iii)  An analysis of future traffic conditions including: future design year (development fully completed); combined volumes (site traffic plus future roadway traffic); and, intersection levels of service.


(iv)  A description and schematic plan of recommended access and on- site circulation.


(v)   A description of proposed on-site and/or off-site mitigation measures necessary to meet the LOS standard set forth herein.


(vi)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Engineer.


(IV) The design of the pavement section shall be performed by a registered professional engineer based upon a geotechnical evaluation of the site and the pavement design procedures presented in the "AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures." The pavement shall be designed with a twenty (20) year design life.


(V) Street jogs should be avoided on all streets.


(VI)  Curbs and gutters on minor residential streets shall be concrete of the integral type B unit, not less than thirty inches (30") in overall width, and not less than six inches (6") thick where curb abuts the street pavement.


(VII)  Storm water inlets and catch basins of adequate size and spacing shall be provided within the roadway improvement at points specified by the stormwater design prepared by a professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer.


(VIII) All curb corners shall have a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15') and at intersections involving collector or major streets of not less than twenty-five feet (25').


(IX) Except as approved by the City Council, all streets within the corporate limits  of the City, other than State or County highways, shall be improved with pavement bounded by integral curbs and gutters to an overall width in accordance with the following minimum dimensions:

Type of Street	
Dedicated Right-of-Way

Width	
Pavement Width

(including gutter)
Major Collector & Arterials	
Conform to thoroughfare

plan	
Conform to thoroughfare

plan
Minor Collector	60 feet	
40 feet or more; Less than

40 feet requires City

approval in advance
Cul-de-sac & Local	60 feet	
36 feet or more; Less than

36 feet requires City

approval in advance
(X)      Arrangement and layout of thoroughfares.


(A)   Location and alignment. The location and alignment of designated thoroughfare shall be in conformance with the thoroughfare plan of the city.


(B)   Right-of-way width. The width of the right-of-way to be dedicated for any designated thoroughfare shall be in conformance with the City's thoroughfare plan. In those instances where the proposed subdivision is located contiguous to an existing thoroughfare having a right-of-way less than that required by the thoroughfare plan, sufficient additional right-of-way must be dedicated to bring the right-of-way width in conformance with the thoroughfare plan. In all cases the minimum right-of-way width required for the development of a designated thoroughfare must be of sufficient width to accommodate the approved roadway pavement and drainage and utility facilities.


(C)    Curves and intersections. Curves proposed for the right-of-way of designated thoroughfares shall be in conformance with AASHTO guidelines and accepted best engineering practices.


(XI) Buffering and traffic separation requirements for thoroughfares. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed thoroughfare, the City may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screening by landscaping and berming contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford a separation of through and local traffic. If landscaping or berming is used as a buffer between the thoroughfare and residential property uses, the subdivider shall provide a minimum 20-foot landscape buffer in an easement or in a tract dedicated for such purposes along the thoroughfare.


(XII) Arrangement and layout of streets, other than thoroughfares.


(A)   Location and alignment. The location and alignment of streets must be in conformance with the City's thoroughfare plan.


(B)   Right-of-way width. The width of the right-of-way to be dedicated for any designated or proposed street shall be in conformance with the provisions of subsection 14-11 6(a)I.  In those instances where the proposed subdivision is located contiguous to an existing street having a right-of-way less than that required by the thoroughfare plan, sufficient additional right- of-way must be dedicated to bring the right-of-way in conformance with the City's thoroughfare plan. The minimum right-of-way width required for the development of a designated or proposed street must be of sufficient width to accommodate the approved roadway pavement and drainage and utility facilities.

(C)   Curves and intersections. Curves proposed for the right-of-way of designated streets shall be in conformance with AASHTO guidelines and accepted best engineering practices.


(XIII) Cul-de-sacs, dead-end streets and stub streets.


(A)  Length of cul-de-sac. The length of all cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet, unless topographic conditions warrant a longer length.


(B)  Radius of cul-de-sac. The radius of the right-of-way for all cul-de-sacs shall not be less than sixty (60) feet.


(C)  Drainage of a cul-de-sac. Drainage of a cul-de-sac shall preferably be toward the open end.


(D)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs, to permit future extensions into adjoining tracts or when designed as circular cul- de-sac turnarounds.


(E)   Stub streets. Stub streets, greater in length than one (1) lot length, shall be paved to the full width of the right-of-way for the last fifty (50) feet of their length.


(XIV) Private streets.


(A)  Private streets may be permitted by the City Council if it determines that the use of private streets will preserve the aesthetic environmental qualities of the subdivision while providing property owners with a safe, functional and lasting means of access. The design and approval of any private streets shall promote driver and pedestrian safety by improving movement along streets and ingress and egress for properties adjacent thereto. Generally, as the widths of streets and vehicular speeds increase, the number of private street connections thereto should decrease.


(B)  Private streets shall be designed in accordance with traffic engineering principles and practices as applied to existing and anticipated conditions, particularly the land uses to be served and the configuration of the thoroughfare itself.


(C)  Private streets shall meet all requirements contained in this Article for public streets. Adequate space shall be provided in the private street right-of-way for easements for the location and maintenance of utilities.


(D)  A note shall be included on the plat that provides that the maintenance of private streets shall be the responsibility of the applicable homeowners' or property owners' association, and that assessments for such maintenance shall be addressed in the association's deed restrictions, protective covenants, or covenants, conditions and restrictions.


(XV) Partial or half streets.

Partial or half streets may be dedicated in those instances where the City concurs that it is necessary for the proper development of the land and in the public interest to locate a public street right-of-way. The City will not approve a partial or half street dedication within a subdivision dedicating less than a 60-foot right-of-way width. Appropriate notations must be placed upon the plat restricting access from any partial or half streets so dedicated to adjacent acreage tracts until the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat and the additional adjacent right-of-way is acquired providing the full right-of-way as specified in this Article.


(XVI) Alleys.


(A)  General arrangement and layout. Alleys may be provided within a subdivision plat to provide secondary vehicular access to lots which otherwise have their primary access from an adjacent street. Alleys may not be used or designed to provide the principal access to any tract of land.


(B) Right-of-way width; intersections and curves. Alleys must have a right-of-way width of at least sixteen (16) feet. Alleys must intersect with streets.


(C) Dead-end alleys. No dead-end alley or cul-de-sac alley shall be permitted.


(XVII)    Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches shall be provided in accordance with the driveway approach standards of the State of Colorado.


(XVIII)   Driveways. Driveways shall be constructed with minimal grades or slopes.

(XIX)     Shared access, driveways and parking facilities for nonresidential tracts.


(A)   All off-street parking and driveway areas and primary access to parking facilities shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar materials.


(B)  Where feasible, parking lots of nonresidential uses shall share access drives with adjacent property.


(C) Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles may

exit without backing onto a public street unless no other practical alternative is available.


(D)  Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach upon or extend onto public rights-of-way, sidewalks or strike against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility or other structure.


(E)  When there are opportunities to support parking demand through shared off-street parking for compatible uses (such as a movie theater and an office building), a parking study and shared parking agreements may be used to demonstrate the adequacy of the parking supply as a substitute for standard parking requirements.


(F)  Circulation areas shall be designed to facilitate the safe movement of vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or impeding the function of the parking area.


(G)  Unless otherwise approved by the City, all plats for commercial and/or industrial tracts shall provide for shared access and parking facilities, and the plat shall contain a note on it to that effect.


(XX)   Street lighting, naming, signage, and traffic signals.


(A)  Street lighting. The City shall install streetlights at the developer's expense. To minimize light pollution, street lights shall only be installed at street intersections, street dead-ends, or in cul-de-sacs.


(B)  Street naming and signage. Streets that are in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Otherwise, new street names should not be similar to existing street names located in or adjacent to the City as to cause confusion to drivers of public safety vehicles. Developers shall be responsible for the costs of purchasing and installing street signs at intersections in their subdivisions in accordance with City standards.


(C)  Addressing, U. S. Postal Requirements. Upon plat recordation and prior to the submittal of building permit applications, developers shall coordinate

the addressing of lots with the City Planning Department and the local postmaster. Cluster mailbox units required for new subdivisions shall not be located within a residential lot, but shall be located within a centrally-located parcel owned and maintained by the homeowners association, and shall have vehicular and/or pedestrian access.


(D)  Traffic signs and signals. Developers shall be required to provide and install all traffic signage and signalization determined by the City to be necessary because of the construction of the subdivision. All signs and signals shall be provided and placed in accordance with City standards and shall be erected prior to the acceptance of streets by the City. Developers shall be responsible for upgrading existing signals, equipment, and facilities to accommodate their development.


(XXI)    Fire lane. Fire lanes shall be required where deemed necessary by the City to protect an area during the period of development and after

development. If required after development, a fire lane easement shall be

dedicated and marked as such in accordance with applicable fire codes,

so that it is to remain free of obstructions and provide access at all times.


(XXII)   Sidewalks, trails, and multi-use pathways.


(A)  The intent of the standards for sidewalks, multi-use pathways and trails is to assure a safe, convenient, and attractive pedestrian/bicycle system that minimizes conflicts between vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.


(B)  A sidewalk network that interconnects all dwelling units with other dwelling units, non-residential uses, and common open space shall be provided throughout each development. Trails and sidewalks may be combined as multi-use pathways.


(C) Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of streets in and adjacent to a subdivision, and shall be constructed to be separate and distinct from motor vehicle circulation to the greatest extent possible. Adjacent property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance of such sidewalks. A minimum one foot (1') separation shall be provided between a sidewalk and curb. When permitted by the City Engineer, combination curb, gutter and sidewalk will be allowed.


(D) The pedestrian circulation system shall include gathering/sitting areas and provide benches, landscaping and other street furniture where deemed appropriate by the City. Pavement markings, separators, signage, fencing and landscaping may also be required where necessary to promote circulation, screening, buffering and safety.


(E)  Sidewalks, trails and multi-use pathways shall be located within the right-of-way unless otherwise authorized by the City Council.


(F) Sidewalks, trails and multi-use pathways shall be constructed of concrete, but may also include accents of brick, slate, and/or colored/textured concrete pavers, that are compatible with the style, materials, colors, and detail of the surrounding buildings. Asphalt shall not be used for sidewalks, trails or multi-use pathways.


(G) Sidewalks and related improvements shall be installed or constructed by the subdivider in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City and, after installation or construction; they shall be subject to inspection and approval by the City. All required improvements shall be completed in accordance with the officially established grades.


(H) Sidewalks, trails or multi-use pathways shall be provided between and within residential neighborhoods, nonresidential areas, open space areas, parks, schools, and other community facilities.


(I) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Trails shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width. Multi-use pathways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.


(XXIII)            Utilities.


(I) Sewers.


(A)   Sanitary sewers.


(i)  All residential, commercial and industrial uses located within the City's corporate boundaries which have human occupancy shall either have sanitary sewer served by the City, or a sewer system that has been specifically approved for the site by the City.


(ii)  The sanitary sewer system shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system and shall consist of a closed system of sanitary sewer mains and lateral branch connections to each structure or lot upon which a structure is to be built.


(iii)  Sanitary sewer lines are to be of sufficient size and design to collect all sewage from all proposed or portable structures within the subdivision or development.


(iv)  Plans and specifications of any proposed sewer system or treatment plant in accordance with the requirements of the City shall be submitted and approved by the City prior to the commencement of such construction.


(v)  The locations and dimensions of existing sanitary sewer lines, and plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer lines, indicating depths and grades of lines, shall be indicated on construction plans submitted to the City for review and approval.


(vi) Pretreatment of industrial discharge into the City's sewage collection system or treatment plant shall be required if, in the opinion of the appropriate utility superintendent, the concentration of such discharge results in shock loading or contains elements untreatable by normal City treatment methods.


1.  Storm sewers.


a.   Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins, and be connected to an adequate outfall.


b.  The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system.


c.   All street widths and grades shall be indicated on construction plans submitted to the City, with runoff figures indicated on the outlet and inlet side of all drainage ditches and storm sewers and at all points in the street or storm sewer drainage ditch, and with proposed locations of all drainage easements indicated.


d.  When a drainage channel, retention/detention facility or storm sewer is proposed, completed plans, profiles and specifications signed and sealed by a professional engineer shall be submitted showing complete construction details. Such plans require City approval.



(II)       Potable Water.

(A)  All residential, commercial and industrial uses located within the City's corporate boundaries, which have human occupancy, shall have potable water served by the City.


(B)  The water system shall be of sufficient size and design to supply potable water to each structure or lot upon which a structure is to be built.


(C)  The location and size of existing water lines and fire hydrants, plans and profiles of all proposed water lines and fire hydrants showing depths and grades of the lines, and detail design information of proposed water lines and fire hydrants shall be indicated on construction plans in accordance with the requirements of the City. Such plans shall be submitted and approved by the City prior to the commencement of such construction.

(III)   Electricity.

(A)  All residential, commercial and industrial uses located within the City's corporate boundaries, which have human occupancy, shall have electric service provided for in accordance with City standards and policies.


(B)  The electric system shall be of sufficient size and design to supply power to each structure or lot upon which a structure is to be built.


(C)  The location and size of existing power lines, plans and profiles of all proposed power lines, and detail design information of proposed power lines shall be indicated on construction plans in accordance with the requirements of the City. Such plans shall be submitted and approved by the City prior to the commencement of such construction.


(IV)   Gas.


(A)   All uses located within the City's corporate boundaries may elect to have gas service. If elected, gas shall be provided by the City.


(B)  The gas system shall be of sufficient size and design to supply gas to each structure or lot upon which a structure is to be built.


(C)  The location and size of existing gas lines, plans and profiles of all proposed gas lines, and detail design information of proposed gas lines shall be indicated on construction plans in accordance with the requirements of the City. Such plans shall be submitted and approved by the City prior to the commencement of such construction.


(V)   Fire hydrants. The subdivider shall install fire hydrants at street intersections and at other points as required by the City to meet adopted fire codes.


(VI)  Underground utilities. The City may require that utilities to be located within a subdivision be placed underground.


(VII)   Flood prevention. No subdivision of land shall be approved unless the subdivision complies with all applicable ordinances, statutes and federal law pertaining to flood prevention. All subdivisions shall comply with the flood prevention provisions of Sections 14-130 through 14-134.


(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, due to excavation, fill work or grading, to impede, obstruct or otherwise divert the natural flow of surface waters on adjoining properties, or to cause surface waters on adjoining properties, or to cause surface waters to drain over and across adjoining property contrary to existing natural runoff and flow, without written

permission to allow such in perpetuity from the owner of such adjoining tract.


(B)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, builder, developer, design engineer and architect to examine the property under construction and adjoining tracts prior to and during periods of construction and to provide such drainage facilities, at appropriate times, to ensure proper on-site and off-site drainage.


(C)  When a tract or parcel of land is graded to a level that is higher or lower than the natural grade of adjacent property, or graded in any manner which may alter the natural flow of waters on such tract or on any adjoining tract, the person causing such alteration of natural grade or natural flow shall cause to be constructed, to the satisfaction of the City, ditches, swales, catchbasins, drains, retaining walls or other facilities necessary to protect adjoining tracts from erosion, overflow or accumulation of surface waters or any obstruction of the natural drainage of such adjoining tracts.  A grading permit, based upon a set of grading plans approved by the City Engineer, issued by the City is required before the commencement of such work.


(D)  Developers shall be required to participate in and/or provide on- and off-site drainage improvements deemed by the City as necessary to provide adequate drainage for the subdivision and to protect downstream areas from the hazards of flooding and high waters.


(E)  Land subject to periodic flooding, or that has inadequate drainage, may be subdivided only if improvements or structures are designed by a professional engineer so as to assure adequate flood proofing. Proposals for subdivision of land in such areas shall include engineering evidence that the proposed development will:


(i)  Not unduly restrict or block the conveyance of flood water;


(ii) Not result in an increase in height of flood water of more than one (1) foot;

(iii) Require residential structures to have the lowest floor (including basement) to be at least one (1) foot above such flood level or require nonresidential structures to be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one (1) foot above such flood level; and,

(iv) Meet all zoning requirements for identified flood hazard areas.


(F)  New or replacement water supply and/or sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.


(7)   In subdivisions located outside the City's corporate limits but located within the City's territorial limits, street improvements shall conform to standards of improvements as outlined in this Article for subdivisions located within the corporate limits.


(8)    Subdividers and developers are referred to Chapter 17, Streets and Sidewalks, for additional applicable standards relating to public improvements.


Sec. 14-12. Public improvements, improvement guarantees, development agreements, construction plans, inspections, and maintenance of dedicated improvements.


(1)    Improvements required; oversized or off-site improvements. All public improvements required under this Article, including improvements specified in the City's Comprehensive Plan, which, in the judgment of the City Council, are necessary for the adequate provision of streets, drainage, utilities, municipal services and facilities to the subdivision, shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer. If oversizing of utility or drainage facilities or off-site improvements are required as a part of the subdivision development, and are necessary for the adequate and efficient development of surrounding areas, the City may require the developer to construct such oversized or off-site improvements. In such event the developer may seek financial participation of adjoining developers to reimburse his portion of the cost of the oversizing or offsite improvements not attributable to the subdivision development.


(2)    Dedication or reservation of land for public improvements.


(a) Rights-of-way, streets, alleys, and utilities. Where a proposed right-of-way shown in the City plan and adjacent unincorporated areas, is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission or the City Council may require the dedication or reservation of such area, in whole or in part, within the subdivision in those cases in which the Commission or the City Council may deem such requirements to be reasonable.


(b) School sites and other public areas. Where a proposed school site or other public use area, shown in the City plan and adjacent unincorporated areas, is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission or the City Council may require the dedication or reservation of such area, in whole or in part, within the subdivision in those cases in which the Commission or the City Council may deem such requirements to be reasonable. However, in no case shall the total amount of required public areas to be dedicated or reserved, for these uses, exceed ten percent (10%) of the total gross acreage controlled by the owner. The acquisition of the additional area needed for such uses shall be secured by the authority having jurisdiction, and shall be made no later than ninety (90) days after the plat has been recorded.


(3) Improvement Guarantees.


(a) The final plat to be placed on record shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the owner and the subdivider, setting forth the following:

(I)  Plans and specifications for such improvements previously approved by the City Engineer clearly describing same.


(II) Agreement executed by the owner and subdivider with the City wherein they agree to make and install the improvements provided for by this Article, in accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final plat; and that all such improvements shall be inspected during the course of construction by an inspector appointed by the City Council, with salaries and other costs in connection with such inspections to be paid by the owner and subdivider, with such costs to be based on the reasonable customary charges for such service.


(a)  In the event that the City Council, by motion, approves the action of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission in approving the final plat, it shall withhold its approval of the plat until an agreement signed by the owner and subdivider, as provided in subsection 3(a)II above, shall be given, supported by a bond executed by an acceptable surety company, as approved by the Director of Finance, or some other acceptable form of security, as approved by the City Council, in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements as estimated by the developer and approved by the City Engineer. Such surety or other security shall be subject to the condition that the improvements shall be completed within two (2) years after the recordation of the final plat.  Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, no construction of public improvements shall commence prior to the City's acceptance of the required improvement guarantee.


(4) Development agreements. A development agreement stating the developer agrees to construct any required public improvements shown in the final plat documents together with collateral which is sufficient, in the judgment of the City Council, to make reasonable provision for the completion of said improvements in accordance with design and time specifications may be required by the City. No subdivision plat shall be signed by the City or recorded at the office of the County Clerk, and no building permit shall be issued for development until a development agreement, if required, between the City and the developer has been executed, and until all public improvements have been accepted by the City. Such agreement shall include a list of all agreed-upon improvements, an estimate of the

cost of such improvements, the form of guarantee for the improvements, and any other provisions or conditions deemed necessary by the City Council to ensure that all improvements will be completed in a timely, quality and cost-effective manner. A development agreement shall run with and be a burden upon the land described in the agreement. Other agreements or contracts setting forth the plan, method and parties responsible for the construction of any required public improvements shown in the final plat documents may also be required.


(5) Construction plans of public improvements. Construction plans for public improvements to be installed within a subdivision shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the City. Multiple copies of such documents shall be provided in accordance with the schedule of required copies, with payment of the

applicable fee as adopted by the City Council. No grading activities and no public improvements shall be constructed until and unless such plans shall have been received and approved by the city. Construction plans shall include but are not limited to those items specified in this Article.


(6) Inspections of public improvements. The City Engineer shall fully inspect all phases of the construction of the improvements for subdivisions. No sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer pipes shall be covered without approval of the City Engineer, working in coordination with the appropriate utility superintendent. No flexible base material, subgrade material or stabilization shall be applied to the street subgrade without prior approval. No concrete or asphalt may be poured or placed to the base without prior approval. The City Engineer may at any time cause any construction, installation, maintenance or location of improvements to cease when, in his judgment, requirements of this Article or the standards or specifications provided in this Article have been violated, and may require such reconstruction or other work as may be necessary to correct any such violation.


(7) Acceptance and maintenance of public improvements. Following the completion of the installation or construction of required subdivision improvements, the developer shall request, and the City Engineer shall provide, a final inspection of required subdivision improvements. Upon approval of said construction, the City Engineer shall issue to the developer a statement approving the subdivision improvements and releasing the improvement guarantee.


The developer shall, upon receiving written approval from the City of the construction of subdivision improvements, provide the City with adequate surety covering the maintenance of all subdivision improvements for a period of two (2) years. The surety is subject to the approval of the City in the same manner as the improvement guarantee. The developer shall, during said two-year maintenance period, provide any and all maintenance and repair required on the subdivision improvements and as directed by the City. At the end of the two-year maintenance period, the developer and City shall conduct a final inspection of all subdivision improvements and the developer shall, where necessary, and at the direction of the City, provide any and all final maintenance and repair to all subdivision improvements prior to the City's letter of acceptance of the improvements for maintenance purposes.


(8) Finished plans. Finished plans, or "as-builts," attested to by a professional engineer, of all public improvements as installed shall be required before the City will accept the improvements.


Sec. 14-13. Annexation.


Any area proposed for annexation to the corporate limits of the City shall be studied by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission and a public hearing held on the proposed annexation, in accordance with state statutes, prior to the incorporation of the area into the City.



ARTICLE 2.  CITY PLANNING, ZONING AND VARIANCE COMMISSION.


Section 14-14. City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission; establishment.


(1)  There is established a City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission pursuant to Section 8.4 of the Charter.


(2)  The terms "City Planning Commission", "Planning Commission", "Commission", "Board of Adjustment", or "The Board of Zoning Adjustment of the City of Trinidad, Colorado", whenever used in this Chapter, shall mean "City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission".


(3)  Membership; appointment; term; removal; vacancy.


(a)  The City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City Council and shall not be a member of the City Council or a Council Officer, as defined in Section 2-16 of the Code of Ordinances, nor serve on the Board of Appeals.  Of the initial seven (7) members, five (5) shall be current members of the City Planning Commission, which shall cease to exist upon the effective date of this ordinance.  Their terms shall expire at the conclusion of the terms to which they were appointed to the Planning Commission.  The remaining two (2) members shall be appointed to four (4) year terms.  Upon expiration of the initial terms of office, all subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years, or until a successor takes office.


(b) The City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission members shall be subject to removal for just cause by a majority vote of the Council.  Just cause shall include but not be limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interests, malfeasance in office, or excessive absences.  Absences by members of the board of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six-month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal.  The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of general circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a letter so indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised. (Ord. 1749, eff., 4-16-04)


(c)  Any vacancy which shall occur other than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.


(d)  All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and shall be bona fide

residents of the City.  If any member ceases to reside in the City, his/her membership on the Commission shall immediately terminate.


(4)  Organization and meetings.  The Commission shall elect its Chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine.  The term of the Chairman shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for re-election.  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month.  It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a

record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record.


(5)  Appearance before Commission or City Council.  No member of the Commission shall appear on his/her own behalf, or on behalf of any private person, before either the City Panning, Zoning and Variance Commission or the City Council in connection with any zone change request or request for variance.


Section 14-15. Powers and duties of Commission.


(1)  The Commission shall have the duty to prepare and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the City, including any areas outside of its boundaries subject to the approval of the legislative or governing body having jurisdiction thereof, which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the City.  Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the Commission's recommendation for the development of such territory including, among other things:  The general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields, and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utility or terminals; a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises.


(2)  The Commission, in the preparation of the master plan, shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the City and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory.  The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditures of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements.


(3)  As preparation of the master plan progresses, the Commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one (1) or more major sections or divisions of the City or one (1) or more of the foregoing or other functional matters to be included in the plan.  The Commission may amend, extend or add to the plan from time to time.

(4)  The Commission shall have such additional powers that are necessary and incidental for the carrying into effect or discharging the powers and duties conferred by this Article, and such as shall seem necessary and proper to provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the prosperity, improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the City and the inhabitants thereof.


Section 14-16. Adoption of master plan - Procedure.


(1)  The Commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the City or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendments or extensions thereof or additions thereto.  Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the Commission shall hold at least one (1)public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and in the official newspaper of the County.  The adoption of the plan, or any part, or amendment, or extension or addition, shall be by resolution of the Commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the entire membership of the Commission.


(2)  The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matters intended by the Commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.  An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the City Council and after the approval by said body shall be filed with the Clerk and Recorder of the County. (Code 1958, Sec. 18-3.)


Section 14-17. Filing and approval of plats.


Whenever the Commission shall have adopted a major street plan of the territory within its subdivision control or part thereof, as provided in Section 14-16, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of the County in which such territory or part is located, no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by the Commission and such approval entered on the plat by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission. (Code 1958, Sec. 18-5.)


Section 14-18. Building and improvement requirements.


Whenever the Commission shall have adopted a master plan, the City shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, curb, or light any street or lay or authorize water mains or sewers or connections to be laid in any street, nor shall any building be erected on any lot within such territory or part, nor shall a building permit be issued therefor unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such buildings are proposed to be placed:


(1)  Shall have been accepted, opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal status of a public street prior to that time; or


(2)  Corresponds with a street shown on the official master plan or with a street or subdivision plat

approved by the Commission or with a street on a street plat made and adopted by the Commission or with a street accepted by the Council or by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Council after disapproval by the Commission.


ARTICLE 3.  TRINIDAD METRO AREA COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN.


Section 14-19. Repealed (Ord. 1647, eff., 10/27/00)




ARTICLE 4.  ZONING ORDINANCE.


DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 14-20. Title.


This Article shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance" of the City of Trinidad, Colorado," and may be cited as such.

State law reference:  As to zoning power of City, see C.R.S. 1973, Title 31, Art. 23.


Section 14-21. Purpose.


This Ordinance is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, by lessening congestion in the streets and roads; securing safety from fire and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; protection of the tax base; and securing economy in governmental expenditures.


Section 14-22. Authority.


The Zoning Ordinance and Zone District Map of Trinidad, Colorado are adopted and approved pursuant to authority conferred by Colorado State Law, Title 31, Article 23, Colorado Revised Statutes and the City Charter.


Section 14-23. Definitions.


As used in this Article, certain terms and words are hereby defined and shall have the following meanings unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:


(1) Accessory uses and structures shall mean a use naturally and normally incidental to a use by right, and complying with all of the following conditions:


(a)  Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the operation of the use by right;


(b)  Is operated and maintained under the same ownership as the use by right;


(c)  Includes only those structures or structural features consistent with the use by right;

(d)  May include home occupations, as defined in this Section.


(e) May not exceed a maximum of 75% of the square footage of the principal structure for the combined total of all accessory structures or accessory uses. (Ord. 1721, Sec. 14-23 (1)(3) eff., 4/25/03)



(2) Alley shall mean a public, dedicated right-of-way used primarily as a service or secondary means of access and egress to the service side of abutting property.


(3) Apartment shall mean a room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling used or designed for occupancy by a single family.


(4) Basement shall mean a story having part, but not more than one half (½) of its height below grade.  A basement is counted as a story for the purposes of height regulations if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes.


(5) Boarding house :  See Lodging house.


(6) Building area shall mean that portion of the lot that can be occupied by the principal use, excluding the front, rear and side yards.


(7) Building, attached shall mean a building which at least part of a wall is common with another building, or which is connected to another building by a roof which exceeds six feet (6') in width between opposite open ends.


(8) Building, detached shall mean a building which is separate from another building or buildings on the same lot. Buildings connected only with a roof not more than six feet (6') wide between opposite open ends shall be deemed to be detached.


(9) Building height shall mean the vertical distance as measured from the average finished grade at the building set-back to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable and hip roofs.  Chimneys, ventilators, pipes, spires or similar items shall be exclusive of building height.


(10) Building Inspector shall mean the Building Inspector of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(11) Building set-back shall mean an imaginary line extending across the full width or side of a lot, parallel with the street right-of-way line or property line and outside of which no building or structures shall be constructed


(12) City shall mean the City of Trinidad.


(13) City Council shall mean the governing body of the City of Trinidad, Colorado.


(14) Commission shall mean the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission of the City of Trinidad.


(15) Comprehensive Plan shall mean the Trinidad Metropolitan Comprehensive Plan.


(16) Dwelling shall mean a structure or portion of a structure which is designed for occupancy as living quarters or sleeping quarters.


(17) Dwelling, single family shall mean a structure or portion of a structure, including a manufactured home, as defined in Section 31-23-301(5)(a), C.R.S., and in this Section, which is designed for occupancy as living quarters or sleeping quarters exclusively by one family.


(18) Dwelling, two family shall mean a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by two families.


(19) Dwelling, multiple family shall mean a structure or group of structures, attached or detached which is (are) designed for occupancy as living quarters or sleeping quarters by more than one family.


(20) Dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by only one family unit.


(21) Family shall mean one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying a dwelling unit as members of a single housekeeping organization. A family may include not more than two persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption.


(22) Frontage shall mean all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the property line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. Corner lots shall have only one frontage.  Frontage for a single use which may extend for more than one platted lot shall be the total linear distance of all lots of the use along one side of a street, and shall be considered as a single frontage.


(23) Garage, private shall mean an accessory building or portion of a main building on the same lot and used for the storage only of private, passenger motor vehicles, not more than two of which are owned by others than the occupants of the main building.


(24) Garage, repair shall mean a building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junk yards.


(25) Grade level shall mean the average of the ground levels of a  lot, prior to construction thereon, measured at the center of all walls of a building.


(26) Gross leasable area shall mean the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and

exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any;    expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.


(27) Guest room shall mean a room occupied by one or more guests for compensation and in which no provision is made for cooking, but including rooms in a dormitory for sleeping purposes primarily.


(28) Home occupation shall mean any non-residential use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on solely by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for dwelling purposes and does not occupy more than 20 percent (20%) of the total floor space of the dwelling unit or accessory structure and which use does not require more than two customers per twenty-four hour day.


(29) Hotel or motel shall mean a building or group of attached or detached buildings designed for occupancy by short-term or part-time residents who are lodged with or without meals and in which no facilities are provided for cooking in individual rooms.


(30) Junk yard shall mean an area two hundred (200) square feet or more, or any area not more than fifty feet (50') from any street, used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials or goods, or used for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, or parts thereof.


(31) Lot or parcel shall mean a piece, plot or area of land, of contiguous assemblage as established by survey, plat or deed, occupied or to be occupied by a building, or a unit group of buildings, and/or accessory buildings thereto or for other use, together with such open spaces as may be required under these regulations and having its frontage on a street or officially approved place.


(32) Manufactured home shall mean a single family dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; is not less than twenty-four feet (24') in width and thirty-six feet (36') in length; is installed on an engineered, permanent foundation; has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitch roof; and is certified pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974", 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq., as amended.


(33) Mobile home shall mean a portable structure which has no foundation other than a chassis supported by wheels or jacks and which is designed and constructed to provide for occupancy as a dwelling unit.


(34) Mobile home park shall mean any lot or parcel of land on which a mobile home is parked.


(35) Mobile home space shall mean a parcel of land within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.


(36) Mobile home subdivision shall mean a subdivision of land by recorded plat to be used exclusively for the accommodation of mobile homes.


(37) Modular or pre-fabricated home shall mean a structure manufactured, assembled or

constructed in whole or in part at a site other than on its foundation, and which is designed and constructed to provide for occupancy as a dwelling unit.


(38) Nonconforming uses shall mean any building or land lawfully occupied and used at the time of passage of these regulations or amendments thereto, which use does not conform after the passage of these regulations or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.


(39) Off-street loading space shall mean a space, not a part of a public thoroughfare, designed for the loading and unloading of vehicles servicing buildings adjacent thereto. Such berths shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width and twenty-five feet (25') in length, exclusive of access isles and maneuvering space.


(40) Off-street parking space shall mean an off-street, hard-surfaced, dust-free space designed and intended to be occupied by a parked automobile, which is a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in area exclusive of maneuvering and roadway space.


(41) Permit shall mean a document issued by the City of Trinidad granting permission to perform an act or service which is regulated by the City.


(42) Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall mean a development of land in a manner which allows, in conformance with the provisions of this Article, the following:  A variety of uses and/or densities in addition to those ordinarily allowed by right or by condition in the designated zone district, for which land may be developed in order to allow for uniqueness and overall flexibility of development in special instances as may be approved by the City.


(43) Public hearing shall mean a legally advertised meeting held by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission or City Council at which time citizens' opinions may be voiced concerning the subject of the hearing.


(44) Qualified planner shall mean an individual meeting the requirements of planner in charge as defined by the Colorado State Division of Planning or an individual holding full membership in the American Institute of Planners.


(45) Residential area shall mean the land area devoted to residential uses, the build able area, not including streets, parking areas, or required usable open space areas.


(46) Right-of-way shall mean the entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used by the public for circulation and service.


(47) Road :  See Street.


(48) Set-back shall mean the required distance, and the land resulting therefrom, between the edge of the right-of-way of a public roadway, or some other designated line, and the closest possible line of a conforming structure.


(49) Sexually Oriented Businesses : means one or more of the businesses defined as such in Section 14-172. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(50) Street shall mean the entire dedicated public right-of-way, providing for the pedestrian and vehicular movement of people and goods. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(51) Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts and arbors or breeze-ways, but excepting utility poles, fences, retaining walls and ornamental light fixtures. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(52) Structural alterations :  Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girder, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(53) Trailer park :  See Mobile home park. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(54) Travel trailer shall mean any trailer designed for occupancy which is thirty-three feet (33') or less in length and eight feet (8') or less in width and not used as a dwelling or dwelling unit. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(55) Usable open space (public or quasi-public) shall mean open area designed and developed for uses including, but not limited to, recreation, courts, gardens, parks, and walkways. The term shall not include space devoted to street parking and loading areas. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(56) Variance shall mean the relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Regulations in relation to height, area, size and open spaces where specific physical conditions, unique to the site, would create an unreasonable hardship in the development of the site for permitted uses. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(57) Yard shall mean an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.  In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(58) Yard, front shall mean a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and extending from the front lot line to the front of the main building or any projections thereof.  The front yard shall be on the side of the lot which has been established as frontage by the house numbering system. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(59) Yard, rear shall mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building including any projections. On interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.  In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(60) Yard, side shall mean a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and being the space between the side lot line and the side of the main building including any projections. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


(61) Zone district shall mean a zoned area in which the same zoning regulations apply throughout. (Ord. 1738, eff. 10/31/03)


Section 14-24. Establishment of zone districts.


(1)  In order to carry out the purpose of this Article, the City of Trinidad, is hereby divided into four (4) basic zoning districts and eleven (11) secondary-level districts.  The basic districts are defined as follows:

(a)  E - Established District - Established areas of the community where the character of land use is stable and few changes are anticipated in the immediately foreseeable future.  The district should also include rehabilitation or restoration, particularly of a historic nature, in order to maintain the area's established character.  The quality of structures is not expected to deteriorate into a sub-standard classification in the immediately foreseeable future.  The district may also include certain vacant lands immediately contiguous to or part of a single neighborhood contained within this district.


(b)  G - Growth District - Areas where the use of land is in the process of major change, primarily from a vacant or rural character to a more intensive use of a variety of classifications.  Most new development as well as areas of annexation are expected to occur in this district.  The growth district should allow for such site design techniques as density development, planned unit development, shopping centers,  industrial parks or other such uses.

(c)  T - Transitional District - Areas of the community which are undergoing or are expected to undergo land use changes throughout the immediately foreseeable future which are a direct manifestation of plan implementation.


(d)  R - Redevelopment District - Areas which will be subject to substantial changes of land use character.  The redevelopment aspects could include such techniques as the clearing and rebuilding of areas, the use or reuse of lands for new or different purposes, all as rehabilitation of buildings in an area for different uses; all as opposed to the maintenance of an area's character as intended by the Established District.


(2)   For more definitive use separation and for distinction by control of density, any one or all of the basic zoning districts may be sub-classified into as many or as few of the following districts, hereinafter known as second-level zoning districts, as may be in harmony with the character and application of the basic district. The second-level districts are defined as follows:


(a)  O - Open - Areas which are used for open space, parks, major public areas or vacant land.


(b)  RE - Residential Estate - Land used for large lot residential development of a single family conformity and containing a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet.


(c)  LDR - Low Density Residential - Land used for single family residential, purposes and containing a minimum lot area of 6,250 square feet.


(d)  MDR - Medium Density Residential - Land uses for residential purposes accommodating a variety of housing types such as those of a         single-family, duplex, triplex or townhouse conformity.  Maximum density is ten (10) dwelling units per acre and minimum lot area is 6,000 square feet.


(e)  HDR - High Density Residential - Land used for multiple-family residential purposes.  Maximum density is twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre and minimum lot area is 6,000 square feet.


(f)  MHR - Mobile Home Residential - Land used exclusively for mobile homes.  Minimum land area for this district is five (5) acres and the land area for individual mobile homes is 5,000 square feet.


(g)  NS - Neighborhood Service  -  Areas which are served by convenience types of retail establishments primarily on a neighborhood basis.


(h)  CC - Community Commercial - The areas of most intensive commercial use in the community.


(i)   I - Industrial  -  All areas of industrial use in which are accommodated the processing, manufacturing and fabricating enterprises.  This district may also accommodate certain commercial uses.


(j)  PUD - Planned Unit Development  -  Development of an area by means of a design technique which allows flexibility and imagination in the types of uses and arrangements of facilities in an optimum manner in harmony with adjacent properties.


(k)  HP - Historic Preservation  -  The area of Trinidad which has been identified for historic preservation.  The area is subject to special design requirements and use restrictions in order to preserve its historic character.


Section 14-25. Zoning Map and boundaries.


(1)  The location of the zone districts hereby established are shown on the map entitled "Zone District Map of Trinidad Colorado," dated September 17, 1973, and as may be amended thereafter under the provisions of this Article.  Such map along with explanatory matter thereof, is hereby made a part of this Article as if the same were set forth in full herein.  In determining the boundaries of zone districts shown on the Zone District Map, the following rules shall apply:


(a)  Unless otherwise indicated, the zone boundaries are the center lines of rights-of-way for

streets, roads, highways, alleys, ditches and railroads or such lines extended.


(b)  Where the property is unsubdivided property, zone district boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale on the Zone District Map.  A legal description acceptable to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall be made available if a controversy arises concerning zone district boundaries.


(c)  Where a district boundary is shown by a specific dimension as being located at any given distance from any right-of-way line, such specific dimension shall govern.


(d)  The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, upon application or upon its own motion, determines the location in cases where uncertainty exists, after application of the rules of this Article.


(2) Annexation.  Whenever a proposal is made to add territory to the city limits of the City of Trinidad, said proposal shall include the specified land use and zone district designation.  The proposal shall be presented to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission for review and the Commission shall prepare and submit recommendations to the City Council.  The City Council shall by ordinance designate the zone district or districts into which the territory will be included and shall


be governed by the provisions of this Section.  In the absence of the adoption of such ordinance, territory annexed shall automatically become a part of the G - Growth Basic District.


(3)  Vacations.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, the zone district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.


Section 14-26. General district regulations.


(1)  No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zone district (basic district or second level district) in which it is located and the provisions of this Article shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.


(2)  No building permit shall be approved and no structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered on any subdivided land unless the subject lot, area or tract is officially included within a second level zone district as set forth in this Article.


(3)  No part of a lot, open area, or off-street parking area designated for any use or uses or structure or structures for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be designated as a part of a lot similarly required for another use or uses or structure.


(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limits herein established.


(5)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area and special regulations of the district in which the building is located.


(6)  The minimum yards and open spaces, including lot area per dwelling unit, are established by these regulations and no lot area shall be reduced below the district requirements contained in these regulations.


(7)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one building on one lot except as otherwise provided herein.


(8)  The listing of any use as being permitted in any particular district shall be deemed to be an exclusion of such use from any other district, unless such use is specifically permitted in another district under the language set forth in the use regulations.


(9)   Regulations for the districts are set forth in Division 2 through Division 12 of this Article, provided, however, that exceptions to any such regulations or such additional regulations as are set forth in other Sections hereof shall apply; provided, further that the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission may, under certain conditions, vary these regulations and approve the issuance of building permits for the establishment of certain uses, all as set forth in Division 18 of this Article.  Certain regulations applicable to pre-established uses that do not conform to the provisions contained herein are set forth in Division 15 of this Article.


(10)  Regulating Structures within the E-Established & G-Growth, Basic Zoning Districts. (Ord. 1665, eff., 6-5-01)


(a) All structures, requiring a building permit, constructed within the E & G-Basic Zone Districts must have a roof pitch of equal to or greater than 6/12. (Ord. 1665, eff., 6-5-01)


(b) All single-family dwelling units constructed within the E & G - Basic Zone Districts shall have a door facing the front yard (front door). (Ord. 1665, eff., 6-5-01)


(c) All single family dwelling units within the E & G - Basic Zone Districts shall have a front porch facing the front yard, equal to or greater than 16 sq. ft. (Ord. 1665, eff., 6-5-01)


(d) The City Manager shall have the authority to grant    administrative variance relief from Section 14-26(10) if it is determined appropriate.  All requests for relief have the right to the variance process through the Planning, Variance and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 1665, eff., 6-5-01)

(11) Storage containers/shipping containers are allowed for a maximum of thirty days on private property in Low Density, Medium Density, and Historic Preservation zoning districts without an active building permit. On private property in the aforenamed zoning districts, with an active building permit, storage containers are allowed for a maximum of 180 days. The maximum size of any storage containers/shipping containers shall be 160 square feet. The maximum cumulative or total square footage for multiple storage containers/shipping containers shall not exceed 160 square feet. Storage containers/ shipping containers may only be placed for no more than thirty days on a private driveway or within the required setbacks of the property. (Ord. 2086, eff. 10/25/19)


Section 14-27. Uses by right, conditional uses and special uses.


(1)   Each zone district provides for use characteristics peculiar to it; thus all allowable uses require controls complimentary thereto.   Two (2) groups of uses are provided for each district as follows:

(a)  Uses allowed by right - Uses by right as set forth in a Zone district.  Such uses are allowed without further application or administrative review.


(b)  Conditional uses - Uses specifically allowed within a zone district provided certain conditions are met by the property owner. (Ord. 1941, Sec. 14-27(1)(b), repealed and reenacted, eff. 6/28/13)


(I) Standard Conditional Use Permit (CUP) conditions.


(A) All CUP conditions shall be set forth by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) and shall be agreed to and carried out by the property owner or by a duly authorized agent of the property owner.


(B) Under no circumstance shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued by the Building Inspector for any structures associated with the CUP until all of the conditions specified by the Commission have been met.  Exception for multiple structures under one CUP: A Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for each structure within the CUP once all conditions specific to an individual structure have been met


(C) All CUP approvals shall remain in effect for a specified period of time with the following exceptions:


(i) Any conditional use that is not established within one year of its approval, discontinued for at least one year or replaced by another use of the land shall expire.

(ii) Before a conditional use can be transferred to a new owner, said new owner must submit a letter to the Commission agreeing to the CUP terms and conditions. No business license shall be issued to the new owner and/or an agent of the new owner until said letter is submitted to the Commission. If the new owner does not feel that he or she can fully comply with the terms and conditions of the CUP, he or she may submit an application to the Commission for a CUP modification.


(II) Conditional Use Permit (CUP) application procedures.


(A) The Commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing for all CUP applications.


(B) Notice of the time and place of each CUP hearing shall appear at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad.

(C) The Commission shall keep a record of the proceedings from each hearing, a copy of which shall be available to any party for a reasonable fee.


(D) At the conclusion of the hearing or within not more than thirty (30) days thereafter, the Commission shall render its decision either orally or in writing. The applicant shall be issued a copy of the written decision of the Commission or a written notice of the oral decision of the Commission as soon as practicable after the decision has been rendered. Unless such decision shall be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 14-139 of the City of Trinidad Code of Ordinances, the decision shall become final at the end of the fifteen (15) day appeal period.


(III)  Conditional Use Permit (CUP) periodic review procedures.


(A) The Commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing to review CUPs at an interval not less than once per year to ensure that the conditions associated with the CUP continue to be met by the property owner.


(B) Notice of the time and place of said public hearing before the Commission shall appear at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad. Written notice of the hearing must also be delivered by the City to the property owner at least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled hearing date.


(C) The Commission shall keep a record of the proceedings from each hearing, a copy of which shall be available to any party for a reasonable fee.


(D) At the conclusion of the hearing or within not more than thirty (30) days thereafter, the Commission shall render its decision to reapprove or revoke the CUP either orally or in writing. The applicant shall be issued a copy of the written decision of the Commission or a written notice of the oral decision of the Commission as soon as practicable after the decision has been rendered. Unless such decision shall be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 14-139 of the City of Trinidad Code of Ordinances, the decision shall become final at the end of the fifteen (15) day appeal period.


(2)    In those zone districts specified in this Article, uses by special permit may be allowed.  Uses by special permit are those uses specifically set forth within a zone district and allowed only by a special permit issued by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission and approved by the City Council.  Said special permit shall be issued only after review and recommendation by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, public hearing and approval by City Council.

Section 14-28. Zone district classifications.


(1)  The E - Established District shall be sub-classified into the following second level zone districts:


(a)  Open - O

(b)  Low Density Residential - LDR

(c)  Medium Density Residential - MDR

(d)  High Density Residential - HDR

(e)  Neighborhood Service - NS

(f)  Community Commercial - CC

(g)  Industrial - I

(h)  Historic Preservation - HP


(2)  The Growth District shall be sub-classified into the following second level zone districts:


(a)  Open - O

(b)  Residential Estate - RE

(c)  Low Density Residential - LDR

(d)  Medium Density Residential - MDR

(e)  High Density Residential - HDR

(f)  Mobile Home Residential - MHR

(g)  Neighborhood Service - NS

(h)  Community Commercial - CC

(i)  Industrial - I

(j)  Planned Unit Development - PUD


(3)  The Transitional District shall be sub-classified into the following second level zone districts (amended Ord. 1906, eff. 11-26-10):

(a)  Open – O

(b)  Low Density Residential - LDR

(c)  Medium Density Residential - MDR

(d)  High Density Residential - HDR

(e)  Mobile Home Residential- MHR

(f)  Neighborhood Service - NS

(g)  Community Commercial – CC (Ord. 1906, eff. 11-26-10)

(h)  Industrial - I

(i)  Planned Unit Development - PUD


(4)  The Redevelopment District shall be sub-classified into the following second level zone districts:

(a)  Open - O

(b)  Low Density Residential - LDR

(c)  Medium Density Residential- MDR

(d)  High Density Residential - HDR

(e)  Neighborhood Service - NS

(f)  Community Commercial - CC

(g)  Industrial - I

(h)  Planned Unit Development - PUD


Section 14-29. Uses not itemized.


(1)    Upon application or on its own initiative, the City Council may, by ordinance, add to the uses listed for a zone district any other similar use which conforms to the conditions set forth in the following special findings:


(a)  Such use is appropriate to the general physical and environmental character of the district to which it is added.


(b)  Such use does not create any more hazard to or alteration of the natural environment than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other uses permitted in the district to which it is added.


(c)  Such use does not create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, or other objectional influences or more traffic hazards than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other uses permitted in the district to which it is added.


(d)  Such use is compatible with the uses existing and permitted in the district to which it is added and will not adversely affect the Historic Preservation District.


(3) When any use has been added to the list of permitted uses in any district in accordance with this Section, such use shall be deemed to be listed in the appropriate section of this Article and shall be added thereto at the time of adoption.



DIVISION 2.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE O - OPEN DISTRICT.


Section 14-30. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Ranching, farming and general agriculture, except feed lots and animal sale barns.


(2)  Parks and outdoor recreation facilities.


(3)  Public and semi-public uses except as enumerated in Section 14-31, Conditional Uses.


(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted by right.


Section 14-31. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Open District:

( a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations, and sewer lift stations.


(d)  Commercial outdoor recreation facilities.


(e)  Commercial and public parking lots.


(f)  Hospitals and sanitariums for contagious or infectious diseases, penal or mental institutions and nursing homes.


(g)  Cemeteries and mausoleums.


(2)  For each instance the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of   improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, a statement of the time sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission may in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-32. Uses Allowed by special permit.


(1)  Airports, provided:

(a)  They do not endanger the immediate area; and

(b)  They meet all local, state and federal regulations.


(2)  Sand and gravel pits or other such excavation or surface mining subject to the following:


(a)  When the application for a special permit is filed, the applicant shall provide a plan showing the land proposed for excavation.  This plan shall show the contour intervals, any improvements thereon and to a distance of three hundred feet (300') in all directions from the subject.


(b)  Concurrent with the above, the applicant shall also provide a plan showing the contemplated changed condition of the land due to the excavation.  This plan must include the contemplated re-use of the land, what restoration or curing of the land is planned, and the contours on at least two foot (2') intervals.


(c)  No excavation or processing of excavated materials shall be permitted closer than thirty feet (30') from the boundary of adjacent property nor closer than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') from any existing residence, unless by written agreement the owner or owners of such adjacent property consent to a lesser distance and the Commission approves such lesser distance.  The Commission may set a greater distance than that set forth above when in its opinion it is justified.


(d)  The Commission shall specify the degree of slopes of banks for all excavations, the depth of and the distance from any public structures when excavations are made in or near stream beds.  When excavations are near or adjacent to irrigation canals or ditches, the applicant shall secure a written agreement from the ditch company or from officials responsible for the canals or ditches indicating their determination as to setbacks from public rights-of-way when excavation is contemplated near such rights-of-way.


(e)  Sand and gravel shall be excavated in such a manner so as to assure the convenient restoration of the land and to hold to a minimum any adverse effects on adjacent land as a result of piling or storing the overburden material.


(f)  The sand and gravel shall be excavated in such a manner so as to leave an average of two feet (2') of undisturbed sand or gravel as evenly as possible, over the entire excavation tract, to provide a water bearing strata for any existing ground water, and more if the Commission deems necessary.


(g)  After an excavation has been completed, the operator shall spread the excess waste materials evenly over the bottom of the excavation.  The topsoil shall then be spread evenly to a minimum depth of eighteen inches (18").  The topsoil shall be spread last so as to

produce a new surface for the purpose of growing crops, trees, shrubs, etc.  Operations shall be conducted in such a manner that excavated areas will not collect or permit stagnant water to remain therein.


(h)  An excavation operation shall maintain haulage roads within the premises covered by the permit and such roads shall be kept in a reasonably dust-free condition when such dust would be injurious to bordering premises.  The Commission shall specify the conditions in each instance to insure this requirement.  The hours of operation, unless otherwise specified by the Commission, shall be from seven a.m. to six p.m., or unless a national emergency arises or special permission is granted by the Commission.


(i)  The applicant shall furnish evidence of a commitment of credit in favor of the City of Trinidad or bond or certified check, in an amount calculated by the Commission to secure the site restorations as required in this section.  Guidelines for calculating the amount of said bank commitment of credit, bond or certified check could be a sum equal to the number of acres covered by the permit, multiplied by Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).  The minimum amount of such should be One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and the maximum amount, Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00). The Commission shall have the power and authority to provide for an alternative method of indemnifying the City in lieu of the above mentioned methods.


(j)  Upon the granting of a permit by the Commission, the fee schedule shall apply as set forth in Section 14-121.


(k)  All permits shall be in full force for a period of five (5) years from the date of issuance thereof unless a shorter time is set by the Commission.  Temporary permits may be renewable by the Commission for the same period of time or less, without further notice, hearing or posting of the property involved; provided, however, that the operator has complied with all the terms and conditions of the original permit.  A renewal of a new permit shall be considered a new permit with respect to fees.


(l)  The Commission shall have the power to cancel permits upon proof of violation of any of these regulations.


(3)  Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants subject to the following:


(a)  The use is accessory to a sand and gravel operation and in the finished product, the operator uses the product of the sand and gravel pit on which the operation is proposed.


(b)  Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants, which are temporary operations (six (6) months or less) shall not be subject to any of the regulations of this section, except they shall be required to obtain a permit from the Commission.



Section 14-33. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:


(1)  No structure, except one used for agricultural purposes, shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


(2)  There shall be no height limitations for agricultural buildings.


(3)  Minimum height regulations less than those provided herein may be set forth by special airport zoning regulations for buildings in an airport approach zone.


Section 14-34. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:  Eight hundred (800) square feet per structure.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  One-half (½) acre for all uses permitted by right.


(b)  For all conditional uses, one acre unless otherwise specified by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  One hundred feet (100') for each principal structure.


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than fifty feet (50') for all principal structures, unless otherwise specified by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  Measured from the rear property line, every principal or accessory building shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10').


(6)  Minimum side yard:  Measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than ten feet (10') on each side of the lot.


DIVISION 3.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE RE -RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT.


Section 14-35. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Single family dwelling units.


(2)  Home occupations.


(3)  Domestic animals, provided such animals are household pets and kennels are not maintained.


(4)  Farm animals, provided such animals are kept on a parcel of land not less than one (1) acre in area.


(5)  Fences, hedges and walls, provided they are located where they will not obstruct motorists' vision at street intersections.


(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in this district.


Section 14-36. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Residential Estate District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.

(d)  Churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, a statement of the time sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, set-backs or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.




Section 14-37. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:


No dwelling or other structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


Section 14-38. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:  Eight hundred (800) square feet per dwelling unit.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet per dwelling unit.


(b)  For all conditional uses, fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet unless otherwise specified by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.

(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  Seventy five feet (75').


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet (25') feet for all principal structures, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  Measured from the rear property line, every principal or accessory building shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10').


(6)  Minimum side yard:  Measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than ten feet (10') on each side of the lot.

DIVISION 4.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE LDR -LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-39. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Single family dwelling units.


(2)  Home occupations.


(3)  Domestic animals, provided such animals are household pets and kennels are not maintained.


(4)  Fences, hedges, and walls, provided they are located where they will not obstruct motorists' vision at street intersections.


(5)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in this district.


Section 14-40. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Low Density Residential District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(d)  Churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may in addition prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-41. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No dwelling or other structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


Section 14-42. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:


(a)  One (1) bedroom dwelling unit - six hundred fifty (650) square feet.


(b)  Two (2) bedroom dwelling unit - eight hundred (800) square feet.


(c)  Three (3) bedroom dwelling unit - nine hundred (900) square feet.


(d)  Four (4) or more bedroom dwelling unit - one thousand (1,000) square feet.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling unit.

(b)  For conditional uses, six thousand (6,000) square feet, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  Fifty feet (50').


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet (25') for all principal structures, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  Measured from the rear property line, every principal or accessory building shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10').


(6)  Minimum side yard:  Measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than five feet (5') on each side of the lot.


DIVISION 5.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE MDR - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-43. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Single family dwelling units.


(2)  Multiple family dwellings.


(3)  Home occupations.


(4)  Domestic animals, provided such animals are household pets and kennels are not maintained.


(5)  Fences, hedges, and walls, provided they will not obstruct motorists' vision at street intersections.


(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in this district.


Section 14-44. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Medium Density Residential District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


( b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(d)  Churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if  applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may, in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-45. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No dwelling or other structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


Section 14-46. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area for single or multiple family dwellings:


(a)  One (1) bedroom dwelling unit - six hundred fifty (650) square feet.


(b)  Two (2) bedroom dwelling unit - eight hundred (800) square feet.


(c)  Three (3) bedroom dwelling unit - nine hundred (900) square feet.


(d)  Four (4) or more bedroom dwelling unit - one thousand (1,000) square feet.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling.


(b)  For all conditional uses, six thousand (6,000) square feet.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  Fifty (50) feet.


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet (25') for all principal structures, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  Measured from the rear property line, every principal or accessory building shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10').


(6)  Minimum side yard:  Measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than five feet (5') on each side of the lot.



Section 14-47. Density regulations.


For multiple family dwellings, density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre of residential area.


DIVISION 6.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HDR - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-48. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Multiple family dwelling units.


(2)  Home occupations.


(3)  Domestic animals, provided such animals are household pets and kennels are not maintained.


(4)  Fences, hedges and walls, provided they are not located where they will obstruct motorists' vision at street intersections.


(5)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in this district.


Section 14-49. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the High Density Residential District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone stations.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(d)  Churches and schools or other public or other semi-public uses.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may, in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-50. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No dwelling or other structure shall exceed three and one-half (3 ½) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height.


Section 14-51. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:  Four hundred (400) square feet per 1 multiple family dwelling unit.

(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling.


(b)  For all conditional uses, six thousand (6,000) square feet, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  Fifty feet (50').


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet (25') for all principal structures, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  Measured from the rear property line, every principal or accessory building shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10').


(6)  Minimum side yard:  Measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than five feet (5') on each side of the lot.



Section 14-52. Density regulations.


For multiple family dwellings, density shall not exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre of residential area.


DIVISION 7.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE MHR - MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-53. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Mobile homes designed for occupancy by one family.


(2)  Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions.


(3)  Truck campers and travel trailers.


(4)  Home occupations.


(5)  Domestic animals, provided such animals are household pets and kennels are not maintained.


(6)  Fences, hedges and walls, provided they are not located where they will obstruct motorists' vision at street intersections.


(7)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted by this district.



Section 14-54. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Mobile Home Residential District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of proposed structures, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may, in addition prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-55. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No mobile home or other structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


Section 14-56. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:


(a)  Two hundred (200) square feet per mobile home in a mobile home park.


(b)  Six hundred (600) square feet per mobile home in a mobile home subdivision.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Four thousand (4,000) square feet per mobile home in a mobile home park.


(b)  Three thousand (3,000) square feet per truck camper or travel trailer.


(c)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per mobile home in a mobile home subdivision.


(d)  For all conditional uses, five thousand (5,000) square feet unless otherwise specified by the Commission.

(e)  Any newly created free-standing Mobile Home Residential District shall contain at least five (5) acres of land.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  Forty feet (40').


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the nearest edge of the roadway, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') for all mobile homes, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.  For mobile home courts fronting on a State or Federal Highway, the required front yard shall be fifty feet (50').


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  There shall be twenty feet (20') between mobile homes or accessory buildings, or if measured from the rear property line, every mobile home shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10')

(6)  Minimum side yard:  There shall be twenty feet (20')  between mobile homes or accessory buildings, or if measured from the side property line, every mobile home shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on each side of the lot. Where the side yard abuts a State or Federal Highway, the required side yard shall be fifty feet (50').


Section 14-57. Design requirements.


(1)  A Mobile Home Residential District may be created upon petition for an amendment to the Zoning District Map.  Any petition for this zone change shall be accompanied by a site design by a registered engineer, architect, landscape architect, or qualified planner, complete in detail showing the following:


(a)  Location and legal description.

(b)  Entrance to and exits from the court.


(c)  Vehicular roadways, driveways and pedestrian walks.  All roads shall be designed and built to City specifications.

(d)  Plans showing size and arrangement of mobile home lots and stands and location of roadways and service and utility buildings.


(e)  Topographical map showing original and final contours at two foot    (2') intervals.


(f)  Provisions for drainage.


(g)  Area set aside for recreation, clothes washing and drying, storage, and off-street parking.


(h)  Fencing and screen planting on the premises.


(i)  Plans for water supply and distribution.


(j)  Plans for sewage disposal and collection.


(k)  Provisions for trash and garbage storage and removal.


(l)  Plans for underground gas, electric, and telephone service connections to each space.


(m)  Typical lot plan.


(2)  The petitioner shall consult with the school district officials and secure a written statement to be submitted with the petition as to the impact on the school district by the increased number of school children from the increased residential density of the mobile home court.


(3)  The petition shall also be accompanied by a statement of conformance with the Federal Housing Administrations' Minimum Property Standards for Mobile Home Courts.


(4)  For each mobile home lot and for four (4) truck campers, or travel trailer lots, there shall be provided:


(a)  Recreational area in the amount of three hundred (300) square feet.


(b)  Space for mechanical washing and clothes drying facilities in the amount of twenty-five (25) square feet.


(c)  Two (2) off-street parking spaces for each lot, except for truck camper or travel trailer lots.

(5)  Service and utility buildings and appurtenances, garbage and trash containers, racks and rack locations, rodent and insect control, and water and sewage provisions must meet with the approval of the Colorado Department of Health, the local health authority and the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Trinidad.



DIVISION 8.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE NS -NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT.


Section 14-58. Uses permitted by right:


(1)  Business, professional and semi-professional offices.


(2)  Medical clinics and pharmacies operated in conjunction with a clinic.


(3)  Barber and beauty shops.


(4)  Club or lodge (nonprofit).


(5)  Community service agency.


(6)  Day nursery or child-care center.


(7)  Accessory building or use (not involving open storage), when located on the same lot.


(8)  Commercial and public parking lots.


(9)  All uses permitted in the HDR District.



Section 14-59. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Neighborhood Service District:


(a)  Enterprises or businesses of the same nature or class as those listed above in Section 14- 58, which in the opinion of the Commission, as evidenced by a resolution of record, are not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the area than are those listed in said Section 14-58.


(b)  Enterprises of a retail trade nature catering specifically to neighborhood convenience trade which in the opinion of the Commission, as evidenced by a resolution of record, are not of a different intensity of use or character, nor are more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the area than existing businesses. Under no circumstance shall this provision allow gasoline service stations, automobile parts supply stores or automobile repair garages of any kind.


(c)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(d)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(e)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of structures proposed, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.

(3)  The Commission may, in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.





Section 14-60. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No structure shall exceed three and one-half (3 ½) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height.


Section 14-61. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:

(1)  Minimum floor area:  No minimum requirements.


(2)  Minimum lot area:  No minimum requirements.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  No minimum requirements.


(4)  Minimum front yard:  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet (25') for all principal structures, which may be used to meet off-street parking requirements, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  No minimum requirements.


(6)  Minimum side yard:  No minimum requirements.


DIVISION 9.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE CC - COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-62. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  All businesses of a retail or service nature.


(2)  Wholesaling of products provided that storage space does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area.


(3)  Fabrication or assembling incidental to retail sales from the premises, provided that not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area occupied by such business is used for manufacturing, processing, assembling, treatment, installation and repair of products.


(4)  Mortuary or embalming establishment or school.


(5)  Accessory building or use (not involving open storage), when located on the same lot.


(6)  All uses permitted in the HDR - High Density Residential District.


(7)  All uses permitted in the NS - Neighborhood Service District.


(8)  Churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses. (Ord. 1630, eff., 5/26/00)



Section 14-63. Conditional uses.

(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Community Commercial District:


(a)  Enterprises or businesses of the same nature or class as those listed in Section 14-62, which in the opinion of the Commission, as evidenced by a resolution of record, are not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the area than are  those listed in said Section 14- 62.


(b)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(c)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(d)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of proposed structures, description and placement of screening or screen

planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may, in addition, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space, or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.


Section 14-64. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No structure shall exceed five (5) stories or fifty feet (50') in height.


Section 14-65. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:  No minimum requirements.


(2)  Minimum lot area:  No minimum requirements.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  No minimum requirements.


(4)  Minimum front yard:  No minimum requirements except that motor fuel pumps shall not be erected less than twenty-five feet (25') from the front property line.


(5)  Rear yard:  No minimum requirements.


(6)  Minimum side yard:  No minimum requirements.


DIVISION 10.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE I - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.


Section 14-66. Uses permitted by right.


(1)  Any kind of scientific research, manufacturing, compounding, storage of products or raw materials, fabrication, assembling, processing or treatment of products, distribution centers, food and beverage processing or other similar types of use.  All uses by right are subject to the industrial performance standards as set forth in Section 14-71.


(2)  Builders' supply yards, sale of cement and concrete products, and lumber yards.


(3)  Accessory buildings and uses, including off-street parking facilities customarily incident to the uses permitted by this district.


(4)  All uses permitted in the CC - Community Commercial District, except residential uses.



Section 14-67. Conditional uses.


(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Industrial District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.

(d)  Dwelling unit, provided a use permitted by right is taking place therein.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of proposed structures, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development  and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.


(3)  The Commission may, in addition prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity or limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, setbacks or required open space or other such conditions which may be deemed necessary by the Commission.

Section 14-68.            Uses by special permit.


(1)  A special permit may be issued for any of the following uses:

(a)  Junk yards, provided the entire land area occupied by the use is enclosed by an eight foot (8') fence.


(b)  Storage of gasoline and petroleum products of more than four thousand (4,000) gallons above grade.


(c) Construction and operation of a transfer station, which is defined as a facility at which refuse, awaiting transportation to a disposal site, is transferred from one type of containerized collection receptacle into another or is processed for compaction.  Transfer stations must comply with the following requirements: (Ord. 1544, 12/28/96.)


(I) Only residential and commercial waste shall be accepted at transfer stations. Wastes such as medical waste, asbestos waste, and contaminated soil are special wastes, and shall not be accepted at transfer stations unless the transfer station is specifically designed and approved for the special waste.  Special wastes require special handling and must be disposed at approval solid waste disposal sites and facilities approved for the specific waste stream.  “Hazardous waste” as defined in 6 CCR 1007-3 §261.3 shall not be accepted at transfer stations.


(II) Transfer station shall comply with the health laws, standards, rules, and regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, the storm water rules of the Colorado Water Quality Control Commission, and all applicable local laws, ordinances and regulations.


(III) No special use permit for a transfer station shall be approved until an operating plan has been developed and submitted to the City which contains at a minimum the following:


(A) General data maps


(i) Name (s) and address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner/operator.  Name and address and phone number of the person(s) operating the facility and having the authority to take corrective action in an emergency.


(ii) Facility mailing address, county and legal description including 1/4 section, section, township and range.


(iii) Regional map depicting service area, existing and proposed.


(iv) Vicinity map showing access and service roads, zoning and land use, residences, water wells and the location of all surface water bodies, the location of 100 year flood plain boundaries, and all manmade or natural features relating to the facility within a ½ mile radius.


(v) Site map showing adjacent properties including land use, property owners names and addresses, site property boundaries and area (acres).

If proposed site is adjacent to public roads or streets, include the properties across the street or road.  The map should show the present site conditions and the projected site utilization including all site structures (such as buildings, fences, gates, entrances and exits, parking areas, on-site roadways, and signs) and the location of all water supplies and utilities.  This site map shall be certified by a state licensed surveyor and engineer.


(vi) Site maps and drawings showing all the proposed structures and areas designated for unloading, baling, compacting, storage, and loading, including the dimensions, elevations, and floor plans of these structures and areas, including the general process flow.

(vii) Facility’s drainage system and water supply system.


(B) Design criteria.


(i) Unloading and loading areas shall be:

Adequate in size to facilitate efficient unloading from the collection vehicles and the unobstructed movement of vehicles; Constructed of concrete or asphalt paving material and equipped with adequate drainage structures; Solid waste handling shall be confined to the smallest practical area.  Such handling shall be supervised by competent operating personnel who shall be familiar with proper operational procedures;12/28/96.)


Sufficient internal storage areas to provide for incoming solid waste; Exhaust removal system shall be installed in enclosed areas; and Measures shall be provided to prevent backing into pits while unloading.


(ii) On-site roads. Designed to accommodate expected traffic flow in a safe and efficient manner; The road surface design shall be suitable for heavy vehicles and the road base shall be capable of withstanding expected loads; Passable, in all weather conditions, by loaded collection and transfer vehicles.  Provisions shall be made for de-icing ramps during winter months; and Where public dumping is allowing, separate access for passenger vehicles shall be provided.


(iii) Equipment. Number, description and uses of all equipment projected to be employed including the design capacity.                                                      (Ord. 1544, 12/28/96.)


(iv) Gate and fencing. Types and heights of suitable gate and fencing material to be placed on site, to limit unauthorized persons from access to the facility when the facility is closed.


(v) Signs. A sign shall be posted, at all access points to the facility, with the hours of operation, the types of solid waste accepted and not accepted, the operating hours the facility accepts wastes, and emergency telephone numbers of a responsible party.


(vi) Buffer zones.

Buffer zone of 200 feet around the active operating area to the nearest property line when adjacent to residential zoned areas.


(C)   Operation standards.


(i) Waste characterization. The types, composition, and expected daily volume of all solid waste to be accepted at the facility in cubic yards or tons/per day, the maximum time any such waste will be sorted, and the proposed capacity of the facility.


(ii) Supervision. Facilities with permanent continually operating mechanical equipment shall have an attendant on duty at all times the facility is open to the public. (iii)  Personnel. The number, classification, and job descriptions of personnel to be employed at the facility when operating at full capacity.  A personnel training plan which includes recognizing unauthorized waste such as PCB’s and hazardous wastes, equipment operation, and any other personnel concerns.


(iv) Nuisance conditions. All reasonable measures shall be employed to collect, properly contain, and dispose of scattered litter, including frequent policing of the area, and the use of wind screens where necessary.  The facility shall be managed in such a manner that noise, dust and odors do not constitute a hazard to human health.  The facility shall be managed in such a manner that the attraction, breeding and emergence of birds, insects, rodents and other vectors do not constitute a health hazard.


(v) Off-site water. Control measures shall be provided to protect surface and ground waters, including run-off collection and discharge, designed and operated to handle a twenty-four (24) hour, twenty-five (25) year storm and equipment cleaning and wash down water.


(vi) Fire protection. Fire protection equipment shall be available at all times. A fire protection plan including provisions to prevent the spread of fire to adjoining property shall be approved by the local fire department.

(vii) Operational records. Records shall be maintained for all facilities.  These records shall include a daily log of the quantity of solid waste received and transported, as-built construction details, and variations from approved operations procedures.  Records shall be kept on-site whenever practicable or as otherwise approved.


(viii) Contingency plan. Contingency plans specifying the procedures to be followed to handle situations such as the following shall be available at all times to the transfer stations attendants: H azardous material incident, including emergency personnel, and notification procedures; Contamination of surface water or ground water; Nuisance conditions on site or confirmed beyond the site boundary; and Alternate solid waste handling system for periods of inability to operate or delays in transporting solid waste due to fires, unusual traffic conditions, equipment breakdown, hot loads, or other emergencies or undesirable conditions.


(ix) Cleaning Facilities.

Transfer stations shall be cleaned daily of all loose materials and litter, by wash-down or other approved method, to prevent odors and other nuisance conditions. All residuals shall be properly removed and disposed. All boxes, bins, pits or other container type used shall be cleaned on a schedule approved by the City.


(x) Standing water. All floors shall be free from standing water.  All drainage from cleaning areas shall be discharged to sanitary sewers or other methods that meet local pretreatment standards.


(xi) Storage adequate. Storage space for incoming solid waste shall be available at the transfer station.  Solid wastes should be loaded into the containerized collection receptacle on the same day it arrives at the transfer station. Uncompacted wastes will not be allowed to remain on the tipping floor overnight.  Removal of all putrescible solid waste from the transfer station whenever transfer containers are full, or weekly, whichever comes first, is also required.  Uncleaned transfer vehicles containing putrescible mater shall not be parked on public streets or roads except under emergency conditions.  Adequate off-street parking for facility vehicles shall be provided.


(xii) All solid waste received at a transfer station shall be transferred as soon as practicable.  All solid wastes arriving at the transfer station that are not transferred within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt shall be placed in closed containers or in totally enclosed buildings, structures, or other means of cover acceptable to the City, that deter water, birds, insects, rodents and other vectors from reaching wastes.

(xiii) Final disposal.

All solid waste passing through the transfer station shall be ultimately treated or disposed of in an approved solid water disposal site and facility.

(xiv) Water supply.

The amounts and source of water for use on site for the control of nuisance conditions, fire protection, construction purposes and personnel use shall be presented.


(xv) Inspection. The applicant shall submit to routine inspections of the transfer station facilities conducted at reasonable times by the City.


(IV) Portions of these requirements may be waived or modified by City Council in writing as long as the performance of the site under the altered requirement is as protective of public health and the environment as these regulations.


(V) Failure of the applicant to comply with all of the provisions of the operating plan submitted to the City pursuant to Subsection III, after the approval of the special use permit by the City is a violation of this Section, and shall subject the applicant to the penalty set forth in Section 1-8 of this code, and shall be grounds for the revocation of the special use permit.


(2)  The Commission may prescribe any conditions on any use approved by special permit which may be deemed necessary for compatibility within the I - Industrial Zone District.



Section 14-69. Building height limit.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:  No structure shall exceed five (5) stories or fifty feet (50') in height.


Section 14-70. Area regulations.


Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:  No minimum requirements.


(2)  Minimum lot area:  No minimum requirements.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:  No minimum requirements.


(4)  Minimum front yard:  No minimum requirements except as may be specified by the Commission.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:  No minimum requirements except as may be specified by the Commission.


(6)  Minimum side yard:  No minimum requirements except as may be specified by the Commission.


Section 14-71. Industrial performance standards.


All industrial and commercial businesses, whether established as a use by right, condition, or special permit, shall comply with the following standards to provide that these uses do not create any danger to safety in surrounding areas, do not cause water pollution and do not create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or other objectionable influences beyond the boundaries of the property in which such uses are located, and shall not be operated in any manner so as to constitute a public nuisance or hazard.


(1)  Volume of sound generated:  Every use shall be so operated that the volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated does not exceed sixty (60) decibels with a maximum increase of five (5) decibels permitted for a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour at any point of any boundary line of the property on which the use is located.


(2)  Vibration generated:  Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point of any boundary line of the property on which the use is located.


(3)  Emission of smoke and particulate matter:


(a)  Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit smoke exceeding a density of No. 1 on the Ringleman Chart.


(b)  Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit particulate matter exceeding 0.2 grains per cubic foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of 500 E F.


(c)  Every use which is an existing or potential source of air contamination shall be subject to the approval of the Colorado  Department of Health, Air Pollution Control Division.


(d)  Emission of heat, glare, radiation and fumes: Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit an obnoxious or dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond any established by the Colorado Department of Health.


(4)  Outdoor storage and waste disposal:


(a)  No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground.  Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices or appliances located on the same property as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.


(b)  All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent property.


(c)  No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a property in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.


(d)  All materials or wastes which might constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.


(e)  In addition to these regulations, all storage of flammable explosive or dangerous materials shall be subject to all applicable State Laws concerning such.


(5)  Water pollution:  No water pollution shall be emitted by manufacturing or other processing.  In a case in which potential hazards exist, it shall be necessary to install safeguards acceptable to the Building Inspector, the Colorado Department of Health and the local health authority, and in compliance with the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency before operation of the facilities may begin, including all percolation or ground water tests as may be required.


(6)  Other regulations:  Regulation pertaining to landscaping, buffer strips or setbacks may be issued by the Commission.

DIVISION 11.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. (Ord. 1897, eff., 5/14/10)


Section 14-72.  Purpose.


The planned unit development district is enacted pursuant to the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972, as amended (§ 24-67-101, et seq., C.R.S.), to provide an alternative to the conventional approach to zoning by permitting flexibility and innovation in design, density, functional uses, placement of buildings, provision of parks and open space, circulation patterns, common facilities, signage and off-street parking areas, and to encourage a more creative approach to development and redevelopment in Trinidad. (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10)


Section 14-73.  Uses permitted by right.


Unless explicitly specified in an ordinance to establish or revise a specific planned unit development, the following uses shall be permitted by right (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10):


(1) Single-family dwellings.


(2) Multi-family dwellings.


(3) Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, provided the planned unit development district contains a mixture of uses including modular dwellings and multi-family dwellings in addition to mobile homes.


(4) Business, professional and semi-professional offices.


(5) Medical clinics and pharmacies operated in conjunction with a clinic.


(6) Retail specialty or boutique shops including businesses offering personal services.


(7) Community service agency.


(8) Day nursery.


(9) Buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted by this district.


SECTION 14-74.  CONDITIONAL USES. (Ord. 1938, Sec 14-74 repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/31/13)


Unless explicitly specified in an ordinance to establish or revise a specific planned unit development, the following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses to be approved separately by the Planning Commission:

(1) Lodging establishments.


(2) Convention centers and public gathering spaces.


(3) Museums, theaters and/or similar uses.


(4) Restaurants, taverns and similar uses.


(5) All businesses and retail uses that are not permitted by right and not prohibited by the City of Trinidad.


(6) Churches and schools or other public or other semi-public uses.


(7) Wholesaling of products, provided storage space does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.


(8) Fabrication or assembling incidental to retail sales from the premises, provided that not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area occupied by such businesses is used for manufacturing, processing, assembling, treatment installation, and repair of products.


(9) Any kind of scientific research or manufacture, compounding, assembling, processing, fabrication, packaging or treatment of products, manufacturing or processing industries.


(10) Mortuary or embalming establishment or school.


(11) Mini-warehouses, which must be in accordance with Section 14-103 of Division 14.


(12) Wireless telecommunications towers and facilities, which must be in accordance with Article 8 of Chapter 14.

(13) Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(14) Fire stations, police stations and telephone exchanges.


(15) Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


Section 14-75.  Maximum density, height and area regulations.


(A) The residential density of a planned unit development district shall be set forth in the ordinance establishing or revising the planned unit development district. The overall average density of the total residential area within any planned unit development district shall not exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre of residential area.


(B) The minimum area for any newly created free-standing planned unit development district is one (1) acre.


(C) Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height and area regulations for uses within a planned unit development district are as follows:


(1) No detached single family dwelling shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, or twenty-five feet (25') in height.


(2) No attached single or multiple family dwelling shall exceed three and one-half (3 1/2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height.


(3) No commercial or industrial use shall exceed five (5) stories or fifty feet (50) in height.


(4) Minimum lot area: No minimum requirements, but shall be specified in the ordinance establishing or revising a planned unit development district.


(5) Minimum lot frontage: No minimum requirements, but shall be specified in the ordinance establishing or revising a planned unit development district.


(6) Minimum front yard: No minimum requirements, but shall be specified in the ordinance establishing or revising a planned unit development district. Motor fuel pumps shall not be erected less than twenty-five feet (25') from the front property line.


(7) Minimum rear yard: No minimum requirements, but shall be specified in the ordinance establishing or revising a planned unit development district.


(8) Minimum side yard: No minimum requirements, but shall be specified in the ordinance establishing or revising a planned unit development district.


(9) Minimum floor area for each individual residential dwelling:


(a) Studio/efficiency units or one (1) bedroom units – 650 square feet.


(b) Two (2) bedroom units – 800 square feet.


(c) Three (3) bedroom units – 900 square feet.


(d) Four (4) or more bedroom units – 1,000 square feet. (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10)


Section 14-76.  Standards and design requirements.


(1) General standards for the planned unit development district:  The following general standards shall be followed regarding the planning, design, and construction of the planned unit development district (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10):


(a) The planned unit development district shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Trinidad, and with other applicable plans and policies adopted by the City Council.


(b) The planned unit development district shall be designed in such a manner that, wherever possible, it protects the environmental, historical, and cultural assets of the City including considerations of elements such as environmental pollution, streams and storm drainage courses, scenic vistas and viewsheds, and historic preservation.


(c) The planned unit development district's relationship to its immediate surroundings shall be considered in order to avoid or mitigate adverse effects to surrounding development caused by traffic circulation, building height or bulk, lack of screening, or other impacts.


(d) The planned unit development district design and construction plans shall take into account characteristics of soils, slopes, geological hazards, and flood hazards in a manner intended to protect the health, safety, and welfare of potential users of the planned unit development district. These aspects of the plan must be accompanied by a detailed soil engineering, storm drainage and flood report on the suitability of the area for the intended use before a building permit may be issued.  The City may waive such reports for previously developed areas.


(e) Design and construction of the planned unit development district shall include adequate, safe, and convenient arrangements for pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways, off-street parking, and loading space(s).


(f) Setbacks and lot widths shall be as required by the City Council.  In designing their projects, developers must propose setbacks and lot widths that ensure proper ventilation, light, air, adequate access, fire protection, utility service, storm drainage, and snow melt between buildings.


(2) Requirements regarding the site. The following requirements shall be observed regarding the site of the planned unit development district: Planned open spaces within the planned unit development district, including those open spaces being used as public or private recreation sites or open space easements, and common areas shared by multiple owners shall be protected by adequate covenants running with the land, or by conveyances or dedications.


(3) Requirements regarding buffering between residential and nonresidential uses to mitigate potential nuisances: Minimum distances, landscaped bufferyards and/or opaque fencing may be required to minimize the impacts that nonresidential uses may have on residential uses and/or between differing residential densities within the planned unit development district or adjacent to the planned unit development district.


(4) Requirements regarding parks, school sites, and other public areas:


(a) Residential uses located within planned unit development districts shall meet the requirements of Section 14-10, Dedication of Land for Mini-Parks, Neighborhood Parks, Community Parks, District Parks in the Form of Trails, and Regional Open Space; Reservation of Land for Public Uses, as applicable.

(b) The City Council may require additional recreational amenities within the planned unit development district for residents of such a district, and may require that up to twenty-five  (25%) of the planned unit development district area be set aside for park, playground, open space, school site or other public use, in addition to public streets. (Ord. 1938, Sec. 17-76(4)(b), repealed and reenacted eff. 5/31/13)


(5) Off-street Parking:  The off-street parking regulations contained in Section 14-100 shall govern the provision of off-street parking in a planned unit development district, except that the City Council may require the provision of off-street parking in existing buildings for residential uses.


(6) Circulation: Circulation shall be determined by a review of each planned unit development district. The planned unit development district must have an adequate and engineered internal street circulation system approved by a professional traffic engineer licensed in the State of Colorado.  All planned unit development applications must also include a traffic report produced by a professional traffic engineer licensed in the State of Colorado. Public streets must serve all structures and uses within the planned unit development district.  However, private roads may be permitted if they meet minimum construction standards, can be used by public safety vehicles for emergency purposes, and provided that each structure or use in the planned unit development district is served by off-street loading spaces or service areas.  A traffic report produced by a professional traffic engineer licensed in the State of Colorado must accompany all applications. (Ord. 1938, Sec. 17-76(6), repealed and reenacted eff. 5/31/13)


(7) Signs: Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, the sign regulations contained in Division 13 of this Article shall govern signage in a planned unit development district.


(8) The City Council may require additional design requirements as it deems necessary to ensure that the planned unit development district complements or protects the surrounding area and complies with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.


(9) All uses, whether by right or condition, shall be, at a minimum, regulated by the Industrial Performance Standards as set forth in Section 14-71.


Section 14-77.  Procedure.


The following procedure shall be observed when a Planned Unit Development proposal is submitted for consideration (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10):


(1) Pre-application conference: A pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning Director in order for the applicant to become acquainted with planned unit development district procedures and related requirements.


(2) Formal application: An application for approval of a planned unit development district may be filed by a person having an interest in the property to be included in the planned unit development district. The application will be made on a form provided by the City and must include a consent by the owners of all property to be included. The application must be accompanied by a preliminary development plan and a written statement.


(a) Preliminary development plan - The preliminary development plan shall show the major details of the proposed planned unit development prepared at an engineering scale of not less than 1" = 100', and shall be submitted in sufficient detail to evaluate the land, planning, building design, and other features of the planned unit development district. The Plan must contain, insofar as applicable, the following minimum information:


(I) The existing topography of the land at 2 foot (2') contour intervals.


(II) Proposed land uses.


(III) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and improvements.


(IV) The maximum height of all buildings.


(V) The density and type of dwellings.


(VI) The internal traffic and circulation systems, off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way.


(VII) The location, height, and size of proposed signs, lighting and advertising devices.


(VIII) A park land proposal, including areas which are to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as general open space, common park areas, including public parks and recreational areas, and as sites for schools or other public buildings.


(IX) Areas subject to a 100-year flooding cycle.


(X) General plans relating to landscaping.


(XI) The proportion of land to be left in a natural condition as open space, stated in terms of acreage or square footage, as well as the ratio of open space in areas to be developed stated on a square feet per unit basis.


(XII) If required by the City, traffic impact studies, market studies regarding the proposed use(s), and other similar studies prepared by licensed professionals.


(b) Written statement: The written statement to be submitted with the planned unit development application must contain the following information:


(I) A statement of the present ownership and a legal description of all the land included in the planned unit development district;


(II) An explanation of the objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development district, including building descriptions, sketches or elevations as may be required to describe the objectives;


(III) A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the planned unit development district or stages thereof can be expected to begin and be completed;


(IV) A description of snow removal methods or techniques to be utilized;


(V) A description of the proposed method of providing ongoing (permanent) maintenance of all commonly-owned or used buildings, facilities, areas, and thoroughfares, and any private roads;


(VI) A written statement by a licensed engineer(s) that shall describe and/or provide evidence of:


(A) The water source with adequate and dependable capacity to service the proposed planned unit development district at ultimate development in accordance with the provisions contained in C.R.S. 29-20-303 through 305;


(B) The proposed method(s) of sewage treatment and the location of plant and outfall;


(C) The soil, geological, and ground water conditions of the site;


(D) The manner in which storm drainage shall be handled;


(E) Copies of any special agreements, conveyances, restrictions, or covenants, which are to be recorded with the planned unit development district’s final plat(s), and will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its common areas; and


(F) A list of the owners of abutting properties and properties located within 300 feet (300') of the property lines of the land included in the planned unit, and their addresses from available County records.


(c) The applicant may submit any other information or exhibits he/she deems pertinent that will aid in evaluating his/her proposed planned unit development district.


(d) The City may require additional information or exhibits from the applicant it deems is necessary in its consideration of the planned unit development district application.


Section 14-78.  Review and approval.


The procedure to be followed with respect to review and approval of a planned unit development district shall be the same as that governing applications for the granting of zoning classifications or for the change thereof as set forth in this Article, except that the determination of the Planning Commission and the City Council in consideration of a planned unit development district shall be governed by the following additional standards and requirements (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10):


(1) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary development plan to determine that it complies with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and applicable City Codes and policies.


(2) Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward a written report to the City Council recommending that the plan be approved, disapproved, or approved with modifications.


(3) Within thirty (30) days or such additional time as the City Council deems necessary, after the receipt of the written report from the Commission, the City Council shall either approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications the application.


(4) If the plan is approved, the subject area shall be designated and shown on the official zoning map as a planned unit development district if it is not already designated as such, and the legal description of the subject area shall be recorded so as to properly advise that the land is subject to a planned unit development district ordinance. (Ord. 1938, Sec. 14-78(4), repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/31/13)


(5) Within six (6) months following approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a final development plan and any additional information which may be requested by the Commission. The Commission may authorize submission of the final development plan in stages. Upon approval of the final plan or portion thereof, the plan and all accessory documents shall be filed with the City Clerk as a matter of public record. If the applicant has not submitted such plan within the period provided, the Commission can initiate proceedings to remove the planned unit development district from the zoning map. The zoning district applicable before approval of the preliminary plan shall then be in effect.


(6) The final development plan as approved by the Planning Commission shall be binding and shall not be changed during the construction of the planned unit development district except upon application to the appropriate agency under the following procedures:


(a) Minor changes in locations, siting, and bulk of structures or character of building may be authorized by the Commission during the final development plan review if required by circumstances not foreseen at the time the preliminary plan was approved.


(b) All other changes in use, any rearrangement in lots, or changes in the provision of open space must be made by the City Council under the procedures established in this Article for amendment of the zoning map.


SECTION 14-79.  FAILURE TO MEET DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE.

If the applicant has not begun construction in the planned unit development district within one (1) year after the approval of the final development plan or otherwise has failed to meet the approved development schedule, the Planning Commission shall initiate proceedings to revoke approval for the planned unit development district, except that for good cause shown by the applicant, it may extend the development schedule. Upon the completion of proceedings to revoke approval of the planned unit development, the zoning district applicable before approval of the preliminary plan shall then be in effect. (Ord. 1938, Sec. 14-79, repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/31/13)


SECTION 14-80.  ZONING REVIEW.

At least once every two (2) years following the approval of a planned unit development district, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall review all building permits which have been issued for the planned unit development district and shall examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If the Commission finds that the rate of construction has not met the approved development program or if there are found to be violations of any of the provisions of this Article or the terms or conditions of the planned unit development district approval, the Commission shall issue a report of said violations to the City Council.  The City Council shall hold a hearing on the report of violations submitted by the Commission having first given notice to the planned unit development district applicant and all owners of abutting property. Upon review of the alleged violations, the City Council may, if it is deemed necessary, require that the appropriate action be taken to remedy the violations, amend or modify the planned unit development district, or revoke approval. (Ord. 1938, Sec. 14-80, repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/31/13)


Section 14-81.  Completion of a planned unit development.

(1) Upon request of the owner, the Planning Director shall issue a certificate certifying completion of the planned unit development, and shall note the issuance of the certificate on the zoning map and on the district’s site plan (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10).


(2) After completion, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings within the planned unit development district will be governed by the approved site plan.


(3) Except as follows, no changes may be made in the district after its final development plan approval.


(a) Minor changes in the location, size, siting, or character of buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning Director. No change authorized under this section may increase the size of any building or structure by more than ten percent (10%).


(b) All other changes in the district and to the district’s site plan must be made under the procedures that are applicable to the initial approval of a planned unit development district.


Section 14-82.  Conformance with subdivision regulations.

Any area proposed as a planned unit development district shall be subject to the requirements for review and approval under the subdivision regulations, except as provided in this Article. Such subdivision review may be carried out concurrently with consideration of the planned unit development district application as outlined in this Article (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10).


Section 14-83.  Subdivision and resale.

(1) A planned unit development district shall be subdivided or re-subdivided for purposes of sale or lease, in accordance with the City’s subdivision regulations.  Potential owners of land or property located in a planned unit development district should be made aware of the district’s requirements by the current owner prior to such purchase, as the new owners will be subject to those requirements.

(2) The subdivision or re-subdivision may be approved if it does not change location of uses, and if it does not increase the overall residential density of the district and if the district, following the subdivision or re-subdivision, is in compliance with the standards required for that planned unit development district and for planned unit development districts provided in this Article (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10).


Section 14-84.  Fees for planned unit development district application.

Fees, as may be deemed necessary, to help defray the cost of processing, administering and enforcing the provisions contained in this Division 11 of this Article may be established by the City Council and shall be paid by the applicant upon submission of the indicated type of plan for review by the Commission (Ord. 1897, eff. 5-14-10).


DIVISION 12.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HP - CORAZON DE TRINIDAD HISTORICAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT.


Section 14-85.      Uses permitted by right.

(1) All uses permitted in the CC - Community Commercial except churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses. (Ord. 1630, eff., 5/26/00)


(2)  All uses permitted in the NS - Neighborhood Service District.


(3)  All uses permitted in the HDR - High Density Residential District.


(4)  All uses permitted in the MDR - Medium Density Residential District.


(5)  Antique and art shops.


(6)  Museums, public or non-profit relating to the history and character of this District.


(7)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the uses permitted in this District.


Section 14-86.      Conditional uses.

(1)  The following conditional uses may be permitted within the Corazone de Trinidad Historical Preservation District:


(a)  Electric substations and gas regulator stations.


(b)  Fire stations, police stations and telephone stations.


(c)  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations.


(d)  Churches and schools or other public or semi-public uses.


(2)  For each instance, the Commission shall be provided with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  The site development shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2') intervals, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of proposed structures, description and placement of screening or screen planting, availability of utilities if applicable, and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity.

Section 14-87.      Building height limit.

Except as provided in Section 14-101, the height regulations are as follows:


(1)  No dwelling or accessory structure to a dwelling shall exceed three and one-half (3 ½) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height.


(2)  No structure to be used for commercial purposes shall exceed five (5) stories or fifty feet (50') in height.


Section 14-88.      Area regulations.

Except as provided in Section 14-101, the area regulations are as follows:


(1)  Minimum floor area:


(a)  Eight hundred (800) square feet per single family dwelling.


(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet per multiple family dwelling unit.

(c)  No minimum requirements for commercial uses as set forth in the NS and CC Zone Districts.


(2)  Minimum lot area:


(a)  Six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling.


(b)  For all conditional uses, six thousand (6,000) square feet unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(c)  No minimum requirement for commercial uses as set forth in the NS and CC Zone Districts.


(d)  No minimum requirement for other uses by right listed in this Section 14-85.


(3)  Minimum lot frontage:


(a)  Fifty feet (50') for residential uses.


(b)  No minimum requirement for commercial uses as set forth in the NS and CC Zone District.


(4)  Minimum front yard:


(a)  Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front yard of not less than twenty- five feet (25') for all single family dwellings, unless otherwise specified by the Commission.


(b)  No minimum requirement for multiple family residential uses or commercial uses as set forth in the HDR, NS or CC Zone Districts, except for motor fuel pumps which shall be erected not less than twenty five feet (25') from the front property line.

(c)  No minimum requirement for other uses by right as listed in Section 14-85.


(5)  Minimum rear yard:


(a)  Measured from the rear property line, every single family dwelling or accessory building thereto shall have a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10’).


(b)  No minimum requirements for multiple family or commercial uses as set forth in the HDR, NS or CC Zone Districts.


(c)   No minimum requirement for other uses by right as listed in Section 14-85.


(6)  Minimum side yard:


(a)  For single family dwellings measured from the side property lines, there shall be side yards of not less than ten feet (10’) on each side of the lot.


(b)  No minimum requirements for multiple family or commercial uses as set forth in the HDR, NS or CC Zone Districts.


(c)  No minimum requirements for other uses by right as listed in Section 14-85.


(d)  For multiple family dwellings density shall not exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre of residential area.

DIVISION 12.1.  ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR THE HP- CORAZON DE TRINIDAD HISTORIC PRESERVATION MIXED-USE DISTRICT. (Ord. 1915, 7/1/11)


Section 14-88.1.   Purpose.

To establish minimum regulatory standards for development in the HP –  CORAZON DE TRINIDAD HISTORIC PRESERVATION MIXED-USE DISTRICT (herein referred to as the “District”) in furtherance of:


(1) Preserving the historic character, pedestrian scale and architectural distinctiveness of the District;


(2) Producing infill development that is architecturally compatible with the historic structures of the District;


(3) Encouraging the development of traditional mixed-use buildings within the District;


(4) Developing an urban form that is conducive to physical activity, alternative modes of transportation and increased opportunities for social interaction and community engagement; and


(5) Implementing predictable, high-quality development in the District.


Section 14-88.2.     Definitions
As used in this ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meanings specified herein:

(1) “Floor Area Ratio” means the ratio of a building’s gross floor area to the area of the lot on which the building is located.


(2) “Gross Floor Area” is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Gross floor area does not include accessory parking, basements when at least one-half the floor-to-ceiling height is below grade, attic space having a floor-to-ceiling height less than seven feet, exterior balconies, uncovered steps and/or inner courts.


(3) “Mixed-Use Building” means a building that contains at least one floor devoted to allowed nonresidential uses in accordance with Section 14-87 of this Division and at least one devoted to allowed residential uses in accordance with Section 14-87 of this Division.

(4) “Historic Structure” means any structure that was substantially completed prior to 1950.


Section 14-88.3.   Uses.
(1) Commercial Uses

Allowable Uses (P - Permitted by Right; C - Conditional Use; N - Not Permitted)

Commercial

Use

Street and Sub-Street Level

Above Street Level

Retail Sales

P

C

Wholesale Establishments:



Less Than or Equal to 1,500 Square Feet of Floor Area

P

C

Greater Than 1,500 Square Feet of Floor Area

C

C

Business, Professional and Semi-Professional Services

P

P

Personal Services Including Health Clubs and Gyms

P

C

Eating and Drinking Establishments:



Restaurant

P

C

Tavern

C

C

Art Galleries

P

C

Art Studios

C

P

Theater or Performance Art Center*:



Small (1-149 Seats)

P

C

Large (150+ Seats)

C

C

Medical Services

C

C

Hotels and Other Lodging Establishments*:



Small (1-16 Rooms)

P

P

Large (17+ Rooms)

C

C

Mortuary or Funeral Home

C

C

Vehicle Sales

C

N

Vehicle Repairs

P

N

Drive Through Facilities

N

N

*Theaters, performing art centers, museums, libraries, hotels and lodging establishments must feature first floor lobbies, restaurants and/or retail space along the property frontage.


(2) Industrial and Manufacturing Uses

Allowable Uses (P - Permitted by Right; C - Conditional Use; N - Not Permitted)

Industrial and Manufacturing

Use

Street and Sub-Street Level

Above Street Level

Fabrication or Assembling Incidental to Retail



Less Than or Equal to 25% of Total Floor Area

P

C

Greater Than 25% of Total Floor Area

C

C

Brewery

C

C

(3) Residential Uses

Allowable Uses (P - Permitted by Right; C - Conditional Use; N - Not Permitted)

Residential

Use

Street and Sub-Street Level

Above Street Level

Apartments

C

P

Assisted Living

C

C

Nursing Home

C

C

(4) Public and Community Uses

Allowable Uses (P - Permitted by Right; C - Conditional Use; N - Not Permitted)

Public and Community

Use

Street and Sub-Street Level

Above Street Level

Government Offices and Services

C

C

Colleges, Universities and Public Schools

C

C

Libraries*

C

C

Museums*

P

C

Cultural Exhibits

C

C

Child Day Care

C

C

Religious Assembly

C

C

Parking Facilities (Not Ancillary to a Given Structure):

C

C

Surface

C

N

Deck

C

C

Parks and Recreational Facilities

C

C

Public Utilities:



Electric Substations

C

C

Gas Regulator Stations

C

C

Fire Stations

C

C

Police Stations

C

C

Telephone Exchanges

C

C

Water Storage Facilities

C

C

Water Pumping Stations

C

C

Sewer Lift Stations

C

C

*Theaters, performing art centers, museums, libraries, hotels and lodging establishments must feature first floor lobbies, restaurants and/or retail space along the property frontage.

(5) Individual Levels in Mixed-Use Buildings

Individual levels in mixed-use buildings may not have a combination of residential uses and non-residential uses unless the non-residential uses are disconnected from the residential uses with separate points of ingress and egress.

Section 14-88.4.   Conditional uses.

(1) A non-conforming use associated with an historic structure in the District may be reestablished as a conditional use if the design of the historic structure reasonably implies the use of the structure and/or precludes the establishment of a conforming use within the District as defined in Section 14-88.3 of this Division.


(2) For each proposed conditional use, the applicant shall provide the Commission with site development plans showing the proposed development or use and its relationship to adjacent properties.  Said site development plans shall show existing contours of the site at two foot (2’) intervals, the location of all structures and appurtenances, the location of improvements on the site, the height and bulk of proposed structures, description and placement of screening, availability of utilities if applicable and a statement of the time-sequence of development and environmental impact on properties in the immediate vicinity. The City may, within reason, prescribe any additional conditions regarding intensity, limitation of use, appearance, hours of operation, required open space or any other such condition which may be deemed necessary and in the public interest.


Section 14-88.5.   Building and Area Regulations.

(1) Building Height
No building or accessory to said building shall exceed five (5) stories or fifty (50) feet in height.
(2) Floor Area

The maximum floor area ratio shall be [5.0] for all mixed-use buildings and [3.0] for all single-use buildings.

(3) Floor-to-Floor Height for Street Level Space

All street level space must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of ten (10) feet.

(4) Minimum Residential Floor Area


(a) Studio, efficiency or one (1) bedroom units – 650 square feet.


(b) Two (2) bedroom units – 800 square feet.


(c) Three (3) bedroom units – 900 square feet.


(d) Four (4) bedroom units – 1000 square feet


(5) Residential Density

Residential density shall not exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre.

(6) Minimum Lot Area

The minimum lot area shall be two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) square feet.

(7) Minimum Lot Frontage

The minimum lot frontage shall be twenty-five (25) feet.

(8) Setbacks

(a) Front

The front yard setback for structures in the District shall be zero (0) feet. The entire building façade must abut street side property lines.

( b ) Side and Rear


No interior side yard setback or rear yard setback is required for structures in the District unless the property on which the structure is to be located abuts an alley or a fenestrated building face on one or more sides. The minimum setback shall be five (5) feet from all property lines that abut an alley or fenestrated building face.

Section 14-88.6.   Parking

(1) No off-street parking is required for non-residential uses in the District.


(2) Off-street parking must be provided for all residential uses in accordance with the requirements of Section 14-100 of the City of Trinidad Code of Ordinances.


(3) All off-street parking shall be located to the rear of the principal building and shall be screened with landscaping or a masonry wall so as to not be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning districts. A screening plan showing all proposed screening must be submitted with the land development and building permit applications.


Section 14-88.7.   Architectural and Design Standards

A detailed set of architectural drawings must be included with all land development and building permit applications. In addition to building massing, location and design, said architectural drawings must indicate all proposed building materials, architectural detailing, color schemes, street furniture, landscaping and all other significant design features in accordance with the following architectural and design standards:


(1) Use of the following materials on building façades is prohibited:

(a) smooth-faced concrete;
(b) concrete block;
(c) metal or vinyl siding; and
(d) materials of similar nature to those listed above.

3 Examples of façade materials that are prohibited in the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

smooth faced concrete.jpg	corrugated metal.jpg	pre fab metal panel.jpg
Smooth-Faced Concrete	Corrugated Metal	Pre-Fabricated Metal Panels
(2) T h e principal materials used on building façade s shall be indigenous to the Corazon de Trinidad National Historic District, particularly high quality brick, stone and/or wood.

3 Examples of façade materials that are indigenous to the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

brick.jpg	stone.jpg	wood.jpg
Brick	Stone	
Wood

(3) Long blank walls are prohibited.

(4) Building façade s shall be articulated by the use of architectural treatments characteristic of the Corazon de Trinidad National Historic District.


12 Examples of architectural treatments that are characteristic of the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

architectural treatments 1.jpg	architectural treatments 2.jpg	architectural treatments 4.jpg
architectural treatments 3.jpg	architectural treatments 5.jpg	architectural treatments 6.jpg
architectural treatments 7.jpg	architectural treatments 8.jpg	architectural treatments 9.jpg
architectural treatments 10.jpg	architectural treatments 11.jpg	architectural treatments 12.jpg
(5) Building design must be characteristic of the Corazon de Trinidad National Historic District.

12 Examples of building designs that are characteristic of the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District
building designs 1.jpg	building designs 2.jpg	building designs 3.jpg
building designs 4.jpg	building designs 5.jpg	building designs 6.jpg
building designs 7.jpg	building designs 8.jpg	building designs 9.jpg
building designs 10.jpg	building designs 11.jpg	building designs 12.jpg
(6) Ground floor façades abutting public roads and/or parking lots shall feature display windows and entry areas on no less than sixty (60) percent of the horizontal façade length.


(7) Ground floor display windows must be internally lighted, must have a minimum height of four (4) feet and may not be more than three and one-half (3.5) feet above the adjacent sidewalk measured from the bottom of the window.


(8) Building façades shall have clearly defined customer entry areas that utilize distinguishing architectural features such as overhangs, recesses, arches, display windows and/or planters. Said entry areas must be located along a public sidewalk if possible.







6 Examples of storefronts and entry areas in the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

storefronts 1.jpg	storefronts 2.jpg	storefronts 3.jpg
storefronts 4.jpg	storefronts 5.jpg	storefronts 6.jpg
(9) Mechanical equipment such as HVAC units, solar panels or similar equipment must be located out of public view. Architecturally appropriate parapets must be used to conceal all rooftop equipment. The height of said parapets shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the supporting wall.


(10) Overhanging eaves shall extend no more than three (3) feet past the supporting wall.


(11) Sloping roofs must not exceed the average height of the supporting walls. All sloping roofs must feature a gutter system that prevents snow, water and debris from falling onto any adjacent sidewalk or public space.


(12) No more than one curb cut will be allowed per building and curb cuts are not allowed for lots that abut alleys.


(13) The façade design and material composition of all accessory structures must be compatible with the façade design and material composition of the main building.

(14) All proposed street furniture and landscaping must be compatible with existing street furniture and landscaping in the District.


3 Examples of street furniture in the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

street furniture 1.jpg	street furniture 2jpg.jpg	street furniture 3.jpg
14-88.8.                 Historic structure preservation, restoration and rehabilitation.

(1) No historic structure located in the District may be demolished or otherwise removed unless said historic structure has been certified as both structurally compromised and irreparable by a structural engineer licensed in the State of Colorado.


(2) Removal or alteration of any original architectural feature on an historic structure in the District is prohibited unless said architectural feature has been certified as both structurally compromised and irreparable by a structural engineer licensed in the State of Colorado. Significant architectural details include, but are not limited to:


Roofs
Exterior Walls
Pediments
Cornices
Windows and Window Frames
Belt Courses
Transoms
Piers
Columns
Doors
Kickplates

(3) Repairs made to historic structures in the District must be made in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation:


The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation


The Standards (Department of Interior regulations, 36 CFR 67) pertain to historic buildings of all materials, construction types, sizes, and occupancy and encompass the exterior and the interior, related landscape features and the building's site and environment as well as attached, adjacent, or related new construction. The Standards are to be applied to specific rehabilitation projects in a reasonable manner, taking into consideration economic and technical feasibility.


1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.


2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.


3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.


4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.


5. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.


6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.


7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.


8. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.


9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.


10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.


14-88.9.                 Signage.
The requirements of Article 4, Division 13 of the City of Trinidad Code of Ordinances shall apply to all land development projects in the District. In addition:


(1) A sign plan shall be included as part of all development proposals within the District;


(2) Signs for all uses within a given development project must be uniform in style, materials and illumination and be compatible with and respectful of the historic nature of the District;


(3) Sign location shall be limited to building surfaces, canopies, overhangs and behind storefront doors or display window glass. No freestanding and/or rooftop signs will be allowed in the District;


(4) Replication of Trinidad’s historic painted signs is strongly encouraged on all new development projects.


(5) Removal or destruction of painted ‘ghost’ signage on existing structures is prohibited.


6 Examples of signage that are characteristic of the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

singage 1.jpg	singage 2.jpg	singage 3.jpg
singage 4.jpg	singage 5.jpg	singage 6.jpg
(ORD NO. 1915, Eff. 7-1-11)

Historic District map.jpg

Map depicting the Mixed Use and Residential Use portions of the Corazon de Trinidad Historic District

DIVISION 13.  SIGNS.


Section 14-89.      "Signs" defined.

The term " Signs " shall include any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial representation (including illustration or declaration), form (including shapes resembling any human, animal or product form), emblem (including any device, symbol, trademark, object or design which conveys a recognizable meaning, identity or distinction), or any other figure of a similar character which is a structure or any part thereof or is written, painted, projected upon, printed, designed into, constructed or otherwise placed on a building, board, plate or upon any material, object or device whatsoever, which by reason of its form, color, working, stereotyped design or otherwise, attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement, or announcement.


Section 14-90.      Exclusions from definition.

The term " signs " shall not include the following:


(1)  Numbers used to identify street address.

(2)  Flags, pennants, or insignia of nations or an organization of nations, states or cities, or fraternal, religious and civic organizations, or any educational institutions, except when such flags are used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.


(3)  Window displays incorporating placards, pennants, merchandise, pictures or models or products or service.


(4)  Works of art which do not identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, which enterprise may benefit or realize a direct commercial gain from such display.


(5)  One (1) flush wall nameplate per public entrance per business of no more than two (2) square feet per face.


(6)  Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holiday celebrations.


(7)  Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way.


(8)  Traffic or other official signs of any public or governmental agency.


(9)  On-site traffic directional signs which do not exceed four (4) square feet per face or ten feet (10') in height and which do not carry any commercial message other than identification.


(10)  Temporary interior paper window signs.


(11)  Signs over gas pumps which indicate gas prices, provided that such signs shall be limited to one (1) per pump island and shall be no larger than four (4) square feet per face.


(12)  One (1) flush wall nameplate per business, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, to be located at or near the rear entrance of such business.


Section 14-91.      Sign definitions.

(1) Animated sign shall mean any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement, rotation or change of lighting.


(2) Building fascia shall mean that frontage of a building which faces and is parallel to a public or private street.


(3) Canopy sign shall mean a sign which is mounted on or beneath a permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, which shelter may be wholly supported by a building or may be partially supported by approved columns, poles or braces extended from the ground.


(4) Commercial use shall mean use of land upon which a structure may be located in a commercial zone district where such commercial use is permitted.


(5) Display surface or face shall mean the area of a sign structure for the purpose of displaying a message or advertising a product or service.


(6) Flashing sign shall mean any directly or indirectly illuminated sign either stationary or animated, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effect by any means whatsoever.


(7) Flush wall sign shall mean any sign attached to or erected against the wall or parapet wall of a building or structure which extends no more than twelve inches (12") from the wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to the face of the building to which the sign is attached.


(8) "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign shall mean a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or lease of a specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed.


(9) Freestanding sign shall mean a detached sign which is supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights, poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or a detached sign which is erected on the ground, provided that no part of the sign is attached to any part of the building, structure or other sign.


(10) Ground sign shall mean a type of freestanding sign which is erected on the ground and which contains no free air space between the ground and the top of the sign.


(11) Illuminated sign shall mean a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on the sign or directed towards the sign.


(12) Industrial use shall mean use of land upon which a structure may be located in an Industrial Zone District or PUD Zone District where industrial use is permitted.


(13) Marquee sign shall mean a sign identifying a specific motion picture or event which is subject to frequent change.


(14) Permanent sign shall mean a sign which is permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure.


(15) Projecting wall sign shall mean any sign other than a flush wall sign which projects from and is supported by a wall or a building.


(16) Residential zone district shall mean any zone district where residential use is permitted.


(17) Rooftop sign shall mean a sign erected upon or above a roof or above a parapet wall of a building.


(18) Sign face shall mean the display of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.


(19) Sign with backing shall mean any sign that is displayed upon, against or through any material or color surface or backing that forms an integral part of such display and differentiates the total display from the background against which it is placed.


(20) Sign without backing shall mean any word, letter, emblem, insignia, figure or similar character or group thereof that is neither backed by, incorporated in, nor otherwise made a part of any larger display area.


(21) Wind driven sign shall mean any sign consisting of two (2) or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move, upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze.


(22) Window sign shall mean a sign which is applied or attached to, or located within three feet (3') of the interior of a window, which sign can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure.

Section 14-92.      General regulations.

The following rules shall apply to signs in all zone districts:


(1)  The erection, remodeling or removal of any permanent sign, except that which appears in the window or on the door of a business establishment, stating the name only of said business establishment, shall require a permit from the Building Inspector.


(2)  All sign permit applications shall be accompanied by detailed drawings indicating the dimensions, location and engineering of the particular sign and plot plan when applicable.  Signs may be erected after compliance with the following:


(a)  Proper submission of application on form obtained from Building Inspector.


(b)  Issuance of permit by Building Inspector.


(3)  All exterior signs shall be permanent in nature, except "for sale" and "for rent" signs which shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face, shall be limited to one (1) sign per lot, and political signs.


(4)  Political signs shall be of a temporary nature, shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per face, shall not be allowed in any zone more than ninety (90) days prior to and fifteen (15) days following the election to which it relates, and shall not be illuminated.


(5)  No sign shall be placed on government-owned property without permission of the appropriate governmental entity or on private property without permission of the owner thereof.  Such signs shall be subject to immediate removal and confiscation by the appropriate governmental entity or private property owner.


(6)  Any sign attached to a tree, utility pole or to the face of another sign is prohibited.


(7)  Rooftop signs and all other signs which project above the fascia wall, revolving and rotating signs, strings of light bulbs not permanently mounted on a rigid background used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes (other than traditional holiday decorations), posters and wind driven signs (except banners and pennants) are prohibited.


(8)  Flashing, moving, blinking, chasing or other animated effects are prohibited on all signs, except time and temperature signs.


(9)  Freestanding signs shall be engineered to withstand a wind load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot.


(10)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times.  All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust resistant metals.


(11)  The Building Inspector shall inspect and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance or disrepair.


Section 14-93.      Measurement of signs.

The following rules shall apply to the measurement of signs in all districts:


(1)  The total surface area of all sign faces of freestanding signs, ground signs and projecting wall signs shall be counted and considered a part of the maximum total surface area allowance.


(2)  The area of all signs with backing or a background that is part of the overall sign display shall be measured by determining the sum of the area of each square, rectangle, triangle, portion of a circle or any combination thereof which creates the smallest single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the display surface or face of the sign, including all frames and backing.


(3)  The area of all signs without backing or background that is part of the overall sign display shall be measured by determining the sum of the area of each square, rectangle, triangle, portion of a circle or any combination thereof which creates the smallest single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of each word, written representation (including any series of letters), logo or figure of similar character.


Section 14-94.      Limitations based on zone district.

Signs shall be permitted in the different zone districts as accessory uses in accordance with the regulations contained in this Section.


(1)  Limitations in all zone districts:


(a)  One (1) identification sign per one-family or two-family dwelling, provided such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet in area per face.


(b)  One (1) identification sign per multiple-family dwelling, provided such sign does not exceed twenty  (20) square feet in area per face and has only indirect illumination.


(c)  One (1) identification sign during the first two (2) years of construction of a new subdivision, provided such sign does not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area per face, and is unlighted and is located within that subdivision.


(d)  One (1) sign per entrance to the property identifying a subdivision or housing project, provided such sign does not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in area per face and has only indirect illumination.


(e)  One (1) identification sign per child care center, provided such sign does not exceed ten (10) square feet in area per face and is unlighted.


(f)  One (1) identification sign per home occupation use.  Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per face and shall be unlighted.


(2)  Limitations in any commercial or industrial zone district: (Ord. 1645, eff., 10-13-00)


Flush wall signs, projecting wall signs, window signs, canopy signs, freestanding signs and ground signs are permitted in any zone districts where commercial or industrial uses are allowed, subject to the following limitations and restrictions:


(a) Maximum area permitted shall be equal to two (2) square feet of sign area for every lineal foot of building fascia length.


(b) For hotels and motels, total sign area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.


(c) For the purpose of this subsection , the sign allowance shall be calculated on the basis of the length of the one building fascia, which is most nearly parallel to the street it faces.


(I) In the event the building occupies a corner lot and has frontage on two (2) public streets, the total allowance of both frontage shall be calculated to determine permitted sign area.


(II) In the event the building does not have frontage on a dedicated public street, the owner of the building may designate the one (1) building fascia which shall be used for the purpose of calculating the sign allowance.

(III) In all other cases, the sign allowance for a building may be distributed in any manner among its fascia except that no one fascia may contain more sign area than that provided in this Section.


Section 14-95.      Limitations based on type of sign.

(1)  Freestanding and ground signs:


In addition to the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-92, and to the extend they are applicable, the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-94, the following limitations shall apply to all freestanding and ground signs:


(a)  Size, height and location:


(I)  Freestanding signs shall comply with the following requirements with respect to size, height and location:

REQUIREMENTS FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS

Maximum Height Above Grade	Minimum Setback From Street Right-of-way Line
(feet)	(feet)
less than 30	0
30 - 42	5
42 - 55	10
The maximum height permitted for any freestanding sign is fifty-five feet (55').  Any freestanding sign lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance with a height of greater than fifty-five feet (55') may be maintained and operated after the effective date of this ordinance until such time that the business or commercial enterprise it identifies or advertises no longer exists at its current location.  (Ord. 1681, eff., 2-15-02)


(II)  Signs erected within fifty feet (50') (measured along the street right-of-way) of the intersection of a street with another street or a driveway, which exceed forty-two inches (42") in height, shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from the street right- of-way or shall maintain free air space between a height of forty- two inches (42") above the adjacent street elevation and a height of seventy-two inches (72") above

said elevation.


(III) No freestanding or ground sign shall be erected within five feet (5') of any interior side lot line.


(IV)  Single-faced freestanding and ground signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way line according to the provisions of this Section.  Any such setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way line at the street to which the sign face is most nearly parallel.


(V)  When any freestanding or ground sign is placed at a forty-five degree (45 E ) angle on property located at the intersection of two (2) dedicated streets, the required setback may be measured from either of the street right-of-way lines.


(b)  All electrical service provided to freestanding signs or ground signs shall be underground.



(2)    Projecting wall signs:


In addition to the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-92, and to the extent they are applicable, the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-94, the following limitations and regulations shall apply to all projecting wall signs:


(a)  Projecting wall signs shall not project over any public property, including public rights- of-way, more than three feet (3').


(b)  In addition, no projecting wall sign shall extend more than six feet (6') from the face of the building from which it is supported.


(c)  Only materials as permitted by the Uniform Building Code (U.B.C.) Vol. V - Signs, governing structural requirements, shall be used in the manufacture and erection of projecting wall signs.  The design and construction of electrical signs shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth by the U.B.C., Vol. V - Signs, Chapter 4, and shall be approved by the Building Inspector.

(d)  Illumination of a projecting wall sign may be both indirect and direct.  However, illumination shall not exceed twenty-five (25) watts per bulb.


(3)  Window signs:


In addition to the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-92, and to the extent they are applicable, the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-94, the following limitations and regulations shall apply to all window signs:


(a)  The area of a window sign shall be the area of a rectangle, square, triangle, portion of a circle, or any combination thereof, which completely encloses the sign or letters which are painted, attached or placed within three feet (3') of the interior of a window.


(b)  Maximum sign area permitted for window signs shall be as follows:


(I)  Residential home occupation use, six (6) square feet.


(II)  Commercial and neighborhood services, forty percent (40%) of window area.


(III)  Industrial use, forty percent (40%) of window area.


(c)  In all cases, the sign allowance for any window area may be distributed in any manner among its windows except that the total window area for all signs may not contain more sign area than that provided by (b) above.


(4)  Flush wall signs:


In addition to the limitations contained in Section 14-92, and to the extent they are applicable, the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-94, the following limitations and regulations shall apply to all flush wall signs:


(a)  Only one (1) flush wall sign is permitted per business, but may be constructed in one (1) or more parts, provided that it conveys one (1) unified message.  Where an establishment has additional exterior walls which are immediately adjacent to a street or thoroughfare (corner     building), each such wall may have one (1) flush wall sign.



(b)  The area of a flush wall sign shall be all that area within its borders which completely encloses the sign or letters which are attached to the face of the building.  The background area of a sign shall not be included in sign area when such background is an integral part of the design of the building.  The area of a primary flush wall sign may not exceed the maximum area set forth in this Section.  The area of a secondary sign may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable sign area for the primary sign, except that the area of each secondary sign may be increased in the amount that the area of the primary sign is decreased.

(c)  A flush wall sign in a commercial zone district may not project more than twelve inches (12") from the wall to which it is attached (except marquees).  Where one establishment shares a common wall with another, a flush wall sign may not be placed closer than one foot (1') to the adjoining establishment.


(d)  Illumination of flush wall signs may be from a concealed source only, which does not flash, blink or fluctuate, and may not be animated.


(5)  Canopy signs:


In addition to the limitations and regulations contained in Section 14-92, and to the extent they are applicable, Section 14-94, the following limitations and regulations shall apply to all canopy signs:


(a)  A canopy sign may have only one (1) row of letters no more than twelve inches (12") in height.


(b)  A canopy sign must be placed so as to allow a minimum of seven feet (7') of head clearance.


(6)    Off-premise signs:


Signs may not be located on premises to which they do not relate unless a variance has been obtained for such purpose. (Ord. 1645, eff., 10-13-00)


Section 14-96.      Non-conforming signs.

(1)  Definition of non-conforming sign :  A non-conforming sign is any sign which either:


(a)  On the effective date of Ordinance Number 1256, was lawfully erected in accordance with the provisions of any prior zoning regulations or sign code, but which sign does not conform to the limitations and regulations established by that ordinance thereto; or


(b)  On or after the effective date of Ordinance Number 1256, was lawfully erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of that Ordinance, but which sign, by reason of an amendment to said limitations established by the amendment to said Ordinance in the district in which the sign is located.

(2)  Continuation of non-conforming signs:


Any non-conforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date of Ordinance Number 1256, provided, however, that no such sign shall be changed in any manner that increases the non-compliance of such sign with the provisions of said Ordinance established for signs in the district in which the sign is located.


(3)  Discontinuation of non-conforming signs:


Termination of non-conforming signs shall be required in the event of the occurrence of any of the following:


(a)  By abandonment - Abandonment of a non-conforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.


(b)  By violation of the Ordinance - Any violation of Ordinance Number 1256 subsequent to the effective date of said Ordinance or any amendment thereto, shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a non-conforming sign.


(c)  By destruction, damage or obsolescence - The right to maintain any non-conforming sign shall terminate and cease to exist whenever the sign is damaged or destroyed by any cause whatsoever, or becomes obsolete or sub-standard under any applicable ordinance of the City of Trinidad to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard or danger.


(d)  By amortization - The right to maintain a non-conforming sign in use at the time of the effective date of Ordinance Number 1256 or any amendments thereto, shall cease at the expiration of two (2) years from such effective date.


(4)  Penalty for non-compliance:


Failure to modify any non-conforming sign so as to conform to Ordinance Number 1256 or any amendments thereto, or to remove such sign within the above stated period of time shall be construed to be a violation of the provisions of this Division and shall subject any person in violation to the penalties set forth in Section 14-98.


(5)  Annexation and non-conforming signs:


All existing signs with flashing, moving, blinking, chasing, or other animated effects not in conformance with the provisions of this Division and located on property annexed to the City after the effective date of Ordinance Number 1256, shall be modified so that such flashing, moving, blinking, chasing or other animated effects shall cease within sixty (60) days after such annexation.


Section 14-97.      Abandoned, damages, destroyed or hazardous signs.

(1)  Abandoned sign - Definition:


An abandoned sign is any sign identifying or advertising a business or commercial enterprise which either no longer exists or has moved from the place where the sign

is located.


(2)  Abandoned signs:


(a)  The owner of any property upon which an abandoned sign is located, shall be required to remove such sign within ninety (90) days of the abandonment or within ninety (90) days of the effective date of Ordinance Number 1376, whichever is later.


(b)  Notwithstanding Paragraph (a) of this Subsection, any person owning real property upon which an abandoned sign is located, who has received a notice directing removal of said sign by the Building Inspector pursuant to Section 14-98, shall be afforded an opportunity to petition the City Council to waive the provisions of Paragraph (a) on the basis of historical significance.  Such petition must be filed with the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days following the issuance of the Notice by the Building Inspector.  The City Council may in its discretion waive the requirements of Paragraph (a) upon a finding that said sign has historical significance and ought to be preserved.


(3)  Damaged, destroyed or hazardous signs.


Any sign which is damaged, destroyed or otherwise becomes hazardous or dangerous, constitutes a public nuisance.  The owner of the property upon which such sign is located shall therefore be subject to the abatement procedures set forth in Sections 16-64, 16-65 and 16-67 of the Code of Ordinances.

Section 14-98.      Enforcement.


(1)  Should any person, firm or corporation actually begin the erection, construction or painting of a sign for which a permit is required by this Division without taking out a permit therefor, he/she shall be required to pay any fees for this purpose imposed by the City Council by ordinance.


(2)  Penalty.


(a)  Whenever the Building Inspector shall find a violation of any of the provisions of this Division, he/she shall notify the person responsible for the violation in writing and shall order the necessary corrections within a period of thirty (30) days.


(b)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Division shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or both. Each day that such a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense.


(3)  No permit shall be required for repairs that do not in any way alter the exterior appearance of a sign, or for repainting it the same color so as to keep such sign in good repair.


(4)  The Building Inspector shall have the authority to allow repair, maintenance, printing and minor changes.  The Building Inspector will make determination as to what areas of repair, maintenance, printing or minor changes require a permit.


Section 14-99.      Exception or variance to sign regulations.

Consideration for the granting of an exception or variance from the provisions of this Division shall be in accordance with Section 14-117.


DIVISION 14.  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.


Section 14-100.    Off-street parking.

(1)  No building shall be erected, unless there is provided on the lot, space for the parking of automobiles or trucks and space for loading and unloading in accordance with the following minimum requirements:


(a)  Bowling alley:  Five (5) parking spaces for each alley.


(b)  Business, professional or public office building studio, bank, medical or dental clinic: Three (3) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000).


(c)  Church:  One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium.


(d)  College or school: One (1) parking space for each eight (8) seats in the main auditorium or three (3) spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater.


(e)  Community center, library or museum:  Ten (10) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) feet of gross floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet.


(f)  Dwellings - single family:  One (1) parking space for each dwelling unit.


(g)  Dwellings (single or multiple family) from 0 to 10 dwellings per acre of residential area: One (1) parking space for each dwelling unit.


(h)  Dwellings (single or multiple family) from 11 to 25 dwellings per acre of residential area: One and one-half (1 ½) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.


(i)  Hospital, sanitarium, home for the aged, or similar institution:  One (1) parking space for each three (3) beds.


(j)  Hotel:  One (1) parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor space contained therein.


(k)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse or similar establishment:  One (1)  parking space for every two (2) employees on the maximum working shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith.


(l)  Mortuary or funeral home:  One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors, and individual funeral service rooms.

(m)  Private club or lodge:  Five (5) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor in activity and meeting rooms.


(n)  Restaurant, night club, café or similar recreation or amusement establishment:  One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross leasable area.


(o)  Retail store or personal service establishment:  One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross leasable area.


(p)  Rooming house, lodging house, fraternity or sorority:  One (1)  parking space for each two (2) beds.


(q)  Sports arena, stadium or gymnasium (except school):  One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats or bench seating spaces.


(r)  Theater or auditorium (except school):  One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats or bench seating spaces.


(s)  Outdoor or mixed facilities and combinations of any permitted uses: A sufficient number of spaces which will, in the determination of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, make reasonable and adequate provision for the highest expected volume of users.  Such determination may be based upon the following:


(I)  The designed capacity of such facilities.


(II)  An overall plan for concentration or concentrations of parking with appropriate consideration of designed landscaping and relation to the surroundings.


(III)  Trade-off, or alternating use of parking area(s) by uses occurring during different hours, seasons, or days.


(IV)  For Planned Unit Developments, cluster developments or other types of design innovations, the required off-street parking shall be as required above for each separate use.  In addition, demonstration of sufficient parking facilities must be made to satisfy other needs or uses as may be developed in the PUD or other type of design development.  Also the Commission may set forth any additional parking

requirements which, in its opinion, may be needed to satisfy the parking demand for any use developed in the PUD.


(2) Parking Space Reduction for Mixed-Use Development
(a) Purpose:
Shared parking arrangements can reduce impervious surface area by allowing a reduction in the number of parking spaces required for a single use where the parking associated with that use is shared with one or more adjacent uses. Shared parking arrangements also increase efficiency in land use and encourage mixed-use development.

(b) Definitions:

(I) Mixed-Use Development – A site-specific development that contains a combination of two or more commercial, industrial and/or residential uses. In order to be included in a mixed-use development for the purposes of this section, an individual use may not be located more than five hundred (500) feet from the nearest site-specific shared parking space.


(c) Mixed-Use Development Parking Requirement Reductions: A reduction in the total number of parking spaces required for all non-residential uses within a mixed-use development, as calculated in accordance with and pursuant to Section 14-100(1) above, is allowed in accordance with the requirements of this section. To be considered for a parking reduction, the applicant must submit an aggregate parking demand analysis for the proposed mixed-use development that includes the hours of peak demand for each individual use. Said analysis must be prepared by a traffic engineer licensed in the State of Colorado and must utilize the latest parking demand analysis methodology as published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (“ITE”), the Urban Land Institute (“ULI”) or other source acceptable to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


Alternatively, the applicant may reduce the total amount of required parking spaces in a mixed-use development in accordance with the following methodology from the Urban Land Institute’s shared parking standards:


(1) Determine the minimum parking space requirements for each individual use within the mixed-use development in accordance with and pursuant to Section 14-100(1).


(2) Multiply the required minimum number of parking spaces for each individual use by the applicable percentages for each of the five time periods set forth in Table 1 below.


(3) Add the required minimum number of parking spaces for all individual uses in each of the five vertical columns of Table 1.


(4) Select the vertical column with the highest total.


(5) Use this number as the required minimum number of parking spaces for the mixed-use development.

Table 1: Urban Land Institute’s Shared Parking Ratios

SHARED PARKING RATIOS (Numbers Are Listed As Percentages)

WEEKDAY

WEEKEND

Use

Morning

12:00 am – 6:00 am

Day

9:00 am – 4:00 pm

Evening

6:00 pm – 12:00 pm

Day

9:00 am – 4:00 pm

Evening

6:00 pm – 12:00 pm

Office

5.0 %

100 %

10 %

10 %

5.0 %

Retail

5.0 %

60 %

90 %

100 %

70 %

Restaurant

10 %

50 %

100 %

100 %

100 %

Entertainment

10 %

40 %

100 %

80 %

100 %

Hotel

75 %

75 %

100 %

75 %

100 %

Others

100 %

100 %

100 %

100 %

100 %



(d) Maximum Parking Space Reduction for Mixed-Use Developments:
In no instance shall any parking reduction exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sum total of the required parking spaces for all individual uses as calculated in accordance with Section 14-100(1) above.


(e) Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA):
For the purposes of this section, no reduction in the number of required ADA-compliant parking spaces are permitted.


(f) Residential Parking in Mixed-Use Developments:
No reductions in the required number of parking spaces are permitted for residential uses located within mixed-use developments. Parking spaces for residential uses within mixed-use developments must be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 14-100(1) above and must be clearly marked as reserved for residential use.


(g) Reserved Parking for Non-Residential Uses within Mixed-Use Developments:
Non-residential parking spaces in a shared parking facility associated with a mixed-use development may not be reserved for individual uses.


(h) Reciprocal Parking Agreements:
A reciprocal written agreement must be executed by all property owners within a mixed-use development that assures the perpetual joint use of all shared parking and contains a provision for the maintenance of the shared parking facility. A copy of said agreement must be submitted to the City of Trinidad Planning Department for review and approval. Said agreement must be recorded as a deed restriction on all properties within the mixed-use development and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the Planning Director. If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the Planning Director or provide the full amount of required parking for each use in accordance with the requirements of Section 14-100(1) above. (Ord. 1921, eff. 11/12/11)

Section 14-101.    Additional height and area regulations.


The following additional height and area regulations shall apply to all zone districts as set forth in this Article:


(1)  Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless towers, grain

elevators, or necessary mechanical appurtenances may exceed the maximum height regulations of the zone district in which they are located provided the maximum height for the use under question is set by the Commission, but in no instance shall such use exceed one hundred feet (100') in height.


(2)  Hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a zone district, may exceed the maximum height regulations of the zone district in which they are located provided the maximum for the use under question is set by the Commission, but in no instance shall such use exceed forty-five feet (45') in height.


(3)  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one lot unless developed as a Planned Unit Development.


(4)  Unless authorized by the Commission, no basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been substantially completed.


(5)  An open unenclosed porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet (10').  An unenclosed vestibule containing not more than forty (40) square feet may project into a front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet (4').


(6)  Open-lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into the rear yard may be permitted by the Building Inspector for a distance of not more than three and one-half feet (3 ½') and where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.


(7)  Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet (3') above the floor level of the ground story may project into a required yard provided these projections be at least two feet (2') from the adjacent side lot line.


(8)  Established front yards may be adjusted according to prevailing setbacks in the following cases:


(a)  Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with two (2) or more buildings that have (with a variation of five feet (5') or less) a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the front yard so established by the  existing building nearest the street line.


(b)  Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with two (2) or more buildings that have a front yard of less depth than herein required and a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within one hundred feet (100') of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the adjacent buildings on each side.  If a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within one hundred feet (100') of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building.


(c)  The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be one-half (l/2) the required front yard on such street, provided that no adjacent structures front on the same street, in which case the entire required front yard must be provided, and no accessory building shall project beyond the required front yard on either street.


(d)  Where lots have double frontage, the required front yards shall be provided on both streets.


Section 14-102.    Basic considerations for conditional uses and uses by special permit.


Any conditional use or use by special permit allowed in the various zone districts as provided in this Article shall be subject to the following basic considerations and other considerations as may be deemed necessary by the Commission in order to protect the general health, safety, welfare and morals of the area in which a conditional use may be located.


(1)  That such use does not create any danger to safety in surrounding areas, does not cause water pollution and does not create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, snow storage problems, or other objectionable influences beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located.


(2)  That upon the discretion of the Commission a written explanation may be required indicating the methods to be used to minimize smoke, odors, dust, and similar environmental and snow storage problems which might result from the operation of the proposed conditional use.


(3)  Special permits shall be approved only after a public hearing notification of such which has been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.


Section 14-103.    Mini-warehouses


(1) Purpose.


The purpose of this Section is to describe the requirements for the approval of the use of property for mini-warehouse development.  Mini-warehouse clients are home dwellers, and people living in small homes.  Other customers include small commercial clients, local merchants, small contractors, and

professionals.  Storage limitations in current housing developments have generated a public need for

a place to store excess property or seasonal goods.  Because of the unique problems peculiar to mini-warehouse development, the procedures and requirements set forth in this section are established to enable the evaluation of proposals for such developments in relation to compatibility with surrounding properties and to ensure that adequate provisions are made for such factors as, but not limited to, exterior appearance, landscaping and screening, on-site parking and circulation, fire protection, outdoor storage, public improvements, the types of items that can be stored, and use limitations of the storage. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(2) Definitions.


Dead Storage - Goods not in use and not associated with any office, retail or other business use on

premise in a self-storage facility or structure. (Ord. 1704, eff.., 9-27-02)


(3) Development review applications.


Applications for a conditional use permit for a mini-warehouse development shall be made by the property owner or his agent to the Planning Commission on forms prescribed for this purpose by the Planning Department.  Outdoor storage is to be considered a separate conditional use requiring a separate permit.  Outdoor storage is not allowed on a mini-warehouse site unless specifically addressed during the conditional use process. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(4) Planning Commission action.


The Commission, by conditional use permit, may authorize as a sole use, mini-warehousing and outdoor storage only in the following districts:


I -              Industrial zone district;

HDR -       High Density Residential zone district;

CC -          Community Commercial zone district. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(5) Lot Requirements.


(a) Lot size to be a minimum of one-half (½) acre. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)

(b) Lot coverage to be a maximum of fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(6) Development regulations.


(a) A mini-warehouse shall be located contiguous to a public right-of-way. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(b) All buildings shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet (25') from a right-of-way when located in any zone district.  There shall be a twenty-foot (20') building setback line from all other property boundaries. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(c) Where the parcel is adjacent to an LDR, MDR, HDR, MHR, PUD, HP, or RE district, a 20-foot landscaped yard shall be provided on the parcel adjacent to the district and a 20-foot landscaped front yard shall be provided when within 100 feet of an LDR, MDR, HDR, MHR, PUD, HP or RE district or when across the street from such districts.  Landscaping shall be in addition to any architectural screening type fence. Such fence, when required, shall be solid or semisolid and constructed to prevent the passage of debris or light and constructed of either brick, stone, architectural tile, masonry units, wood, or other similar material (not including woven wire) and shall not be less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(d) Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be included within the mini-warehouse development. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(e) Parking: Each mini-storage facility shall provide two parking spaces for the manager or caretaker unit and a minimum of five spaces located adjacent or in close proximity to the manager’s unit for customer parking.  No off-site parking will be accepted for parking requirements. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(f) Driving/loading lanes shall be a minimum of twenty-two feet (22') in width when cubicles open onto one side of the lane only and a minimum of thirty feet (30') when cubicles open onto both sides of the lane.  Driveway corners shall have a minimum thirty-foot (30') radius.  Dead end driveways shall in no instance exceed in length the requirements of the Fire Code and in instances that dead end driveways exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') in length; same shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the local Fire Dept. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(g) An emergency ingress/egress may be required in addition to at least one main ingress/egress for customer use. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(7) Use Restrictions


No activities other than rental of storage units and pick-up and deposit of dead storage shall be allowed within the self-storage complex.  Other permitted uses may be allowed on the property subject to all applicable Zoning District Regulations.  General commercial uses set out under the Community Commercial Zoning District are permitted on residual commercially zoned acreage that is not involved in the mini-storage complex.  Watchman’s or manager’s quarters are permitted subject to compliance with residential building code requirements.  Examples of activities prohibited at Self-Storage Facilities include, but are not limited to, the following: (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(a) Commercial wholesale or retail sales, or miscellaneous auctions and garage sales prohibited except for the purpose of foreclosure liquidation by a proprietor. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(b) The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar equipment. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(c) The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathers, compressors, welding equipment, kilns or other similar equipment. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(d) The establishment of a transfer and storage business. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(e) Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(f) Storing of radioactive materials, explosives and flammable or hazardous chemicals. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(g) Use as a residence or for housing animals is prohibited. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(h) Utilizing the Self-Storage Facility for other than dead storage (see definition). (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


(i) Outdoor storage of materials, including; boats, RV’s, trailers, and similar vehicles are not allowed without specific conditional use approval. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


Note: All storage, rental or purchase contracts shall include the above listed restrictions. (Ord. 1704, eff., 9-27-02)


Section 14-104.    Non-conforming uses and structures.


(1)  Nonconformance.  Certain uses of land and buildings may be found to be in existence at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance which do not meet the requirements as set forth herein.  It is the intent of this Section to allow the continuance of such nonconforming use.  However, the owner of each nonconforming use or property must register, with the City Council, the use of such property within one (1) year following the adoption of Ordinance Number 1032, and in addition, every five (5) years thereafter such nonconforming use or property must be verified by questionnaire from the City Council that such use is still operating and in existence on the property.


(2)  Expansion or enlargement.  Except as provided in the HP - Historic Preservation Zone District a nonconforming structure to be extended or enlarged shall conform with the provisions of this Article; a nonconforming activity may be extended throughout any part of a structure which was arranged or designed for such activity at the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance.


(3)  Repairs and maintenance.  Except as provided in the HP - Historic Preservation Zone District the following changes or alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or to a conforming building housing a nonconforming use:


(a)  Maintenance repairs that are needed to maintain the good condition of a building, except that if a building has been officially condemned, it may not be restored under this provision.


(b)  Any structural alteration that would reduce the degree of nonconformance or change the use to a conforming use.


(4)  Restoration or replacement.


(a)  A nonconforming structure that is damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence (“original condition”) is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacing the entire structure may be restored to its original condition.


(b)  A nonconforming structure that is damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence (“original condition”) exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoring the entire structure may be restored to its original condition only if (i) it cannot reasonably be brought into conformance, in whole or in part, with the requirements of the applicable zoning district, and (ii) said restoration is completed within twenty-four (24) months of the date of damage.


(c)  A nonconforming structure may be replaced only if (i) the structure cannot reasonably be brought into conformance, in whole or in part, with the requirements of the applicable zoning district, and (ii) said replacement is substantially completed within twenty-four (24) months of the date on which the building permit was issued.


(d)  The cost of land or any factors other than the cost of the nonconforming structure are excluded in the determination of the cost of restoration for any nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1914, eff. 7/1/11)


(5)  Discontinuance.  Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year, it shall not thereafter be re-established and any future use shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord.1914, eff. 7/1/11)


(6)  Nonconforming lots.  Nonconforming lots on record at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance may be built upon provided that all other relevant district requirements are met and the approval of the Commission is obtained.


(7)  Change in nonconforming use.  No nonconforming use of a building or lot may be changed to another nonconforming use.  A nonconforming use of a building or lot may be changed to a conforming use.


(8)  Construction prior to ordinance passage.  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction, or designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued or City approval obtained and construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within three (3) months of the date of such permit or approval.


(9)  Special exceptions to provisions on expansion of nonconforming uses.  The Commission may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, an exception permitting an increase in either or both the land area or the floor area in a structure or structures occupied by a nonconforming use, subject to terms and conditions fixed by the Commission.  Every exception authorized hereunder shall be personal to the applicant therefore and shall not be transferable, shall run with the land only after the

construction of any authorized structure and only for the life of such structure.  No exception shall be authorized hereunder unless the Commission shall find that all the following conditions exist:


(a)  That the use is a nonconforming use as defined by this Section and is in full compliance with all requirements of this Section applicable to nonconforming uses;


(b)  That, owing to exceptional and extraordinary circumstances, literal enforcement of the provisions of this Article regarding nonconforming uses will result in unnecessary hardship;


(c)  That the exception will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property in the same zone district or other zone districts;


(d)  That the exception will not alter the essential character of the district in which is located the property for which the exception is sought;


(e)  That the exception will not weaken the general purposes of this Article or the regulations established herein for the specific district;


(f)  That the exception will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this Article;


(g)  That the exception will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.

DIVISION 15.  ADMINISTRATION.


Section 14-105.    Enforcement.


The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the City Council, the City Manager, the City Attorney, the City Planner, the City Building Inspector, and the City Code Enforcement Officers, by the following methods:


(1)  Inspection and ordering removal of violations.


(2)  Municipal Court prosecution.


(3)  Injunctive proceedings.


Section 14-106.    City Planner.


The City Planner shall act as adviser to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, and shall administer and enforce all zoning laws of the City of Trinidad.  It shall be his/her duty to see that all land uses conform to the zoning laws of the City of Trinidad.


Section 14-107.    Inspection.


The City Manager and his/her authorized representatives are hereby empowered to cause any building, other structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any of the provisions of this Article within a reasonable period of time.  After any such order has been served, no work may proceed on any building, other structure or tract of land covered by such order, except to remedy or correct such violation.


Section 14-108.    Penalty.


Failure to comply with all of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or both.  Each day that such a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.


Section 14-109.    Injunction.


In addition to any other remedies, the City Attorney, acting on behalf of the City Council, may maintain an action for an injunction to restrain any violation of this Article.


Section 14-110.    Liability for damages.


This Article shall not be construed to hold the City of Trinidad or its authorized representatives responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect or by reason of issuing a building permit.

DIVISION 16.  AMENDMENTS.


Section 14-111.    Authority.


Amendments to the Zoning Map shall be in accordance with the statutes of the State of Colorado, with report and recommendations from the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission to the City Council required prior to the adoption of any such amendment.


Section 14-112.    Declaration of policy and standards for rezoning. (Ord. 1529, eff., 4/13/96)


For the purposes of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the City of Trinidad, the rezoning of land is to be discouraged and allowed only under certain circumstances as provided hereafter.  This policy is based on the opinion of the City Council that the City's zoning map is the result of a detailed and comprehensive appraisal of the City's present and future needs regarding land use allocation and, as such, should not be amended unless to correct a manifest error or because of changed or changing conditions in a particular area or the City in general.  Rezoning shall only be allowed if the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that rezoning is necessary because of one or more of the following reasons:


(a)  The land to be rezoned was zoned in error and as presently zoned is inconsistent with the policies and goals of the City's comprehensive plan; or


(b)  The area for which rezoning is requested has changed or is changing to such a degree that it is in the public interest to encourage a redevelopment of the area or a new approach to development; or


(c)  The proposed rezoning is necessary in order to provide land for a community related use which was not contemplated at the time of development of the comprehensive plan.


(2) In addition, no rezoning shall be allowed unless all of the following conditions are found to have been met:


(a)  That a change in zoning will advance a more effective use of land in harmony with the City’s comprehensive plan; and


(b)  The public interest has been met.


(3) This declaration of standards for rezoning shall not control a rezoning which occurs incidentally to a comprehensive revision of the City’s zoning map.


Section 14-113.    Procedure for amendments in general.


The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on petition of any person or persons in interest, or on initial recommendation of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this Article, provided that where territory is

sought to be rezoned on a proposal other than by the City Council or the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, the person proposing or petitioning for rezoning of territory shall have a property interest in the subject territory.  The applicant shall submit a list of the abutting owners of record and their addresses from available County records.


(1)  Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission advisory report.  Any proposed amendment or change to this Article or to the Zoning Map when initiated by the City Council shall be referred to the Commission for an advisory report thereon.  When a proposed amendment or change is initiated by the Commission, said advisory report shall accompany the initial recommendations of the Commission.


(2)  Procedure before Planning, Zoning and Variance, Commission.  Before giving an advisory report or initial recommendations on any proposed amendment to this Article, the Commission shall first conduct a public hearing thereon.  Notice of the time and place of such hearing and a brief summary or explanation of the subject matter of the hearing shall be given by the City Planner, by one publication of the same at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad.


(3)  Procedure before the City Council.  After receiving the advisory report from the Planning Zoning and Variance Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing before acting on the proposed amendment to this Article or to the Zoning Map.  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the City Council shall be given by the City Planner, by one publication of the same at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad.


Section 14-114.    Amendments to the Official Zoning Map.


Any person petitioning for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall submit a petition to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission through the City Planner.


(1)  Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission advisory report.  Any proposed amendment to the Zoning Map, when initiated by individual petition, shall be referred to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission for an advisory report thereon.


(2)  Procedure before Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.  Before giving an advisory report or initial recommendation on any proposed amendment to the Zoning Map, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall first conduct a public hearing thereon.  Prior to the public hearing, the applicant requesting amendment to the Zoning Map shall post his/her property with a sign, furnished by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, notifying the general public of the time and place of the public hearing before the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission at which said application for amendment shall be reviewed.  Said sign shall be posted on the property frontage at intervals of approximately five hundred feet (500') at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing and shall recite the rezoning applied for.  In addition, notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall be given by the City Planner, by one publication of the same at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trinidad.


(3)  Procedure before the City Council.  After receiving the advisory report from the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing before acting on the proposed amendment.  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the City Council shall be given by the City Planner by one publication of the same at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of

Trinidad.


Section 14-115.    Data to be submitted.


Prior to any consideration for amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall file the following data with the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date of Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission review:


(1)  Certified survey and legal description by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer.


(2)  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal.


(3)  Snow storage facilities and removal.


(4)  Other such site plans or drawings to show a demonstrated need for zoning change.


(5)  The following additional data may be required to accompany the petition for any zone change:


(a)  A site plan showing location of structures, number of dwelling units per structure, existing contours at an interval of 2 feet (2'), location of open space to be retained, location of off-street parking spaces, location of common areas and their proposed usage.


(b)  Evidence of availability of public water and sewer facilities.  Such evidence shall be in the form of a written commitment by a municipal or quasi-municipal agency stating that such service will be available to the property.


(c)  In the event a private water and sewer system is proposed, a written engineering report shall be submitted assuring the availability of water and sewer service and written approval by the Colorado Department of Public Health and the local health authority.


(d)  When a private water and sewer system is proposed, a surety bond in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of such system shall be made in favor of the City of Trinidad and presented at the public hearing concerning the proposed zoning change.  Such bond will be held until construction of said system is completed and approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and the local health authority.  In lieu of a surety bond, the City Council may authorize other such proof of financing or security which will satisfy construction guarantees.

DIVISION 17.  VARIANCE PROCEDURE.


Section 14-116.    Powers of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


The City Planning, Zoning and Variance commission shall have, in addition to other powers set forth in this Chapter, the following additional powers:


(1)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.


(2)  Hear and decide, grant or deny applications for variance from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.  The Commission may also impose reasonable conditions and safeguards, as deemed necessary to address potentially adverse impacts upon adjacent property or the neighborhood. 1 However, the Commission may not grant variances from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance governing the use or density of land or buildings, or the provisions governing Planned Unit Developments.



Section 14-117.    Procedures.


In addition to any procedures the Commission may adopt by rule, the Commission shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:


(1)  The Commission shall schedule and hold a hearing on any appeal from an order, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, and on any application for variance.


(2)  Public notice shall be given of all hearings and all hearings shall be open to the public.


(3)  The Commission shall keep a record of the proceedings, either by sound recording or stenographically, and a copy of the sound recording and of any graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any party for a reasonable fee.


(4)  At the conclusion of any hearing or within not more than thirty (30) days thereafter, the Commission shall render its decision either orally or in writing.  Such decision must set forth findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.  Conclusions based on any provision of the Zoning Ordinance, or on any rule or regulation, must contain a reference to such provision, rule, or regulation and the reason why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.



Section 14-118.    Criteria for consideration of variance requests.


The Commission may grant a variance only if it makes findings that all of the following requirements, insofar as applicable, have been satisfied:


(1)  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, such as irregularity, narrowness or

shallowness of the lot, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the affected property;


(2)  That the unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist throughout the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;


(3)  That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, the property cannot reasonably be developed in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance;


(4)  That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;


(5)  That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood, the Historic Preservation District, or other district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property; and


(6)  That the variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will afford relief and is the least modification possible of the Zoning Ordinance provision which is in question.



Section 14-119.    Effect of decision by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


The appellant or applicant shall be issued a copy of the written decision of the Commission or a written notice of the oral decision of the Commission as soon as practicable after the decision has been rendered.  Unless such decision shall be appealed to the Board of Appeals within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the written decision or written notice of the oral decision in accordance with Section 14-139 of this Code, the decision shall become final at the end of the fifteen (15) day appeal period.

DIVISION 18.  FEES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE.


Section 14-120.    Purpose.


The City Council may establish such fees as deemed necessary to carry out those functions of the Commission as set forth in this Section.


Section 14-121.    Repealed. (Ord. 1523, eff., 12/30/95)


Section 14-122.    Fees for outdoor advertising signs.


At the time of issuance of any permit for an Outdoor Advertising Structure Permit in any O - Open Zone District a fee of Ten and 05/100 Dollars ($10.05) per square foot for each sign having a total face advertising area of thirty-two (32) square feet or more.  The fee for each renewal of an Outdoor Advertising Structure Permit shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00).


Section 14-123.    Fee for Initial Zoning Classification or Rezoning. (Ord. 1523, eff., 12/30/95)


Any person or persons making application for initial zoning classification or classifications of lands being annexed into the City, or for rezoning of lands previously zoned by the City shall be required to pay an application fee of Five Hundred Dollard ($500.00) to the City at the time application is made.  Of the Fee, One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be non-refundable payment for the administrative costs.  The remaining Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) shall be applied toward the City’s publication costs incurred in connection with the application. If the publication costs are less than Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00), the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.  If the publication costs exceed Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00), the applicant shall be required to make an additional payment to the city Equal to the amount by which publication costs exceed Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00).  The requirement to pay all costs due under this Section shall not be affected by the denial of any application.


Section 14-124.    Repealed. (Ord. 1523, eff., 12/30/95)


Section 14-125.    Variance fee. (Ord. 1523, eff., 12/30/95)


Any person or persons making application for variance from the Commission shall be required to make an application fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to the City at the time application is made.  Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) shall be a non-refundable payment for the administrative costs.  The remaining Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) shall be applied toward the City’s publication costs incurred in connection with the application.  If the publication costs are less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.  If the publication costs exceed Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), the applicant shall be required to make an additional payment to the City equal to the amount by which publication costs exceed Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00).  The requirement to pay all cost due under this Section shall not be affected by the denial of any application.  No appeal to the City Council of a denial of a request for variance shall be considered unless all fees due under this Section have been paid.



DIVISION 19.  LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS.


Section 14-126.    Severability clause.


Should any section, clause, or provision of this Article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid.


Section 14-127.    Conflict.


Whenever the requirements of this Article are in conflict with the requirements of any other

ordinance, rule, regulation, private covenant, or deed restriction, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.


Section 14-128.    Interpretation.


In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.


Section 14-129.    Repeal of conflicting ordinances.


All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with Article, are, and the same hereby, are repealed.

ARTICLE 5.  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION.
(Ord. 1584, eff., 5/2/98, 12/8/98; Ord. 1692, eff., 6/28/02)
Section 14-130.    Statutory Authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
(1) Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Colorado has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.  Therefore, the City Council of Trinidad, Colorado does ordain as follows:
(2) Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of Trinidad are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.  Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(3) Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed:
(a) To protect human life and health;
(b) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
(g) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
(h) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards assume responsibility for their actions.
(4) Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(c) Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and,
(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas
Section 14-131. Definitions. (Ord. 2077, Sec 14-131 amended, eff. 7/26/19)
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD - A flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred years.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN - The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood.
500-YEAR FLOOD - A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred years
500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN - The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood.
ADDITION - Any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING - A fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes .
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD – The flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also known as a 100-year flood). This term is used in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to indicate the minimum level of flooding to be used by a community in its floodplain management regulations.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BASEMENT - Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
CHANNEL - The physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries.
CHANNELIZATION - The artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel.
CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR ) - The codification of the general and permanent Rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. It is divided into 50 titles that represent broad areas subject to Federal regulation.
COMMUNITY - Any political subdivision in the state of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) - FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain.
CRITICAL FACILITY – A structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 14-136.1, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Section 14-136.1.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
DFIRM DATABASE - Database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) - FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as “regulatory floodplain maps” for insurance and floodplain management purposes.
ELEVATED BUILDING - A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION -
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL REGISTER - The official daily publication for Rules, proposed Rules, and notices of Federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents.
FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD OR FLOODING - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways;
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or
3. Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current)
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine Base Flood Elevations for some areas.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR - The community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT – A permit required before construction or development begins within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management ordinance.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURE - A physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) - The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of Map Revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation.
FREEBOARD - The vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) - FEMA's official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F) – FEMA’s modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
LEVEE – A man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10.
LEVEE SYSTEM - A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET (MSDS) – A form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) – FEMA’s program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
NO-RISE CERTIFICATION – A record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A No-Rise Certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).
PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR) - FEMA’s action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - means a vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the buildin
STRUCTURE - A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "Start of Construction" of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred "Substantial Damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
THRESHOLD PLANNING QUANTITY (TPQ) – A quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations).
VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Section 14-133.1. Penalties for Noncompliance. (Ord. 2077, enacted, eff. 7-26-19)


No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided is Chapter 1, Section 1-8 of this Municipal Code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Trinidad from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

Section 14-132     General Provisions.
(1) Lands to which this Ordinance applies:
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards and areas removed from the floodplain by a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City of Trinidad, Colorado. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-132(1) repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/1/15)
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Trinidad, Las Animas County, Colorado, dated August 28, 2019, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study and FIRM are on file at 135 North Animas Street, Trinidad, Colorado 81082. (Ord 2077, amended, eff., 7-26-19)
(3) Compliance (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(4) Abrogation and greater restrictions (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(5) Interpretation (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:(Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Considered as minimum requirements: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(6) Warning and disclaimer of liability (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Trinidad, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.(Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
Section 14-133     Administration.
(1) Establishment of development permit (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 14-132(2).  Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City Engineer and/or Public Works Director and may include, but not be limited to: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.  Specifically, the following information is required: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 14- 134(2)(b); and, (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The Public Works Director is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-133(2), repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/1/15)
(3) Duties & Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by this Article.
2. Review, approve, or deny all applications for Floodplain Development Permits required by adoption of this ordinance.
3. Review Floodplain Development Permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
5. Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance, including proper elevation of the structure.
6. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
7. When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this Article, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data and Floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Article.
8. For waterways with Base Flood Elevations for which a regulatory Floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community.
9. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval.
10. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
11. Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-133(3), repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/1/15)
(4)   Variance Procedure (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Variance Board (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, as established by the City of Trinidad, shall hear and decide appeals of interpretations of FIRM boundaries and request for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the City Council acting as the Board of Appeals.  Decisions of Board of Appeals may be appealed to the District Court for the Third District Court as provided for by Colorado law. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:(Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(i) the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(ii) the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(iii) the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(iv) the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(v) the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;(Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(vi) the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(vii) the compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and anticipated development; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(viii) the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(ix) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(x) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and, (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(xi) the costs of providing governmental service during after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and bridges. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Section 14-133(4)(a)(4) and the purposes of this ordinance, the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(6) The City Engineer and/or Public Works Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(b) Conditions for Variances (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base level, providing items (i-xi) in Section 14-133(4)(a)(4) have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increases. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places. (Ord 1996, Sec. 14-133(6)(b)(2), repealed and reenacted, eff., 12-1-15)
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(I) a showing of good and sufficient cause; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(II) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(III) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section 14-133-(4)(a)(4) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
Section 14-134.    Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
(1)  General Standards (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Anchoring (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) All mobile or manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.  Specific requirements may be: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(i) over-the-top ties be provided at each of the two four corners of the mobile or manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile or manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(ii) frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile or manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(iii) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds and; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(iv) any additions to mobile or manufactured home be similarly anchored. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(b) Construction Materials and Methods (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be construction with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(c) Utilities (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(d) Subdivision Proposals (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and  (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) Specific Standards (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 14-132(2), BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or Section 14-133(3)(b), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Residential Construction
(1) New construction and substantial improvements of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. (Ord 1996, Sec. 14-134(2)(a)(1), repealed and reeancted, eff., 12-1-15)
(2) Openings in Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor (Ord. 1692, eff., 6-28-02)
For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Below-Grade Residential Crawlspace Construction (Ord.1692, eff., 6-28-02)
New construction and substantial improvement of any below-grade crawlspace shall:
(i) Have the interior grade elevation, that is below base flood elevation, no lower than two feet below the lowest adjacent grade;
(ii) Have the height of the below grade crawlspace measure from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall, not to exceed four feet at any point;
(iii) Have an adequate drainage system that allows floodwaters to drain from the interior area of the crawlspace following a flood:
(iv) Meet the provisions of Section 14-134(1)(a), Anchoring; Section 14-134(1)(b), Construction Materials and Methods; and Section 14-134(2)(a)(2), Openings in Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor.
(b) Nonresidential Construction (Ord 1996, Sec. 14-134(2)(b), repealed and reenacted, eff., 12-1-15)
New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) be flood-proofed so that below one foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(3) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this paragraph. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 14-133(3)(c)(2).
(c) Mobile or Manufactured Homes (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(1) Mobile or manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section 14-134-(1)(a)(2). (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(2) All mobile or manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the mobile or manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system.

All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.


All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either:


a. The lowest floor or the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditional equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one foot above the base flood elevation; or


b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately-anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. (Ord 2077, Sec. 14-134(2)(c)(2), repealed and reenacted, eff., 7-26-19)

(d) Floodways (Ord 1996, Sec. 14-134(2)(c)(3) renumbered, eff., 12-1-15)
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 14-132(2) are areas designated as floodways.  Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(b) If Section 14-134(3) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 14-134, PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION. (Ord 1584, eff., 5-2-98)
(e)  Recreational Vehicles (Ord. 1996, eff. 12/1/15)
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(c) Meet the permit requirements of this Section, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (c) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Section 14-135. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones).
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in this Article are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
1. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
All new construction and Substantial Improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator.
2. NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Section 14-136.1, all new construction and Substantial Improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section are satisfied.
Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-135, eff. 12-1-15)
Section 14-136. Properties Removed from the Floodplain by Fill.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following:
1. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill.
2. NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-136, eff. 12-1-15)
Section 14-136.1. Standards for Critical Facilities.
A Critical Facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood.
1. CLASSIFICATION OF CRITICAL FACITILIES
It is the responsibility of the City of Trinidad to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria:
Critical Facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) Essential Services; (b) Hazardous Materials; (c) At-risk Populations; and (d) Vital to Restoring Normal Services.
(a) Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines.
These facilities consist of:
i. Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers);
ii. Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions);
iii. Designated emergency shelters;
iv. Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits);
v. Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution ( hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and
vi. Air Transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars).
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances.
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Trinidad City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Trinidad City Council on an as-needed basis upon request.
(b) Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials.
These facilities may include:
i. Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing);
ii. Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
iii. Refineries;
iv. Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and
v. Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers.
Facilities shall be determined to be Critical Facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, AND the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a Critical Facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation “Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification,” 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation “Occupational Safety and Health Standards,” 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this ordinance, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations
Specific exemptions to this category include:
i. Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use.
ii. Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public.
iii. Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products.
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as Critical Facilities under another category outlined in this Article.
(c) At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools.
These facilities consist of:
i. Elder care ( nursing homes);
ii. Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals (day care and assisted living);
iii. Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children);
(d) Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations.
These facilities consist of:
i. Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers);
ii. Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only).
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the Trinidad City Council that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Trinidad City Council on an as-needed basis upon request.
2. PROTECTION FOR CRITICAL FACILITIES
All new and substantially improved Critical Facilities and new additions to Critical Facilities located within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be Critical Facilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, protection shall include one of the following:
(a) Location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area; or

(b) Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the Base Flood Elevation.

3. INGRESS AND EGRESS FOR NEW CRITICAL FACILITIES
New Critical Facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Trinidad City Council, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a100-year flood event. (Ord. 1996, Sec. 14-136.1, eff. 12-1-15)
ARTICLE 6.  BOARD OF APPEALS.
Section 14-137.    City Council designated as Board of Appeals.
The City Council is designated as the Board of Appeals for the City of Trinidad pursuant to Section 8.5 of the Charter of the City of Trinidad.
Section 14-138.    Powers and duties.
The City Council, in its capacity as the Board of Appeals, shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of the City Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission either granting or denying requests for variances and with respect to applications for a conditional use or special use permit, and from orders of the Building Inspector to repair or demolish buildings.  All decisions shall be final.  (Ord. 1632, eff., 6/30/00)
Section 14-139.    Appeals from Planning, Zoning and Variance  Commission - Procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission granting or denying a variance request, or any officer or department of the City, may appeal such decision to the City Council.  Any applicant for a conditional use or special use permit within a zone district whose application has been denied by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission or who is dissatisfied with the decision imposing conditions on the conditional or special use by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission, may appeal such decision to the City Council.  Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk no later than fifteen (15) days following the issuance of the decision by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.  The appeal shall contain, at a minimum, a brief statement setting forth the basis for the appeal.  The City Clerk shall refer the appeal to the City Council, which shall schedule a hearing to be held no less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the City Clerk.  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to the Appellant by the City Clerk, by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the Appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the Appellant at his/her address as shown on the appeal.  The City Planner shall be served with the notice in the same manner.  In the case of an appeal of a variance decision, the person who requested the variance shall also be served in the same manner.  Notice of such hearing shall also be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 1632, eff., 6/30/00)
Section 14-140.    REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)
Section 14-141.    REPEALED. (Ord. 1949, eff. 12/17/13)
ARTICLE 7.  VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
Section 14-142.    Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-143.    Definitions.
As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
1) “ Site specific development plan ” means:
For all developments, the final approval step, irrespective of its title, which occurs prior to building permit application; provided, however, that if the landowner wishes said approval to have the effect of creating vested rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended, the landowner must so request at least twenty (20) days prior to the date said approval is to be considered.  Failure to so request renders the approval not a “site specific development plan,” and no vested rights shall be deemed to have been created.  The City Council may by agreement with the developer designate an approval other than those described above to serve as the site specific development plan approval for a specific project. (Ord. 1624, eff.,12/18/99)
2) “ Vested property right ” means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-144.    Notice and hearing.
No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing.  Such notice may, at the City’s option be combined with the notice required by Section 31-23-304, C.R.S., as amended, for zoning regulations, or with any other required notice.  At such hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-145.    Approval - effective date amendments.
A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the City Council approval action relating thereto, as set forth in Section 14-143 above.  In the event amendments to a site specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the City Council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-146.    Notice of approval.
Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language:
“Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended.”  Failure to include this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right.  In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.” (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-147.    Payment of costs.
n addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan, shall pay, at the time of application, all costs incurred by the City as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs, which amount shall be set at Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00), of which Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) shall be a nonrefundable administration and review fee.  The remaining One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be applied toward the costs of publication of notices in connection with the application.  If the publication costs are less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.  If the publication costs exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), the applicant shall be required to make an additional payment to the City equal to the amount by which publication costs exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1624, eff., 12/18/99)
Section 14-148.    Other provisions unaffected.
Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12.18.99)
Section 14-149.    Limitations.
Nothing in this Article is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended.  In the event of the repeal of said Article or a judicial determination that said Article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Article shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. (Ord. 1624, eff., 12.18.99)
ARTICLE 8. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES
Section 14-150. Findings.
(1) The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“the Act”) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from Telecommunications Facilities; and (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) The re gulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) The City’s regulation of Towers and Telecommunication Facilities in the City will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-151.    Purposes.
The general purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City.  Specifically, the purposes of this Ordinance are: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(1) To regulate the location of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in the City; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) To minimize adverse visual impact of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(4) To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of Towers and Antenna Support Structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use Towers; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(5) To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for new Tower structures to support antenna and Telecommunications Facilities; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(6) To avoid potential damage to property caused by Towers and Telecommunications Facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(7) To ensure that Towers and Telecommunications Facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-152.    Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when use in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(1) Antenna Support Structure means any building or structure other than a Tower which can be used for location of Telecommunications Facilities. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) Applicant means any Person that applies for a Tower development permit. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) Application means process by which the Owner of a parcel for land within the City submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a Tower upon such parcel of land.  Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representation, in whatever form or forum, made by the Applicant of the City concerning such a request. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(4) Engineer means any engineer licensed by the State of Colorado. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(5) Modification means repair or restoration of the Tower to the extent that the cost of such repair or restoration is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing or rebuilding the entire tower. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(6) Owner means any Person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding ten (10) years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the City who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a Tower upon such parcel of land. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(7) Person is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(8) Stealth means any Tower or Telecommunications Facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and Towers designed to look other than like a Tower such a light poles, power poles, and trees.  The term Stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole Tower designs. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(9) Telecommunications Facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a Person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a Tower or Antenna Support Structure.   However, Telecommunications Facilities shall not include: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) Any satellite earth station antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(10) Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports Telecommunications Facilities.  The term Tower shall not include amateur radio operators’ equipment, as licensed by the FCC. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-153.    Development of Towers.
(1) A Tower shall be a conditional use in the Industrial Zone District and the Community Commercial Zone District. No person shall build, erect, or construct a Tower within the Industrial Zone District or Community Commercial Zone District unless a development permit shall have been issued by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission. Application shall be made to the Planning Director in the manner provided in this Article.  (Ord. 1961, Sec. 14-153(1) repealed and reenacted eff., 7/11/14)
(2) No person shall build, erect, or construct a Tower upon any parcel of land within any zone district set forth above unless a development permit shall have been issued by the Planning Director, and the approval of the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission is obtained. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) Development permits shall be issued by the Planning Director upon approval of an application to develop a Tower by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission and payment of a permit fee of $750.00.  Development permits for new or modified monopole Towers shall be effective for the period of construction plus a period of five (5) years after certification pursuant to Section 14-165(1).  Development permits for new or modified lattice and guyed Towers shall be effective for the period of construction plus a period of two (2) years after certification pursuant to Section 14-165(1).  Subsequent permits shall be issued for the periods of time coinciding with the certification schedule set forth in Section 14-165(1).  The fee for any such permit shall be $500.00. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(4) Towers shall be permitted to a height of fifty (50) feet in accordance with Section 14-167. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(5) No new Tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the City unless the Tower is capable of supporting another Person’s operating Telecommunications Facilities comparable in weight, size and surface to the Telecommunications Facilities installed by the Applicant on the Tower within six (6) months of the completion of the Tower construction. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(6) An application to develop a Tower shall include: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the Owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated.  If the Applicant is not the Owner of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is to be located, the written consent of the Owner shall be contained in the Application. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is to be located. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(c) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other Towers or usable Antenna Support Structures within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed new Tower site, including City-owned property. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(d) A description of the design plan proposed by the Applicant.  The Applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent technological design, including micro cell design, as part of the design plan.  The Applicant must demonstrate the need for Towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of micro cell, cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the Applicant’s telecommunications services. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(e) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the Applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the Applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities on Towers or usable Antenna Support Structures owned by the City or other Persons located within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed Tower site. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(f) Written technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower or Telecommunications cannot be installed or collocated on another person’s Tower or usable Antenna Support Structures owned by other Persons located within one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed Tower site. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(g) A written statement from an Engineer(s) that the construction and placement of the Tower will not interfere with public safety communications or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(h) Written, technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in Section 14-155. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(i) Written, technical evidence from a qualified Engineer(s) acceptable to the Fire Chief and the Building Inspector that the proposed site of the Tower or Telecommunications Facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous material such as LP gas, propane, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(j) In order to assist City staff and the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission in evaluating visual impact, the Applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the Tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed Tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential properties and from adjacent roadways. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(7) The Application to develop a Tower shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee of $250.00. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(8) The Planning Director or the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission may require an Applicant to supplement any information that it considers inadequate or that the Applicant has failed to supply.  An Application may be denied on the basis that the Applicant has not satisfactorily provided the information required in this subsection.  Applications shall be reviewed by the City in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for approval or denial. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-154.    Setbacks.
(1) All Towers up to thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zone district.  Towers in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be set back one (1) additional foot per such foot of Tower height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) Setback requirements for Towers shall be measured from the base of the Tower or the furthest point of projection of the Tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in Section 14-167 (2)(a) when placement of a Tower in a location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished, such as adjacent to trees which may visually hide the Tower. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-155.    Structural requirements.
All Towers must be designed and certified by an Engineer to be structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the Uniform Building Code, and any other standards outlined in this Article.  All Towers in operation shall be fixed to land. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-156.    Separation or buffer requirements.
(1) For the purpose of this Section, the separation distances between Towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed Tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a Tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property.  The minimum Tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other Towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of City jurisdictional boundaries. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) Proposed Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing Towers or Towers which have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) Monopole Tower structures shall be separated from all other Towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred and fifty (750) feet. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) Self-supporting lattice or guyed Tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed Towers by a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(c) Self-supporting lattice or guyed Tower structures shall be separated from all monopole Towers by a minimum of seven hundred and fifty (750) feet. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-157.    Method of determining Tower height.
Measurement of Tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of this Article shall include the Tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other Telecommunications Facilities attached thereto.  Tower height shall be measured from grade. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-158.    Illumination.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Association (FAA).  Upon commencement of construction of a Tower, in cases where there are residentially uses located within a distance which is three hundred (300) percent of the height of the Tower from the Tower and when required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-159.    Exterior finish.
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-160.    Landscaping.
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing Towers, Antenna Support Structures, or Telecommunications Facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zone district where the Tower, Antenna Support Structure, or Telecommunications Facilities are located.  The City may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in the City’s Code of Ordinances in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses.  Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-161.    Access.
A parcel of land upon which a Tower is located must provide access to at least one (1) paved vehicular parking space on site. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-162.    Stealth Design.
All towers are encouraged to use stealth design.  Stealth design will be required when determined appropriate by the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-163     Telecommunications Facilities on Antenna Support Structures.
Any Telecommunications Facilities which are not attached to a Tower may be permitted as a conditional use of any Antenna Support Structure, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located.  Telecommunications Facilities are prohibited on all other structures.  The owner of such structure shall, by written certification to the Planning Director, establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building permit: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(1) That the height from grade of the Telecommunications Facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of the Antenna Support Structure by more than (20) feet; (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) That any Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Structure, are set back one (1) foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one (1) foot in height above the primary roof of the Telecommunications Facilities.  This setback requirement shall not apply to Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the City.  Setback requirements shall not apply to Stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of Antenna Support Structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more than eighteen (18) inches from the side of such an Antenna Support Structure. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-164.    Modifications of Towers.
(1) A Tower existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, which was in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure.  Such nonconforming structures may be modified without complying with any of the additional requirements of this Article except Section 14-156, 14-165 and 14-166, provided: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) The Tower is being modified for the sole purpose of accommodating, within six (6) months of the completion of the modification, additional Telecommunications Facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the discrete operating Telecommunications Facilities of any Person currently installed on the Tower. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) An application for a development permit is made to the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission which shall have the authority to issue a development permit.  The grant of a development permit pursuant to this Section allowing modification of an existing nonconforming Tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified Tower is conforming. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
2) Except as provided in this Article, a nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days.  This Ordinance shall not be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time this Ordinance is adopted which structure or use is in violation of the Code prior to enactment of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-165.    Certifications and inspections.
(1) All Towers shall be certified by an Engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and all other construction standards set forth in the City’s Code of Ordinances and federal and state law.  For new monopole Towers, such certification shall be submitted with an Application pursuant to Section 14-153 and every five (5) years thereafter.  For existing monopole Towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Ordinance and then every five (5) years thereafter.  For new lattice or guyed Towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to Section 14-153 and every two (2) years thereafter.  For existing lattice or guyed Towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) day of the effective date of this Ordinance and then every two (2) years thereafter.  The Tower owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the Tower is jeopardized. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) The City or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a Tower is located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the Tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the Uniform Building Code and all other construction standards provided by the City Code and federal and state law. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the Tower owner.  All expenses related to such inspections by the City shall be borne by the Tower owner. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-166.    Maintenance.
(1) Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods, materials, and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) Tower owners shall install and maintain Towers, Telecommunications Facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, state and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(3) All Towers, Telecommunications Facilities, and Antenna Support Structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any Person. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(4) All maintenance or construction of Towers, Telecommunications Facilities, or Antenna Support Structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(5) All Towers shall maintain compliance with current emission standards of the FCC. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(6) In the event that the use of a Tower is discontinued by the Tower owner, the Tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of discontinuance. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-167.    Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications.
(1) Notwithstanding the Tower requirements provided in this Article, a modification to the requirements may be approved by Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission as a conditional use in accordance with the following: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) In addition to the requirement for a Tower Application, the Application for modification shall include the following: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(I) A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impacts that might occur as a result of approving the modification. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(II) A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the modification. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(III) A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the Applicant upon which the request for modification is based.  The technical study shall be certified by an Engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationships to surrounding rights-of-way and properties. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(IV) For a modification of the setback requirement, the Application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed Tower could be located, attempts by the Applicant to contract and negotiate any agreement for collocation, and the result of such attempts. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(V) The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission may require the Application to be reviewed by an independent Engineer at the Applicant’s expense to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall consider the Application for modification based on the following criteria: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(I) That the Tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the
character and integrity of surrounding properties. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(II) Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(III) In addition, the Commission may include conditions on the site where the Tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed Tower and mitigate any adverse impacts in connection with the approval of the modification. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) In addition to the requirements of subparagraph (1) of this Section, in the following cases, the Applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following: (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(a) In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement contained in Section 14-154, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the Tower is proposed to be located, and no reasonable alternative exists. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(b) In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other Towers of Section 14-156, that the proposed site is zoned “Industrial” and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands provided for in Section 14-156. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(c) In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially zoned land of Section 14-156, if the Person provides written technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower and Telecommunications Facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the Applicant’s wireless communications system and if the Person is willing to create approved landscaping, stealth towers, and other buffers to screen the Tower from being visible to residentially zoned property.  (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(d) In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for Towers and Telecommunications Facilities or to the minimum height requirements for Antenna Support Structures, that the modification is necessary to: (I) facilitate collocation of Telecommunications Facilities in order to avoid construction of a new Tower; or (II) to meet the coverage requirements of the Applicant’s wireless communications system, which requirements must be documented within written, technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that demonstrates that the height of the proposed Tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no Tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be approved. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-168.    Abandonment.
(1) If any Tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days, the Planning Director shall notify the Owner, with a copy of the Applicant, that the site will be subject to a determination by the City Council that such site has been abandoned.  The Owner shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tower has been in use or under repair during the period.  If the Owner fails to show that the Tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the City Council shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site.  Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the Owner shall, within seventy-five (75) days, dismantle and remove the Tower. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
(2) To secure the obligation set forth in this Section, the Applicant and/or Owner shall post bond in an amount determined by City Council based on the estimated cost of removal of the Tower. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-169.    Severability.
That if any clause, section, or other part of this Ordinance shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
Section 14-170.    Conflicts.
That all provision of the Code of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1675, eff., 10-26-01)
ARTICLE 9. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
Section 14-171.    Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and design of sexually oriented businesses within the City, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses.  The provisions of this article are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.  It is not the intent of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.  Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-172.    Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(1) ADULT ARCADE - means any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or
invited where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image or virtual reality producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, are used regularly to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic, digital or electronic reproductions describing, simulating or depicting “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO - means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, digital video discs, CD-ROMs or other digital video media, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representatives however produced that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) ADULT CABARET - means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium or other commercial establishment that features: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(a) persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(b) live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by the exhibition of “specified sexual activities.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(4) ADULT MOTEL - means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, digital video discs, CD-ROMS or other digital video media, video cassettes, slides, or other media productions, however produced, which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” and which commercial establishment has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of media production. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(5) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - means a commercial establishment that is distinguished or characterized by the showing, for any form of consideration, or films, motion pictures, digital video discs, CD-ROMs or other digital video media, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, or more than one hundred (100) days per year, that have an “X” rating or that have an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(6) ADULT THEATER - means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(7) COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT - may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as a sexually oriented business.  Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” The term “commercial establishment” includes clubs, fraternal organizations, social organizations, civic organizations, or other similar organizations with paid memberships. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(8) EMPLOYEE - means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(9) ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - means and includes any of the following: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(a) the opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ??????
(b) the conversion of any existing business into a sexually oriented business; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(c) the addition of a different sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(d) the relocation of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(10) FOYER - means an architectural element of a building that consists of an entry hall or vestibule that is completely enclosed and contains one door to provide access to areas outside of the building and a separate door to provide access to areas inside of the building. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(11) LICENSEE - means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(12) LICENSING OFFICER - means the City Clerk or his or her designee. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(13) MANAGER - means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(14) NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY - means: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(a) the appearance of human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(b) a state of dress which fails opaquely and fully to cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the female breast. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(15) NUDE MODEL STUDIO - means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(16) OPERATOR - means and includes the owner, license holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any licensed premises. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(17) PEEP BOOTH - means a room, semi-enclosure or other similar area located within a licensed premises wherein a person may view films, motion pictures, digital video discs, CD-ROMs or other digital video media, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, which depict or describe “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(18) PERSON - means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(19) PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES - means any premises that requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business, including parking lots and sidewalks immediately adjacent to the structure containing the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(20) PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE - means as to any establishment, having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade the items listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store above and having on the premises at least thirty percent of the establishment’s display space occupied by the display of the items described therein. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(21) PRINCIPAL OWNER - means any person owning, directly or beneficially:(Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(a) any membership or partnership interest in a limited liability company or limited liability partnership if such person has any legal control or authority over the management or operation of the entity; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(b) in the case of any other legal entity, five (5) percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity, except for shareholders, but including such shareholders who are corporate officers or directors or who otherwise have any legal control or authority over the management or operation of the entity. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(22) PUBLIC PARK - an area of land owned by a governmental entity and intended to be used for recreational purposes, but not including any such land that contains no improvements and is intended only for open space purposes, and not including any such land that is intended for use only for pathway purposes. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(23) SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or nude model studio.  The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the State of Colorado engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(24) SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY - means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices, which supporting straps or devices are used to support or enable the wearing of such clothing. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(25) SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - as used herein means and includes any of the following: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(a) human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, that are not completely and opaquely covered; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
(26) SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS - means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, sexual assault, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity, prostitution, or pandering. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
??????????????
(27) SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - means and includes any of the following: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(a) the fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(b) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(c) masturbation, actual or simulated; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(d) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(e) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(28) TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - means and includes any of the following: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ??????????????
(a) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(b) the transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(c) the establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift or other similar legal device that transfer ownership or control of the business, including a transfer by bequest or operation of law. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-173.    Lighting regulations.
(1) All off-street parking areas and premises entries of adult businesses shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a light system which provides an average minimum maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways.  This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult business to help ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) The interior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place (including peep booths) at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) Adult motion picture theaters shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every interior place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle of light as measured at the floor level. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(4) It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-174.    Location of sexually oriented businesses and design of same. ???????
(1) It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of I-Industrial District. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred (500) feet of:  (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ??????????????
1. any church; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
2. any school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Colorado; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
3. an existing dwelling; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
4. a public park; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
5. a licensed childcare facility. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(2) It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business on any property that has frontage on a street on which a school is located. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(3) It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of a sexually oriented business within one hundred (100) feet of any other sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(4) All exterior windows in a sexually oriented business shall be opaque to such an extent that interior objects viewed from outside shall be so obscure as to be unidentifiable.  Exterior windows in sexually oriented businesses shall not be used for any display or sign except for a sign that complies with the requirements of Sections 14-89 through 14-104 of this Code. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(5) All doors for ingress and egress to a sexually oriented business, except emergency exits used only for emergency purposes, shall be located on the front of the sexually oriented business. For purposes of this subsection, the front of a sexually oriented business shall be deemed to be that facade of the building that faces the front lot line of the lot or parcel on which the business is located.  Every sexually oriented business shall have a foyer at every point of ingress or egress, except for emergency exits.  In the case of a sexually oriented business having more than one front lot line, the sexually oriented business shall be oriented so that the front of the business faces away from the nearest of any of the land uses listed in subsection (1) above. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-175.    Measurement of distance.
(1) The distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business, or, in the case of a sexually oriented business operating within a condominium estate or leasehold estate, from the closest airspace boundary of such condominium estate or from the closest wall of such leasehold estate. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) The distance between any sexually oriented business and any church, school, dwelling, public park or childcare facility shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the  closest exterior structural wall of the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling, public park or childcare facility.  If the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted is comprised of a condominium estate or leasehold estate, such distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest airspace boundary of the condominium estate or the nearest wall of the leasehold estate used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling, public park or childcare facility. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-176.    Other locational regulations.
???????
(1) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of Section 14-174 will be permitted to continue for a period of six (6) months from the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(2) Upon application made by the owner of a sexually oriented business within four months of the effective date of this ordinance, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), the City Manager may, after a hearing to be held within 30 days of the application, grant an extension of time during which a sexually oriented business in violation of Section 14-174 will be permitted to continue upon a showing, by competent evidence, that the owner of the business has not had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business.  At the hearing, the City Manager shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the City Attorney, the owner, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer that is relevant to the issue of whether the owner of the business has had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business.  The City Manager shall make findings of fact, from the statements and evidence offered, as to whether the owner of the business has had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business.  If the City Manager grants an extension of time during which a sexually oriented business in violation of Section 14-174 will be permitted to continue, he or she shall issue an order to that effect, which states exactly the period of the extension.  A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the owner within 30 days of the hearing.  No extension of time shall be for a period greater than that reasonably necessary for the owner of the business to recover his or her initial financial investment in the business.  A sexually oriented business in violation of Section 14-174 may continue during such extended period unless the business is sooner terminated for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more.  Such business shall not be enlarged, extended, or altered except that the business may be brought into compliance with this Article.  In preforming his duties pursuant to this section, the City Manager may retain independent counsel to advise him with regard to any matter. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03) ???????
(3) A sexually oriented business which at the time it received its sexually oriented business license was in compliance with the location requirements of Section 14-174 does not violate the section if when the sexually oriented business applies to renew its valid sexually oriented business license a church, school, dwelling, public park or childcare facility is now located within five hundred (500) feet of the sexually oriented business.  This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid sexually oriented business license and does not apply to an application for a sexually oriented business license that is submitted as a result of the previous sexually oriented business license at the same location expiring or being revoked. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-177.    Stage required in adult cabaret and adult theater.
Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one or more separate areas designated as a stage in the diagram submitted as part of the application for the sexually oriented business license.  Entertainers shall perform only upon a stage.  The stage shall be fixed and immovable and located inside the building in which the adult use operates.  No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage.  No members of the audience shall be permitted upon the stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-178.    Conduct in sexually oriented business.
(1) No licensee, manager or employee mingling with the patrons of a sexually oriented business, or serving food or drinks, shall be in a state of nudity.  It is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this subsection that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area only during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) No licensee, manager or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or breasts of any person. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-179.    Employee tips.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth in subsection 3 of this section. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips.  All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided in this section shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises, in bold letters at least one inch high to read as follows: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
“All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees.  Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited.” (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-180.    Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee, manager or employee to violate any of the requirements of this Article, or knowingly to permit any patron to violate the requirements of this article. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
???????
Section 14-181.    Exemptions.
The provisions of this article regulating nude model studios do not apply to:(Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(1) A proprietary school, licensed by the State of Colorado; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) A private college or university that maintains and operates education programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) A business located in a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-182.    Regulation of peep booths.
It shall be unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business with peep booths to violate the following requirement of this section: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(1) At least one employee must be on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that such employee shall be clearly visible from every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.  If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the employee in at least one of the manager’s stations from each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this Code. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video display equipment.  If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations.  The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this Code. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) No peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(4) No door, two-way mirror, screen, opaque covering or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-183.    Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or for the licensee, manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the licensed premises during the following time periods: (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(1) On any Tuesday through Saturday from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m.; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) On any Monday, other than a Monday that falls on January 1, from 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.; (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(3) On any Sunday from 2:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(4) On any Monday which falls on January 1, from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-184.    Minimum age.
(1) Except for such employees as may be permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business that operates pursuant  to a type A sexually oriented business license.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon the premise of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
(2) It shall be unlawful for the licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except for such employees as may be permitted by law, to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business operated pursuant to a type A sexually oriented business license.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-185.    Signs for sexually oriented businesses.
In addition to complying with all other sign regulations of this Code, a sexually oriented business shall display a sign, clearly visible and legible at the entrance of the business, that gives notice of the adult nature of the sexually oriented business and of the fact that the premises is off limits to minors or those under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as the case may be.  No signs for a sexually oriented business shall contain flashing lights, words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations that emphasize specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-186.    Right of entry.
The application for an adult-oriented business license shall constitute the irrevocable consent of the licensee and the licensee’s agents and employees to permit the city police department or any other agent of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed adult business during the hours the establishment is conducting business.  Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner, and only as frequently as may be reasonably necessary. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
Section 14-187.    Penalty provision.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, licensee, lessee, sublessee, occupant, or employee, violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Code violation, and each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted; and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or corporation shall be punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, as set forth in Section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. 1738, eff., 10-21-03)
ARTICLE 10.  SIDEWALK CAFÉ REQUIREMENTS.

Section 14-188. - 14-200.      REPEALED (Ord. 2028, eff. 5/12/17)


ARTICLE 11.  RESIDENTIAL CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA


Section 14-200.1.  Definitions.
All terms concerning the medical use of marijuana shall take the meaning they are given in Article XVIII, Section 14 (1)(a)-(j) of the Colorado Constitution.

“Primary residence” shall refer to the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes their principle domicile; the address to which a person intends to return following any temporary absence or vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, occupancy, and use for such domestic purposes as preparing and partaking of meals, slumber, and repose, and use of the residential address for purposes such as receiving mail, vehicular and voter registration, or credit, water, or utility billing. This definition shall include residences that are let, leased, or rented from one property owner to another person or persons.



Section 14-200.2.  Limits on Medical and Recreational Use in Residences.
In addition to full compliance with the regulations of marijuana use found in the Colorado Constitution, applicable State law, and all other Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, all persons possessing marijuana plants in their residences in the City of Trinidad shall be bound by the following:
There shall not be, on any property other than those licensed by the City of Trinidad for commercial possession of marijuana, any more than twelve (12) marijuana plants, no more than six (6) of which may be mature, flowering, and producing a usable form of marijuana.
A person shall possess marijuana plants only in their primary residence.
In no case shall a person’s allotment of marijuana plants be held on two (2) properties at once. In the case that a person has a debilitating medical condition which shall have been declared by the State of Colorado to allow them the medical use of marijuana, that person’s allotment of marijuana plants may be possessed in the primary residence of their primary care-giver.
If a person resides on a property that they do not own, they must first obtain the written consent of the owner before possessing marijuana plants therein.
A person may possess marijuana plants in accessory structures of their residence, but the restrictions of this ordinance still apply.
The lawful possession and cultivation of marijuana shall be contingent upon the following:
There shall be no visual, odorous, or auditory indication of said possession or cultivation, perceptible from any other residence, property, or right of way. This shall also prohibit signs to that effect;
There shall not be undue vehicular or foot traffic, including excess parking, at the residence;
There shall be no criminal activity, on or in the vicinity of the property, in any way related to the possession of marijuana plants thereon;
The cultivated marijuana and marijuana plants shall not be accessible to any person under the age of twenty-one (21); it must be secured and under lock and key when any person under the age of twenty-one (21) is on the premises of the property.
??????? In the case that the primary care-giver is in possession of marijuana plants for more than one patient, each patient’s respective allotment must be demarked.
No processing chemical or pressurized gas shall be used on the property to enhance or extract the tetrahydrocannibinol (THC) from marijuana.
The Police Chief, or his designee, may inspect the residence of a person cultivating marijuana upon their permission (and the permission of the property owner, if they are not the same person), or upon receiving an inspection warrant duly issued by the Municipal Court Judge. Barring an emergency, any such inspection shall take place during reasonable hours and shall be for the purpose of verifying compliance with this ordinance.
All cultivation of marijuana shall comply fully with applicable sections of Building, Fire Safety, and Health Codes, and with the requirements of officials enforcing such Codes.
If the possession or cultivation of marijuana causes the need for the City of Trinidad to provide services above and beyond the standard requirements for the residence, or if it causes damage or wear which the City of Trinidad must repair, any such expenditures shall be the sole liability of the property owner.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense, punishable according to the penalties in section 1-8 of this code, for any person to violate any portion of this code, and a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day in which any violation of this Ordinance is committed or permitted.
Violation of part (b)(i) and (b)(ii) of this section shall be established upon the official complaint of no less than three (3) residents of the neighborhood, given that said persons live within a two (2) block radius of the person against whom they are complaining, and that no two complainants live at the same residence. Violation may also be determined by the Police Chief, or his designee.

Any ordinance or ordinances pertaining to public nuisances, either present or adopted later into the Code of the City of Trinidad, shall apply in a supplementary fashion to the restrictions in this ordinance on the medical and personal use of marijuana. (Ord. 2030, Article 11 amended, eff. 6-16-17)
ARTICLE 11.  RESERVED
ARTICLE 12.  MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND RETAIL MARIJUANA.
(Ord. 2004, Article 12 enacted, eff. 4-29-16)
Section 14-201.  Purposes, intent and other laws.
(a) The purposes of this Article are to implement the provisions of Article 43.3 of Title 12, C.R.S., known as the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code; to regulate the sale and distribution of marijuana in the interests of patients who qualify to obtain, possess and use marijuana for medical purposes under Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution; and to implement the provisions of Article 43.4 of Title 12, C.R.S., the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, which authorizes the licensing and regulation of retail marijuana businesses and affords the City the option to determine whether or not to allow retail marijuana businesses within its jurisdiction and to adopt licensing requirements that are supplemental to or more restrictive than the requirements set forth in state law.  The intent of this Article is to establish a nondiscriminatory mechanism by which the City can control, through appropriate regulation, the location and operation of medical marijuana establishments and retail marijuana establishments within the City.  Nothing in this Article is intended to promote or condone the sale, distribution, possession or use of marijuana in violation of any applicable law.  Compliance with the requirements of this Article shall not provide a defense to criminal prosecution under any applicable law.
(b) If the state adopts any stricter regulation governing the sale or distribution of medical or retail marijuana or their respective derivative products than those set forth in this Article, the stricter regulation shall control the establishment or operation of any medical or retail marijuana establishment in the City.  A licensee may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the local licensing authority, or by law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any marijuana found upon the licensed premises are in full compliance with applicable state regulation.  If the state prohibits the sale or other distribution of medical or retail marijuana, any license issued under this Article concerning the type of marijuana subject to such prohibition shall be deemed immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress by the licensee.  The issuance of any license pursuant to this Article shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of medical marijuana or retail marijuana.
Section 14-202.  Definitions.
(a)  The following words and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
Applicant shall mean any person or entity who has submitted an application for a license or renewal of a license issued pursuant to this Article.  If the applicant is an entity and not a natural person, applicant shall include all persons who are the members and managers of such entity.
Colorado Medical Marijuana Code shall mean Title 12, Article 43.3 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended from time to time, and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.
Colorado Retail Marijuana Code shall mean Title 12, Article 43.4 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended from time to time, and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.
Consumer means a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who purchases marijuana or marijuana products for personal use by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, but not for resale to others.
Cultivation or cultivate shall mean the process by which a person grows a marijuana plant or plants.
Industrial hemp means the plant of the genus cannabis and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with a Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed three-tenths percent on a dry weight basis.
Good cause (for the purpose of refusing or denying a license or license renewal under this Article) means:  (1) the licensee has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this Article, of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code or Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, as applicable, or of any rule and regulation promulgated under either Code, as applicable, or under this Article; (2) the licensee has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions that were placed on its license, whether state or local, at the time the license was issued, or that were placed on its license, whether state or local, in prior disciplinary proceedings or that arose in the context of potential disciplinary proceedings; or (3) the licensee’s marijuana establishment has been found to have been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the marijuana establishment is located. Evidence to support such a finding can include:  (i) a continuing pattern of offenses against the public peace; (ii) a continuing pattern of drug-related criminal conduct within the premises of the marijuana establishment or in the immediate area surrounding the marijuana establishment; or (iii) a continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the marijuana establishment.
License shall mean a document issued by the City officially authorizing an applicant to operate a marijuana establishment pursuant to this Article or, if required by the context, means a document issued by the state licensing authority pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, as applicable.
Licensee shall mean the person or entity to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this Article.
Licensed premises means the premises specified in an application for a license under this Article, which is owned or in possession of the licensee and within which the licensee is authorized to cultivate, test, manufacture, distribute, or sell retail or medical marijuana or retail or medical marijuana products in accordance with state and local law.
Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
Marijuana establishment means a medical marijuana establishment or a retail marijuana establishment.
Medical marijuana establishment means a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer, as defined in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.
Medical marijuana-infused product means a product infused with medical marijuana that is intended for use or consumption other than by smoking, including but not limited to edible products, ointments, and tinctures. These products, when manufactured or sold by a licensed medical marijuana center or a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer, shall not be considered a food or drug for the purposes of the "Colorado Food and Drug Act", Part 4 of Article 5 of Title 25, C.R.S.
Retail marijuana establishment means a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturer or a retail marijuana testing facility, as defined in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code.
Retail marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including without limitation to edible products, ointments and tinctures.
School shall mean a public or private preschool or a public or private elementary, middle, junior high or high school.
State shall mean the state of Colorado.
State licensing authority means the authority created by the state of Colorado for the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, sale and testing of medical marijuana and retail marijuana in the State of Colorado pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-43.3-201.
(b)  In addition to the definitions contained in Subsection (a) of this Section, other terms used in this Article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution; Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, and such definitions are hereby incorporated into this Article by this reference.
Section 14-203. Licensing authority created.
There shall be and is hereby created a Marijuana Licensing Authority hereafter referred to in this Article as the “Authority.”
Section 14-204.  Composition of the Authority.
The Authority shall be the City Council.
Section 14-205.  Functions of the Authority.
(a)  Subject to all other requirements of this Article and excepting any delegation of duty and authority, the Authority shall have the duty and authority pursuant to this Article to grant or deny licenses for marijuana establishments and to process applications for new licenses, renewals, transfers of ownership, modifications of premises and changes of location of an existing licensed business.
(b)  The Authority shall have the power to: (i) promulgate rules and regulations concerning the procedures for hearings before the Authority; (ii) conduct hearings personally or to appoint and designate a Hearing Officer to conduct any hearing; (iii)  require any applicant or licensee to furnish any relevant information required by the Authority; and (iv) administer oaths and issue subpoenas to require the presence of persons and the production of papers, books and records at any hearing that the Authority is authorized to conduct.  Any such subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by a district court of the state.
Section 14-206.  License required; term of license; renewal application; taxes.
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any marijuana establishment within the City that has not been licensed by the state licensing authority.  It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate any marijuana establishment within the City without first having obtained from the Authority a license for the marijuana establishment.  Such licenses shall be kept current at all times and shall be conspicuously displayed at all times in the premises to which they apply.  The failure to maintain a current state or City license shall constitute a violation of this Section.
(b)  Any license issued by the Authority under this Article shall expire one year after it is approved.
(c)  An application for renewal of an existing license shall be made on forms provided by the Authority.  The City Clerk is authorized to administratively process and approve, conditionally approve or deny renewal applications, or refer the license renewal to the City Council who shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny renewal applications. The City Clerk shall not approve a renewal application unless credible evidence of good cause is presented.  The City Clerk may impose reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to obtain or ensure compliance with this Article, this Code and applicable state law.  The City Clerk shall provide written notice of his or her decision, including the reason(s) therefor, by first-class, postage-prepaid U.S. mail to the Applicant at the address shown in the application. An Applicant may request an additional form of notification by electronic mail or other means, as specifically authorized by the Applicant on the Application.  An Applicant whose renewal application is denied or conditionally approved may appeal the Clerk’s decision to the Authority by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the decision.  The Authority shall conduct a hearing on such appeal in accordance with Section 14-209 of this Article. The standard of approval to be applied by the City Clerk as set forth in this subsection (c) shall also apply to the Authority’s review of the Application.
(d)  At the time of the renewal application, each Applicant shall pay the appropriate fee(s) pursuant to Section 14-214.
(e)  A licensee shall collect and remit City sales tax on marijuana, retail marijuana products, medical marijuana-infused products, paraphernalia and other tangible personal property sold at retail.  A licensee shall also collect and remit any other taxpayer-approved tax, or any valid fee enacted by the City, pursuant to this Code or any state or federal code.
(f)  A license issued pursuant to this Article does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required permits or licenses related to the operation of the marijuana establishment, including, without limitation, a conditional use permit, a health department permit, and any development approvals or building permits required by any applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 14-207.  Application requirements.
(a) Prior to making an application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this Article, the person potentially seeking the license shall first attend at least one pre-application meeting with the City Manager and such other City staff designated by the City Manager.  The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to advise the potential applicant as to the process for applications under this Article, to answer preliminary questions from the potential applicant, and to provide an opportunity to identify issues that might preclude the issuance of a license pursuant to this Article.  A person seeking a license pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall submit an application to the City on forms provided by the Authority.  As a part of any such application, the applicant shall present for recording one (1) of the following forms of identification:
An identification card issued in accordance with Section 42-2-302, C.R.S.;
A valid state driver’s license;
A United States military identification card; or
A valid passport.
(b) The applicant shall also provide the following information on a form provided by the Authority, which information shall be required for the applicant and the proposed manager of the marijuana establishment:
Name, address, date of birth, and other identifying information as may be required;
If the applicant is a business entity, information regarding the entity, including without limitation the name and address of the entity, its legal status and proof of registration with, or a certificate of good standing from, the Colorado Secretary of State, as applicable;
A copy of the deed reflecting the applicant’s ownership of, or a lease reflecting the right of the applicant to possess, the proposed licensed premises;
If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed licensed premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the use of the property for the particular type of marijuana establishment proposed;
Evidence of the issuance of a conditional use permit to conduct the proposed marijuana establishment at the proposed location;
Evidence of the issuance of a license by the state licensing authority for the proposed licensed premises for the type of marijuana establishment proposed;
If the marijuana establishment will be manufacturing or providing retail marijuana products or medical marijuana-infused products in an edible form, evidence, at a minimum, of a pending application for any food establishment license or permit that may be required by the state and/or Las Animas County;
Evidence that all applicable fee(s) have been paid;
A description of the projected demand on City utilities and measures relating thereto, including but not limited to:
a. Projected water usage;
b. Projected volume and content of discharge into the sewer system;
c. Any proposed interceptor, filter or other device necessary to prevent harmful materials from entering the City sewer system; and
d. An acknowledgement that the Applicant may be required to dedicate water rights to the City, or otherwise provide an approved alternative means of providing water to the licensed premises, if, in the judgment of the Authority, the projected or actual water usage exceeds the City’s capacity to serve.
Any additional information that the City Clerk reasonably determines to be necessary in connection with the investigation, review and determination of the application.
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Clerk shall circulate the application to all affected service areas and departments of the City to determine whether the application is in full compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. The Authority shall not act to approve, conditionally approve or deny an initial license Application until after the Authority has conducted a public hearing thereon in accordance with Section 14-209 of this Article.  The Authority shall approve an Application upon a finding that the proposed business complies with the requirements of this Article, this Code and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and/or Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, as applicable.
(d)  In a competitive application process in which there are more applicants than there are available licenses, the Authority shall have as a primary consideration whether an Applicant:
(1)  Has prior experience producing or distributing marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code; the number of state and local licenses for marijuana which the Applicant currently holds; the number of marijuana licenses or conditional use permits in any given geographic area; the benefit to the community and the public good; and
(2)  Has, during the experience described in paragraph (1) above, complied consistently with all applicable provisions of the Colorado Constitution, Colorado law, state regulations implementing such state laws, and this Code, as well as previous versions of the local ordinances and Codes regarding Marijuana regulation, as applicable.
(3) The Authority shall determine which of the applicants shall proceed with an application for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).  Only the Applicant selected by the Authority may apply for a Conditional Use Permit in a competitive application process.
(e) The Authority may impose reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to obtain or ensure compliance with this Article, this Code, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and/or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, as applicable.
(f) After approval of an Application, the City Clerk shall not issue a license or license certificate until the building in which the business is to be conducted is ready for occupancy with such furniture, fixtures and equipment in place as are necessary to comply with the applicable provisions of this Article.  After approval of an Application, the City Clerk shall not issue a license or license certificate until the Applicant provides written evidence that the Applicant has paid all applicable state and local fees due in connection with the Application.  Each license certificate issued by the City pursuant to this Article shall specify the date of issuance, the period of licensure, the name of the licensee, and the premises licensed.
Section 14-208.  Denial of application.
The Authority shall deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this Article.  The Authority shall deny any application that contains any false, misleading or incomplete information.  The Authority shall deny an application for good cause.  Denial of an application for a license by the Authority shall not be subject to further review, but shall be subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 14-209. Hearings required.
(a)  The Authority shall conduct a public hearing on any Application submitted under this Article for a new license or change of location of an existing licensed marijuana establishment and on any appeal of a decision on an Application rendered by the City Clerk in accordance with this Article.
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be posted and published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten (10) days before the hearing.  Such notice shall describe the type of Application submitted, the date of Application, the name and address of the Applicant, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, or manager of the facility to be licensed, the existing or proposed location of the marijuana establishment, as appropriate, and the date, time and place the hearing will be conducted.  Posted notice shall be by a sign in a conspicuous place on the proposed licensed premises, which sign shall comply with the requirements of C.R.S. § 12-43.3-302(2).
(c) The Authority shall issue a written decision approving, conditionally approving or denying an Application requiring a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision shall state the reason(s) for the decision and be sent by certified mail to the Applicant at the address shown in the application. An Applicant may request an additional form of notification by electronic mail or other means, as specifically authorized by the Applicant on the Application.  In addition, the Authority shall promptly notify the state licensing authority of its action on an Application for local licensure.
Section 14-210. Transfers of Ownership; Modification of Premises.
(a)  The City Clerk is authorized to administratively process and approve, conditionally approve or deny Applications from existing locally-licensed marijuana establishments to transfer or change ownership or to modify the licensed premises. The City Clerk may elect to refer any application to the Authority for decision, even when such application is eligible for administrative approval, in his or her discretion.
(b)  The City Clerk shall approve an Application filed pursuant to this Section unless credible evidence of good cause is presented.  The City Clerk may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the approval of an Application filed pursuant to this Section as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to obtain or ensure compliance with this Article, this Code and applicable state law.
(c)  The City Clerk shall provide written notice of his or her decision, including the reason(s) therefor, by first-class, postage-prepaid U.S. mail to the Applicant at the address shown in the application. An Applicant may request an additional form of notification by electronic mail or other means, as specifically authorized by the Applicant on the Application.  An Applicant whose Application is denied or conditionally approved under this Section may appeal the Clerk’s decision to the Authority by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the decision.  The Authority shall conduct a hearing on such appeal in accordance with Section 14-209 of this Article. The standard of approval to be applied by the City Clerk as set forth in subsection (b) above shall also apply to the Authority’s review of the Application.
Section 14-211. Locational criteria and numerical limit on retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers.
(a)  A marijuana establishment shall be operated from a permanent, fixed location and, except as further limited in this Section, within a zone district of the City that allows for the type of use(s) to be conducted by the marijuana establishment.  No marijuana establishment shall be permitted to operate from a moveable, mobile or transitory location.  The suitability of a location for a marijuana establishment shall be determined at the time of the issuance of the first license.  The fact that later changes in the neighborhood occur that may render the site unsuitable for a marijuana establishment shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license.  No marijuana establishment shall be issued a license if, at the time of application for such license, the proposed location is within 1,000 feet of any school, as that term is defined by Section 14-202 of this Code.
(b)  The distance limitation set forth in Subsection (a) above shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the lot used for a school to the nearest property line of the lot on which the new marijuana establishment is proposed to be located.
(c) Consistent with the other requirements of this Section, a marijuana establishment may locate within the following zone districts within the City as a conditional use upon obtaining the necessary conditional use permit in accordance with this Chapter 14:  CC, Community Commercial; I, Industrial; and HP, Corazon De Trinidad Historical Preservation District. Location of a marijuana establishment in any zone district not listed in this subsection (c) is expressly prohibited.
(d) Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet shall only be allowed in the Industrial zone district north of Kit Carson Bypass/Exit 15 on Interstate 25.
(e) The locational criteria contained in this section shall apply to all proposed changes in the location of an existing license.
(f) Any provisions of this Code concerning home occupations notwithstanding, no marijuana establishment shall be located in any residential zoning district.
(g)  No proposed retail marijuana store or medical marijuana center shall be issued a license or a conditional use permit, nor shall an application for a license or conditional use permit be accepted by the City Council or Planning, Zoning, and Variance Commission, if the proposed location, if approved, will exceed the maximum number of locations permitted in the City.  The limitation of this paragraph on the maximum number of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers shall not be applied so as to effect licenses or conditional use permits, in existence or applied for, as of May 1, 2016, nor the renewal of such licenses.
(1)  The maximum total number of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers when counted together in the City shall not exceed twenty (20) locations.  The limitation of this paragraph on the maximum number of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers shall not be applied so as to effect licenses or conditional use permits, in existence or applied for, as of May 1, 2016, nor the renewal of such licenses.
Section 14-212.  Marijuana Cultivation Outdoors.
(a) All marijuana cultivation which occurs outdoors or outside of any structure shall be limited to occur only in the City of Trinidad Industrial Park, properties zoned Agricultural, or properties which had conditional use permits for outdoor cultivation applied for or approved at the effective date of this ordinance.
Section 14-213.  Inspection of licensed premises.
During all business hours and other times of apparent activity, all licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the Authority, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief of the local fire protection district, the Building Official, or the authorized representative of any of them, for the purpose of investigating and determining compliance with the provisions of this Article and any other applicable state or local law or regulation.  Such inspection may include, but need not be limited to, the inspection of books, records and inventory.  Where any part of the premises consists of a locked area, such area shall be made available for inspection, without delay, upon request.
Section 14-214.  Fees.
The following fees are required at time of application:
(a)  For medical marijuana establishments:
(1)  Annual Licensing Fee, non-refundable is $ 1,000 (due with initial application and with each subsequent renewal).
(b) For retail marijuana establishments:
(1) Annual operating fee, non-refundable is $ 1,000 (due with initial application and with each subsequent renewal).
(c) Cultivation Fee on Retail Marijuana
(1) All retail marijuana cultivated inside the City Limits of the City of Trinidad shall be subject to a $25 per pound fee due to the City for each cultivated pound produced in a Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility.    This fee shall be dedicated to infrastructure maintenance, repair, replacement, expansion, or new infrastructure systems, to include City Utilities and Public Works.  Said fee shall be due and payable monthly by the 20th of each month to the Department of Finance.


If in any month, a Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility licensee transfers marijuana, as defined in Colorado state law, payment of the City’s Cultivation Fee shall be paid to the City at a rate of $25.00 per pound, measured to four decimal places.  The filing of said fee shall be accompanied by the City’s remittance report and a copy of the State harvest and transfer reports (currently generated through metrc®).  If no retail marijuana is transferred in a given month, submission of the monthly harvest and transfer reports is still required to be submitted to the City of Trinidad.  Any Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility that fails to submit the required reports each month or that fails to pay the Cultivation Fee in any month where a transfer has occurred, is in violation of this Article. 


All Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility licensees are required to provide the City Manager or his/her designee access to their operations for physical observation of the same and shall provide access to all financial and inventory records for auditing purposes.  The reports submitted by licensees shall be confidential.(Ord. 2046, Sec.14-214(c)(1), repealed and reenacted, eff. 11-18-17)

Section 14-215.  Prohibited acts generally.
It is unlawful for any licensee to:
(a) Permit the use or consumption, in any manner, of retail marijuana products, medical marijuana-infused products or marijuana of any type or form, on the licensed premises.
(b) Permit the consumption of alcohol beverages, as defined in the Colorado Liquor Code, on the licensed premises;
(c) Purchase or otherwise obtain marijuana, retail marijuana products or medical marijuana-infused products from a source that is not properly authorized under state and local law to sell or dispense the same;
(d) Dispense marijuana, retail marijuana products or medical marijuana-infused products to a person that is or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of any controlled substance, including marijuana.
Section 14-216.  Additional operational limitations.
(a) No marijuana shall be given away, transferred, sold, or otherwise exchanged or transacted at a marijuana establishment, except to a person authorized to possess the same under the laws and Constitution of Colorado.
(b) All plants and products shall be concealed from public view.  Plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia shall not be visible from a public sidewalk or right-of-way.  All products shall be in a sealed/locked cabinet except when being accessed for distribution.
(c)  A marijuana establishment shall not exceed its projected demand on City utilities, as stated in its application, or as amended during the application process, without the written approval of the City Utilities Director, who shall issue such approval upon a finding that the proposed increase in demand will not compromise the City’s ability to safely and adequately serve all customers of the City utilities.
Section 14-217.  Off-site storage facilities prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to locate any off-site marijuana storage facility within the City.
Section 14-218. Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.
(a) The City Clerk may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license for good cause.
(1) Temporary-Summary Suspension.
(i) Where the City Clerk has reasonable grounds to believe and finds that a licensee has been guilty of a deliberate and willful violation of any applicable law or regulation or that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and incorporates such findings in its order, it may temporarily or summarily suspend the license pending proceedings for suspension or revocation which shall be promptly instituted and determined.
(ii) The temporary suspension of a license without notice pending any prosecution, investigation, or public hearing shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen days.
(b) Th e City Clerk shall not suspend or revoke a license until after notice and an opportunity for hearing has been provided to the licensee.  The hearing will be noticed and conducted in accordance with Section 14-209, and held by the Authority.
(c) The Authority shall not hold a hearing on a license renewal application unless a complaint has been filed concerning the licensee or there are allegations against the licensee that, if established, would be gro unds for suspension, revocation or non-renewal under Subsection (a) of this Section.
Section 14-219.  Violations and penalties.
In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license under the provisions of this Article, any person, including but not limited to any licensee, manager or employee of a marijuana establishment, or any customer of such business, who violates any provision of this Article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Section 1-8 of this Code.
Section 14-220.  No City liability; indemnification; no defense.
(a) By accepting a license issued pursuant to this Article, the licensee waives any claim concerning, and releases the City, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys and agents from, any liability for injuries or damages of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of business owners, operators, employees, clients or customers of the licensee for a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
(b) By accepting a license issued pursuant to this Article, all licensees, jointly and severally if more than one (1), agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys, agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims and demands on account of any injury, loss or damage, including without limitation claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the marijuana establishment that is the subject of the license.
(c) The issuance of a license pursuant to this Article shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense or immunity for any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have under state or federal law for the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of marijuana.
14-221.  Definition of Primary Residence.

 All terms concerning the medical use of marijuana shall take the meaning they are given in Article XVIII, Section 14 (1)(a)-(j) of the Colorado Constitution.

“Primary residence” shall refer to the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes their principle domicile; the address to which a person intends to return following any temporary absence or vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, occupancy, and use for such domestic purposes as preparing and partaking of meals, slumber, and repose, and use of the residential address for purposes such as receiving mail, vehicular and voter registration, or credit, water, or utility billing. This definition shall include residences that are let, leased, or rented from one property owner to another person or persons. (Ord. 2015, effective 8-12-16)


14-222.  Limits on Medical and Recreational Use in Residences.

In addition to full compliance with the regulations of marijuana use found in the Colorado Constitution, applicable State law, and all other Ordinances of the City of Trinidad, all persons possessing marijuana plants in their residences in the City of Trinidad shall be bound by the following:
There shall not be, on any property other than those licensed by the City of Trinidad for commercial possession of marijuana, any more than twelve (12) marijuana plants, no more than six (6) of which may be mature, flowering, and producing a usable form of marijuana.
A person shall possess marijuana plants only in their primary residence.
In no case shall a person’s allotment of marijuana plants be held on two (2) properties at once. In the case that a person has a debilitating medical condition which shall have been declared by the State of Colorado to allow them the medical use of marijuana, that person’s allotment of marijuana plants may be possessed in the primary residence of their primary care-giver.
If a person resides on a property that they do not own, they must first obtain the written consent of the owner before possessing marijuana plants therein.
A person may possess marijuana plants in accessory structures of their residence, but the restrictions of this ordinance still apply.
The lawful possession and cultivation of marijuana shall be contingent upon the following:
There shall be no visual, odorous, or auditory indication of said possession or cultivation, perceptible from any other residence, property, or right of way. This shall also prohibit signs to that effect;
There shall not be undue vehicular or foot traffic, including excess parking, at the residence;
There shall be no criminal activity, on or in the vicinity of the property, in any way related to the possession of marijuana plants thereon;
The cultivated marijuana and marijuana plants shall not be accessible to any person under the age of twenty-one (21); it must be secured and under lock and key when any person under the age of twenty-one (21) is on the premises of the property.
i.    In the case that the primary care-giver is in possession of marijuana plants for more than one patient, each patient’s respective allotment must be demarked.

No processing chemical or pressurized gas shall be used on the property to enhance or extract the tetrahydrocannibinol (THC) from marijuana.
The Police Chief, or his designee, may inspect the residence of a person cultivating marijuana upon their permission (and the permission of the property owner, if they are not the same person), or upon receiving an inspection warrant duly issued by the Municipal Court Judge. Barring an emergency, any such inspection shall take place during reasonable hours and shall be for the purpose of verifying compliance with this ordinance.
All cultivation of marijuana shall comply fully with applicable sections of Building, Fire Safety, and Health Codes, and with the requirements of officials enforcing such Codes.
If the possession or cultivation of marijuana causes the need for the City of Trinidad to provide services above and beyond the standard requirements for the residence, or if it causes damage or wear which the City of Trinidad must repair, any such expenditures shall be the sole liability of the property owner.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense, punishable according to the penalties in section 1-8 of this code, for any person to violate any portion of this code, and a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day in which any violation of this Ordinance is committed or permitted.
Violation of part (b)(i) and (b)(ii) of this section shall be established upon the official complaint of no less than three (3) residents of the neighborhood, given that said persons live within a two (2) block radius of the person against whom they are complaining, and that no two complainants live at the same residence. Violation may also be determined by the Police Chief, or his designee.
Any ordinance or ordinances pertaining to public nuisances, either present or adopted later into the Code of the City of Trinidad, shall apply in a supplementary fashion to the restrictions in this ordinance on the medical and personal use of marijuana. (Ord. 2015, effective 8-12-16)
ARTICLE 13. CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT.

(Ord. 1975, Article 13, eff. 6-2-15)


Section 14-245.  Historic Preservation Commission


(1)  Establishment.  There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission, hereinafter in this Chapter14, Article 13 referred to as the Commission.


(2)  Membership.


(a)  The Commission shall consist of five (5) members providing a balanced, community-wide representation, and all shall have an interest in historic preservation.  The Commission shall have at least one (1) design professional, (1) licensed real estate broker and (3) members at large.  Commission members shall not be members of the Trinidad City Council or a City Council Officer as defined in Section 2-16 of the Code of Ordinances.


(b)  A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of Trinidad for a minimum of one (1) year prior to appointment.  The remaining member of the Commission must reside in Las Animas County and must either own property within the City and/or have a licensed business within the City.


(3)  Appointments and Terms.


(a)  Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Trinidad City Council and shall serve a three year staggered term from the date of appointment.  In order to stagger the initial terms of membership the original membership shall serve as follows:


One (1) appointment shall serve a one-year term

Two (2) appointments shall serve two year terms

Two (2) appointments shall serve three year terms


(b)  Members may be reappointed by the City Council to serve successive terms without limitation.

(c)  Appointments to fill vacancies on the Commission shall be made by the City     Council.  Such appointments shall be for the remainder of the vacated term only.


(d)  Members of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council for just cause, which includes neglect of duty, acts detrimental to the City’s interest, malfeasance in office or excessive absences.  Absences by members of the commission of three consecutive meetings or three absences in a six month rolling period shall be cause for evaluation by City Council for the purpose of consideration of the member’s removal from the Commission.  The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies in a newspaper of local circulation requesting that interested individuals submit a letter indicating their interest and qualifications for the position advertised.


(4)  Officers and Voting


(a)  The Commission shall by majority vote, elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the Commission’s meetings.  This shall be done at the first meeting of each calendar year.  This term shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for re-election.


(b)  A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of the regular membership.  A quorum of 3 members is necessary for the Commission to hold a public hearing or to take official actions.  A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the motion or recommended motion.


(5)  Meetings and Appearances


(a)  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting per quarter, with monthly meetings as necessary.  It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record.  The City shall provide an administrative staff person to assist with this function.


(b)  No member of the Commission shall appear on his/her own behalf or on the behalf of any private person before either the Historic Preservation Commission or the City Council in connection with any matter before the Commission.


Section 14-246.  Powers, Duties and Authority of the Commission


The Commission shall act in a quasi-judicial manner, and it shall have the following powers, duties and rulemaking authority:


(1)  Adopt criteria for review of historic properties and for review of proposals to alter, demolish or relocate designated properties.


(2)  Review properties nominated for designation as a local landmark and recommend that the City Council designate by ordinance those properties qualifying for such designation.  Nominated properties will only be reviewed once the property owner has given written permission for the designation; Review districts nominated for designation as local historic districts and recommend that the City Council designate by ordinance those districts qualifying for such a designation.  Nominated districts will only be reviewed once 100% of the property owners have given written permission for the designation.


(3)  Review and make decisions on any application for alterations to a designated historic landmark.


(4)  Review and make decisions on any application for moving or demolishing a historic landmark.


(5)  Maintain a list of significant historic properties through the periodic updating of the Trinidad Inventory of Historic Buildings.


(6)  Advise and assist owners of historic properties on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, including nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.


(7)  In conjunction with the local historical based organizations, the Commission should seek to develop and assist in public education programs, lectures and conferences.


(8)  Conduct surveys of historic areas for the purpose of defining those of historic significance, and prioritizing the importance of identified historic areas and structures.


(9)  Advise the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission and the Trinidad City Council on matters related to preserving the historic character of the City.


(10)  Actively pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs through grants and by other means in partnership and collaboration with other entities as much as possible.


(11)  Recommend removal of properties from the register of local landmarks if the criteria for revocation of designation are met.


Section 14-247.  Local Historic Landmark Designation


(1)  Pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth in Section 14-246(2), the City Council may, by ordinance designate as a landmark an individual structure or an integrated group of structures on a single lot or site having a special historical or architectural value;


(a)  Each such designating ordinance shall include a description of the characteristic of the landmark which justifies its designation and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location, boundaries of the landmark site and the character defining features that qualify the landmark for designation.


(b)  Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of this Section 14-247(3).


(c)  The property included in any such designation shall be eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed by this Commission and the City Council.


(d)  No such designating ordinance will be enacted involving a property without written permission from the property owner.


(2)  Procedures


(a)  A nomination for designation may be made by any property owner desiring to obtain a landmark designation by filing an application with the City of Trinidad Planning Department.


(b)  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposal no more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of the application.  The notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be made by one (1) publication in a newspaper of local circulation in the City.  The Commission shall review the application for conformance of the proposed designation with the established criteria for designation and the standards set forth in Section 14-247(3).


(c)  At the conclusion of the public hearing or within not more than forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall 1) approve or 2) modify and approve or 3) disapprove the proposal by a majority vote.


(d)  The Commission shall forward its recommendation and written report to the Trinidad City Council for consideration and final action.


(3)  Standards for local landmark designation


The Trinidad Historic Preservation Commission, duly empowered as defined in Section 14-246(2), will evaluate and determine the merit of sites as defined in Section 14-247(3), for local landmark designation.  The following historical, architectural or geographic criteria shall be used in this determination:


(A)  If it is at least fifty (50) years old; AND


(B)  If it has historic importance.  Historical importance relates to a building, structure, object and/or site that:


(a)  Has character, interest, value and which has affected the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(b)  Is the site of a historic event that has interest, value and which has affected the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(c)  Is identified with a person or group of persons who had some influence on the development, heritage and cultural characteristics of the City, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(d)  Exemplified the cultural, political, economic, social or historical heritage of the community; OR


(C)  If it has architectural importance.  Architectural importance relates to a building, structure, object and/or site that:


(a) Portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history; or


(b) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of a significant or unique architectural type specimen; or


(c) Is the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the character of the City, State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(d) Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural style; OR


(D) If it has geographic importance.  Geographic importance relates to a building,

structure, object and/or site that:


(a)  Should be preserved based on a consistent historic, cultural or architectural motif; or


(b) Due to its unique location or singular physical characteristics represents an established and familiar visual feature of the city.


(E) Any site listed on the State or National Register of Historic Places shall be deemed to qualify for local designation under this Section 14-247(3), but is not automatically designated as a Local Landmark and must submit an application to receive the designation.


Section 14-248.  Local Historic District Designation


(1)  Pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth in Section 14-246(2), the Trinidad City Council may, by ordinance designate as a district a contiguous area as having a special historical or architectural value;


(a)  Each such designating ordinance shall include a description of the characteristic of the district which justifies its designation and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the district area.


(b)  The designating ordinance may also indicate alterations which would have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the district area.


(c)  Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of Section 14-248(3).


(d)  The district included in any such designation shall be eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed by the Trinidad Historic Preservation Commission and the Trinidad City Council.


(2)  Procedures


(a)  A nomination for designation may be made by any property owner desiring to obtain a district designation by filing an application with the City of Trinidad Department of Planning.


(b)  The Planning Department shall contact every property owner of record within the boundaries of the proposed district outlining the reasons and effects of the designation and, secure the consent of 100% of the ownership within the proposed area before the nomination is accepted as complete for review.


(c)  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposal no more than forty-five (45) days after the nomination has been accepted for review.  The notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be made by one (1) publication in a newspaper of local circulation in the City.  The Commission shall review the nomination for conformance of the proposed designation with the established criteria for designation and the standards set forth in Section 14-248(3).


(d)  At the conclusion of the public hearing or within not more than forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing the Commission shall 1) approve, or 2) modify and approve or 3) disapprove the proposal by a majority vote.


(e)  The Commission shall forward its recommendation and written report to the Trinidad City Council for consideration and final action.


(3)  Standards for local landmark designation


The Trinidad Historic Preservation Commission, duly empowered as defined in Section 14-246(2), will evaluate and determine the merit of sites as defined in Section 14-248(3), for local district designation. The following historical, architectural or geographic criteria shall be used in this determination:


(A)  The proposed district has a percentage of structures that are at least (50) years old; AND


(B)  The proposed district has historical importance.  Historical importance relates to a district and/or area that:


(a)  Has character, interest, value and which has affected the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(b)  Is the site of a historic event that has interest, value and which has affected the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(c)  Is identified with a person or group of persons who had some influence on the development, heritage and cultural characteristics of the city, the State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(d)  Exemplified the cultural, political, economic, social or historical heritage of the community; OR


(C)  The proposed district architectural importance. Architectural importance relates to a district and/or area that:


(a)  Portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history; or


(b) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of a significant or unique architectural type specimen; or


(c) Includes the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the character of the City, State of Colorado or the Nation; or


(d) Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural style; OR


(D) The proposed district has geographic importance.  Geographic importance relates to a district and/or area that:


(a)  Should be preserved based on a consistent historic, cultural or architectural motif; or


(b)  Due to its unique geography or physical characteristics represents an established and familiar visual feature of the City.


Section 14-249.  Revocation of a Designation


(1)  Revocation of local historic landmark designation from buildings, structures, objects and/or sites.


(a)  If a designated local landmark is lawfully removed, demolished or the victim of a natural disaster, the Trinidad Historic Preservation Commission and/or the property owner may request that the Trinidad City Council take action to revoke the local historic landmark designation.


(b)  Trinidad City Council must revoke a designation by ordinance.  Revocation of a designation is final.


(2)  Revocation of local historic district designation from districts and/or areas.


(a)  If a designated local district is significantly depleted of its qualifying historic structures or is the victim of a natural disaster, the Trinidad Historic Preservation Commission may request that the Trinidad City Council take action to revoke the local historic district designation.


(b)  Trinidad City Council must revoke a designation by ordinance.  Revocation of a designation is final.


Section 14-250.  Landmark Alteration Certificates


(1)  No person shall carry out or permit to be carried out on a designated landmark property any new construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or other designated feature without first obtaining a landmark alteration certificate for the proposed work.


(a)  The City of Trinidad Building Department shall be provided a current record of all designated landmark properties and pending designations by the Historic Preservation Committee.  The Building Department will refer any requests regarding these properties to the City of Trinidad Planning Department.


(2)  Construction on proposed landmark properties.


(a)  No person shall receive a permit to construct, alter, remove or demolish any structure or other feature on a proposed landmark property after an application has been filed to landmark the property.  Any such permit will be placed on hold until the landmark proceedings have come to a conclusion.


(3)  Landmark alteration certificate application and Commission review.


(a)  An owner of property which has been designated as a local landmark or a property that is located within a locally designated historic district will be required to apply for a landmark alteration certificate before making any alterations to the exterior appearance of the property.


(b)  The City of Trinidad Planning Department will process the landmark alteration certificate application as well as any required design specifications that illustrate the proposed changes to the landmarked property.


(c)  The City of Trinidad Planning Department shall make available a detailed list of submittal requirements for the applicant’s use.


(A)  Administrative Review Process for Minor Alterations.


(I)  A streamlined administrative review process shall be made available to applicants proposing minor changes to a landmarked structure.


(II)  The Commission shall establish written eligibility and review criteria for the staff to follow.  The staff may request that the submitted review be scheduled for formal review by the Commission if there is any uncertainty as to the intent of the criteria as it applies to a specific request.


(III)  The administrative process shall be concluded within fifteen (15) days of a complete application submittal.  The applicant may appeal any administrative decision to the Commission by submitting an appeal request in writing to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the administrative ruling.


(B)  Meeting and Hearing Requirements.


(I)  The Commission shall hold a public meeting on all applications for landmark alteration certificates within forty-five (45) days after an application has been received by the City of Trinidad Planning Department.


(II)  The Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing which is required for requests involving demolition or removal of a landmarked structure. Notice of time, date and place of such hearing, and a brief summary of explanation of the subject matter of the hearing, shall be posted on the property in a manner visible from all adjacent public rights-of-way at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The applicant is responsible for accomplishing the public notice.


(C)   Commission Review.


(I)  At the conclusion of the public hearing or within not more than forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing the Commission shall determine whether the application meets the established review standards for alterations as outlined in Section 14-251(1).


(II)  The Commission shall adopt written findings and conclusions and either approve, or approve with conditions or disapprove the application by a majority vote.


(D)  Extension of Review Period.


(I)  When reviewing alteration certificate applications involving moving or demolition of a landmarked structure, the Commission may extend the review period up to ninety (90) additional days if the Commission finds the original application does not meet the established review standards for alterations.


(II)  The ninety-day extension period shall be used to encourage both the applicant and the Commission to explore acceptable alternative solutions to the original submittal.


(4)  Appeal or call-up of disapproved proposals.


(a)  A decision of the Commission approving or disapproving an application for alteration or extending the review period on the application is final unless appealed to the Trinidad City Council as provided below:


(A)  An applicant may appeal any decision of the Commission to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Department within fifteen (15) days of the Commission’s decision.


(B)  Council Meeting and Decision.


(I)  Within forty-five (45) days of the date of any decision of the Commission to disapprove or modify an alteration certificate application, the Council shall hold a public meeting on the matter.


(II)  Where a decision to move or demolish a landmarked structure is involved, public notice shall be required in accordance with Section 14-250(3)(c)(B)(II).


(III)  The Council shall consider the written findings and conclusions of the Commission and the proposal’s conformance to adopted alteration certificate criteria as noted in Section 14-251(1) and shall approve, or approve with conditions, or disapprove the proposed application.


(C)  Undue Hardship Appeals.


(I)  The Council may consider claims of economic or undue hardship in cases where an applicant was denied an alteration certificate by the Commission.


(II)  The applicant must provide adequate documentation and/or testimony at the Council meeting to justify such claims. The following includes the type of information, plus any other information the applicant feels is necessary, which must be submitted in order for the Council to consider a hardship appeal:


(1)   Estimate of the cost of the alteration proposed under the denied alteration certificate, and an estimate of any additional costs which would be incurred to comply with the alterations recommended by the Commission.


(2)  Estimates of the value of the property in its current state, with the denied alterations, and with the alterations proposed by the Commission.


(3)  Information regarding the soundness of the structure or structures, and the feasibility for rehabilitation which would preserve the character and qualities of the designation.


(4)  In the case of income-producing properties, the annual gross income from the property, the operating and maintenance expenses associated with the property, and the effect of the proposed alterations and Commission-recommended alterations on these figures.


(5)  Any information concerning the mortgage or other financial obligations on the property which are affected by the denial of the proposed alterations.


(6)  The appraised value of the property.


(7)  Any past listing of the property for sale or lease, the price asked, and any offers received on that property.


(8)  Information relating to any nonfinancial hardship resulting from the denial of an alteration certificate.


(III)  The Council may refer the information for review by the Commission prior to rendering its final decision on any hardship related appeal. If it is determined that the denial of the certificate of alteration would pose an undue hardship on the applicant, then a certificate of alteration noting the hardship relief shall be issued, and the property owner may make the alterations outlined in the alteration certificate application.


(5)  Issuance of a landmark alteration certificate.


(a)  The Planning Department shall issue a landmark alteration certificate if an application has been approved by the Commission or appealed and approved by the City Council.


(b)  Time Limit. When approving an application for a landmark alteration certificate, the Commission or City Council may impose a time limit for the applicant to apply for a building permit conforming to the certificate.


(6)  Unsafe or dangerous condition exempted.


(a)  Nothing in this Chapter 14, Article 13 of the Code of Ordinances shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or parts thereof where such condition is declared unsafe or dangerous by the City Building Official or Fire Inspector and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by the City Manager to correct the condition, as long as only such work that is absolutely necessary to correct the condition is performed. Any temporary measures may be taken without first obtaining a landmark alteration certificate under this Ordinance, but a certificate is required for permanent alteration, removal or demolition.


(7)  Property maintenance required.


(a)  The City Council intends to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior portions of designated landmarks and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration of any exterior portion. No owner, lessee or occupant of any landmark shall fail to prevent significant deterioration of the exterior of the structure or special feature beyond the condition of the structure on the effective date of the successful landmark status of the property.


(b)  No owner, lessee or occupant of any contributing property within a locally designated historic district shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of Section 14-250(7)(a) regulating property maintenance.


(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any external architectural feature which does not involve change in design, material, color or outward appearance of a designated landmark.


Section 14-251. Criteria to review alteration certificate


(1)  The Commission and City Council shall consider the proposed alteration for conformance with the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation. Conformance to specific alteration criteria for individual properties, structures or districts imposed at the time of initial designation must also follow the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.


(2)  The Commission and City Council may adopt additional criteria or policy design guidelines to aid in the review of alteration certificate applications. Such criteria and policies shall be written and made available to all alteration certificate applicants and the general public.


Section 14-252. Non-locally Landmarked Properties on the National and/or State Historic Register


(1)  Public notice and hearing requirement prior to proposed alterations.


(a)  Affected Properties. Structures listed on the National Historic Register and/or the State Historic Register which are still standing and which have not been designated by the City as a local historic landmark may be subject to notice and hearing requirements prior to the issuance of a building permit for any proposed building alteration involving a significant change to a building’s exterior appearance, building removal or building demolition.


(b)  Public Meeting and Hearing Required. Before a building permit can be issued for proposed alterations to such structures as identified in Section 14-252(1)(a), the proposal shall be considered at a public meeting before the Commission no later than forty-five (45) days after the request for building permit has been accepted by the City Building Department.


(c)  If the permit involves building removal or demolition, public notice of the meeting shall be required. Notice of time, date and place of such meeting, and a brief summary of explanation of the subject matter of the hearing, shall be posted on the property in a manner visible from all adjacent public rights-of-way at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The City shall be responsible for accomplishing the public notice.


(d)  The purpose of the meeting shall be to review the proposed alteration with the applicant and, if warranted, discuss alternative designs, materials and actions with the applicant which would better preserve the historic character of the property.


(e)  Within five (5) days following the public meeting, the applicant shall be entitled to be granted a building permit for the proposed alteration, changed or unchanged, assuming that all other City codes and requirements have been met and if no application for landmark designation has been submitted.


Section 14-253.  Penalties and Sanctions


(1)  Prohibition . No person shall violate or permit to be violated any of the requirements of this Section 14-250 or the terms of a landmark alteration certificate.


(a) Criminal Penalties. The following violations of this Chapter are punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00):


(A)  Moving or demolishing a designated landmark structure without an approved landmark alteration certificate.


(B)  Other types of alterations to a designated landmark without an approved landmark alteration certificate.


(C)  Moving, demolishing or otherwise altering a structure with a pending application for landmark designation.


(D)  Alterations to a defined historically significant structure without having first undergone the required public meeting process.


(b)  Council Sanctions. Irrespective of the imposition of the criminal penalties provided above, the City Council may impose the following nonpenal sanctions if, after a due process hearing, it is found that the provisions of Section 14-250 have been violated:


(A)  Moving or demolishing a designated landmark structure without an approved landmark alteration certificate. The Council may restrict the issuance of any building permits on the site for a period of up to five (5) years, in addition to any fines imposed through the Municipal Court.


(B)  Other types of alterations to a designated landmark without an approved landmark alteration certificate. The Council may require that the structure be returned to its original state or restrict the issuance of any building permit on the site for up to two (2) years, in addition to any fines imposed through the Municipal Court.


(C)  Moving, demolishing or otherwise altering a structure with a pending application for landmark designation. The Council may restrict the issuance of any building permit on the site for a period of up to five (5) years, in addition to any fines imposed through the Municipal Court.


(D)  Alterations to a defined historically significant structure without having first undergone the required public meeting process.  The Council may restrict the issuance of any building permit on the site for a period of up to two (2) years, in addition to any fines imposed through the Municipal Court.

CHAPTER 15.  PLUMBING.


Section 15-1.  International Plumbing Code.


See Chapter 5, Section 5-3 (Ord. No. 1913, Eff. 6-17-11).

CHAPTER 16.   PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE.


ARTICLE 1.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE.


Sections:


16-1                       Disturbing the public peace.

16-2                       Unlawful assembly.

16-3                       Disturbing religious assembly.

16-4                       Disturbing lawful assembly.

16-5                       Loitering - Police order to disperse.

16-6                       Schools, loitering about, disturbing, annoying or molesting students.

16-7                       False impersonation of an officer.

16-8                       Resisting and obstructing police officers.

16-9                       Assisting prisoners to escape.

16-10                     Quarreling and fighting.

16-11                     Noises - Scope of prohibition.

16-12                     Exceptions from provisions.

16-13                     Throwing stones.

16-14                     Participating in or inciting a riot or disturbance.


ARTICLE 2.  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY.


16-15                     Injuring, defacing or destroying publicly-owned property.

16-16                     Injuring, defacing or destroying private property.

16-16.1                  Graffiti

16-17                     Trespassing upon publicly or privately owned property.

16-18                     Loitering about railroad yards; exception.

16-19                     Peddlers going upon premises uninvited.

16-20                     Abatement of nuisance by police.

16-21                     Possession of license no bar to prosecution.


ARTICLE 3.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY.


16-22                     Carrying concealed weapons.

16-23                     Discharging firearms.

16-24                     False fire alarm.


ARTICLE 4.  OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS.


16-25                     Loitering defined.

16-26                     Loitering after curfew.

16-27                     Responsibility of parents; penalty for violation.

16-28                     Furnishing tobacco to minor under age 16.

16-29                     Abandoned refrigerators; removal of locks.




ARTICLE 5.  OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS.


16-30                     Common gambler defined.

16-31                     Permitting gambling in premises.

16-32                     Playing games for money.

16-33                     Gambling with intoxicated persons or minors.

16-34                     Indecent exposure.

16-35                     Urinating in public.

16-36                     Allowing prostitution on premises.

16-37                     Prostitution - Plying vocation.

16-38                     Prostitution prohibited; cohabitation with prostitute.

16-39                     Enticing to house of ill repute.

16-40                     Keeping of disorderly house.


ARTICLE 6.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH.


DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


16-41                     Poison to be labeled.

16-42                     Tainted provisions not to be sold.

16-43                     Unwholesome provisions not to be sold.

16-44                     Cleaning of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults; when required.

16-45                     Discontinuance of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults; filling.

16-46                     Removal of contents of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults.

16-47                     Substances of abuse.


DIVISION 2.  SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.


16-48                     Legislative intent.

16-49                     Repealed.

16-50                     Repealed.

16-51                     Repealed.

16-52                     Repealed.

16-53                     Repealed.

16-54                     Repealed.

16-55                     Repealed.


ARTICLE 7.  NUISANCES.


16-56                     Discharging foul substances into street.

16-57                     Accumulating offensive substances.

16-58                     Offensive cellars; sewers.

16-59                     Accumulation of junk.

16-60                     Exclusion from provisions.

16-61                     Barbed wire and other obstructions into thoroughfares.

16-62                     Placing obstructions on public right-of-way.

16-63                     Dangerous or hazardous conditions.

16-63.5                  Broken windows

16-64                     Notice to abate nuisance.

16-65                     Assessment of costs and collection of assessments.

16-66                     General notice to clean up.

16-67                     Summary abatement of nuisances.


ARTICLE 8. PENALTIES


16-68                     Penalty for violations by minors.



CHAPTER 16.  PUBLIC PEACE MORALS AND WELFARE.


ARTICLE 1.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE.


Section 16-1.        Disturbing the public peace.


It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly to:


(1)  Make unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he/she has no right to occupy; or


(2)  Repeatedly insult, taunt or challenge another person in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or

(3)  Not being a peace officer, display a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm; or


(4)  In a public place, threaten to assault in any manner another person; or


(5)  Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject any person to unwanted physical contact.


Section 16-2.        Unlawful assembly.


It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to assemble together with an intent to do any unlawful act, or being so assembled, to mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the property of the City, or the person or property of another, or against the peace or to the terror of others; or make any movement or preparation therefor; and every person present at such an assembly who shall not endeavor to prevent the commission or perpetration of such unlawful act, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-53.)


Section 16-3.        Disturbing religious assembly.


It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly of persons met for or engaged in religious worship by making any unreasonable loud and unnecessary noise, or by rude or indecent behavior, or discourse within their place of worship or so near it as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-20.)


Section 16-4.        Disturbing lawful assembly.


It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere significantly with any lawful meeting, assembly, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means, with the intent to prevent or disrupt said meeting, assembly, procession or gathering.


Section 16-5.        Loitering - Police order to disperse.

(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:


(a)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to hinder           or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or    pedestrians.


(b)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.


(2)  Any person who causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in Subsection (1) herein and who fails or refuses to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse as directed by a police officer or any other lawful authority shall be guilty of a violation of this Section.


Section 16-6.        Schools, loitering about; disturbing, annoying or molesting students.


It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or about any public, private or parochial school, college or seminary grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having some lawful business therein or thereabout or in connection with such school or the employees thereof, or for any person to:


(1)  Annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any such school; or


(2)  Annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any such school or college while in any such school building, school grounds; or


(3)  Conduct himself/herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in or about any such school building or school grounds; or


(4)  Park or move a vehicle at any time in the immediate vicinity of or on the grounds of any such school, college or seminary for the purpose of annoying or molesting the students or employees thereof or in an effort to induce, entice or invite students into such vehicles for immoral purposes. (Code 1958, Sec.17-46.1.)


Section 16-7.        False impersonation of an officer.


It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate a policeman or any City, County, State or Federal officer by wearing a badge or star, or by any acts or words which may lead others to believe that he/she is such officer when in fact he/she is not such officer.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-24.)


State law references: As to penalty under State law, 1973, Sec. 29-5-102.


Section 16-8.        Resisting and obstructing a police officer.


(1)       (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist arrest by a police officer of the City.  A person commits the crime of resisting arrest if he/she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a police officer acting under color of his/her official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another, or using any other means which creates substantial risk of causing physical injury to the police officer or another.


(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if he/she was acting under color of his/her official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest he/she was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense.  A police officer acts "under color of his/her official authority" when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he/she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him/her.


(c)  The term "police officer" as used in this section means a police officer, in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself/herself by exhibiting his/her credentials as such police officer to the person whose arrest is attempted.


(2)       (a)  It is unlawful for a person to obstruct a police officer.  A person commits the crime of obstructing a police officer, when, by using or threatening violence, force or physical interference, or an obstacle, he/she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a police officer acting under color of his/her official authority.


(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was acting in an illegal manner, if he/she was acting under color of his/her official authority as defined in subsection (1)(b).


Section 16-9.        Assisting prisoners to escape.


It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person in custody of a police officer, to escape from such custody or such confinement.


Section 16-10.      Quarreling and fighting.


It shall be unlawful for any person to fight with another upon public property or upon private property which is open to view from any other place within the City or in the presence of persons not engaged in said fight.  It shall not be unlawful to engage in a fight which is a contest of amateur or professional athletic skill.


Section 16-11.      Noises - Scope of prohibition.


(1)  Subject to the provisions of this Section, the creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises at any time is prohibited.  Noises of such character and of such intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health and welfare is prohibited.  Noises which unreasonably interfere with the sleep, comfort and repose of any individual are prohibited.


(2)  The following acts are declared to be a violation of this Section; the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive or in any way limited by the generality of Subsection (1):


(a)  The keeping in any building or upon any premises of any animal or bird which by frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.


(b)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.


(c)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.


(d)  The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in any place at any time in such manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb any person thereby.


(e)  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any public or parochial school, college, or institution of learning while it is in session, which unreasonably interferes with the work of pupils or instructors; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed on such street indicating, in substance, that it is a school street and that quiet is required.


(f)  The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.


(g)  The playing of any game not for public exhibition, which results in the creation of any noise or disturbance that in any manner unreasonably interferes with the health, comfort or repose of any inhabitants of the City.  (Ord. 2084, Sec. 16-11, amended, eff. 9/27/19.)


Section 16-12.      Exceptions from provisions.


(1)  Nothing contained in Section 16-11 shall be construed to prevent the production of music with any military, civic, or authorized parade, funeral procession or religious ceremony, or any musical performance conducted with the consent of municipal authority, or to prevent public exhibitions of sports or other events.


(2)  The provisions of Section 16-11 shall not apply to police officers or firemen in the discharge of their official duties.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-14.)


Section 16-13.      Throwing stones.


It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or other missile at or upon any building, tree or other public or private property, or at any person.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17- 50.)


Section 16-14.      Participating in or inciting a riot or disturbance.


It is unlawful for any person who collects or assembles in crowds and bodies to become involved in or incite or attempt to incite a riot or public disturbance.




ARTICLE 2.  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY.


Division 1.  General Provisions.


Section 16-15.      Injuring, defacing, or destroying publicly-owned property.


It is unlawful for any person to knowingly injure, deface or destroy any real property or improvements thereon, or movable or personal property owned by the City or any other public entity. (Ord. 1499, 3/3/95.)


Section 16-16.      Injuring, defacing or destroying private property.


It is unlawful for any person to knowingly injure, deface or destroy the real or personal property belonging to any person or other private entity.  (Ord. 1499, 3/3/95.)


Section 16-16.1    GRAFFITI


(1) Definitions: for purposes of Sections 16-16.1.: (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(a) “Graffiti” means the defacing of public or private property without the consent of the property owner by means of any method of defacement, including but not limited to painting, drawing, writing, etching, carving or otherwise marring the surface of the property by use of paint, spray paint, ink or any other substance or object. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(b) “Prohibited graffiti material” means and includes spray paint, spray paint nozzles, glass cutting tools and glass etching tools or instruments. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(c) “Spray paint” means any aerosol container that is made or adapted for the purpose of applying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(d) “Spray paint nozzle” means a nozzle designed to deliver a spray of paint of a particular width or flow from a can of spray paint. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)



(2) Application of Graffiti. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(a) It is unlawful for any person to deface public or private property with graffiti. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(b) The City may order the occupant or owner of any property on which graffiti is found to remove the graffiti, at the occupant or owner’s sole expense, within twenty-four (24) hours, or such additional time as determined by the City.  It is unlawful for any occupant or owner of property on which graffiti is found to fail to remove or cause to be removed graffiti as directed by the City. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(c) Upon conviction of a violation of this Section, in addition to any other penalty allowed by law, the Municipal Court may order the defendant to personally make repairs to the damaged property, or may enter an order authorizing the City to enter upon the property and remove the graffiti, assessing the cost of removal against the defendant. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(3)   Sale and Possession of prohibited graffiti materials. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(a) Possession. It is unlawful for any minor, except under the direct supervision of such minor’s parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or a law enforcement officer, to purchase, obtain, possess or attempt to purchase, obtain or possess any prohibited graffiti materials. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(b) Contributing to unlawful possession.  It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duty, to knowingly allow a minor to possess prohibited graffiti materials upon any real property unaccompanied by such minor’s parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(c) It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or law enforcement officer, to sell, exchange, give, deliver, loan or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, delivered, loaned or otherwise furnished any prohibited graffiti material to any minor unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or a law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(4) Signs Required.  It is unlawful for any person who sells or offers for sale any prohibited graffiti material to fail to display a warning sign in a prominent place in the building at all times.  Such warning sign shall have a minimum height of fourteen inches and a minimum width of eleven inches, shall use capital lettering of at least one-half of one inch in height, and shall read as follows: (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


WARNING: IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS ANY SPRAY PAINT, SPRAY PAINT NOZZLE, GLASS CUTTING TOOL OR GLASS ETCHING TOOL OR INSTRUMENT, UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY HIS OR HER PARENT,

LEGAL GUARDIAN, SCHOOL TEACHER, TUTOR, COUNSELOR, ART INSTRUCTOR OR A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, AND UPON CONVICTION, A FINE OF UP TO $300.00 MAY BE IMPOSED.

(5) Affirmative Defenses. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)

It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Subsections 3(A) or (B) hereof that the minor possessing the prohibited graffiti materials was: (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(a) Within his or her residence; (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(b) At his or her place of employment; or (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(c) Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant or person having lawful control of such property to possess such materials. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)



It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Section 3(C) hereof that the person charged in an employer and; (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(a) Has adopted and enforces a written policy against selling prohibited graffiti materials to minors; (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(b) Requires employees to verify the age of purchasers of prohibited graffiti materials by way of photo identification; and (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


(c) Has established and imposes sanctions for noncompliance. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)

Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars. (Ord. 1756, eff., 7-16-04)


Section 16-17.      Trespassing upon publicly or privately owned property.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use, occupy, or remain on or in any publicly owned property, except during those times in which such property is open to the public, unless permission has been granted by a person properly authorized to do so.


(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use, occupy, or remain on or in any privately owned property, real or personal, without the permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof.


(3)  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).


Section 16-18.      Loitering about railroad yards; exception.


It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the railroad to loiter about cars, car yards, transfer grounds, or to enter in or upon any car, depot or freight house or to move any car door or sleep in any car, or disturb any car or other property belonging to the railroad company doing business in the City; provided, this Section shall not apply to persons doing business with any such railroad.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-36.)


Section 16-19.      Peddlers going upon premises uninvited.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of a private residence to enter upon such private residence for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or for the purpose of or peddling or hawking the same.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-40.)


Section 16-20.      Abatement of nuisance by police.


The Chief of Police and all police officers are required and directed to suppress and abate any such nuisance as is described in Section 16-19.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-41.)



Section 16-21.      Possession of license no bar to prosecution.


The possession of a license issued by the City Clerk under the provisions of any ordinance of the City shall constitute no bar to the prosecution authorized by Sections 16-19.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-42.)



ARTICLE 3.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY.


Section 16-22.      Carrying concealed weapons.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his/her person any pistol, revolver, bowie-knife, dirk, razor, slung shot, sand-bag, brass-knuckles or other deadly weapon.


(2)  This Section shall not apply to any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, policeman or other peace officer within his/her own territory and while on duty provided such officer shall have and produce on demand a certificate from the proper authority showing he/she is an officer within this exception; or, in default thereof, may be punished to the same extent an in the same manner of other violators.  This Section shall also not apply to any person who has been issued a valid Concealed Weapon Permit anywhere in the State.


State law reference: As to provisions pertaining to carrying on concealed weapons, see C.R.S.  Sec. 18-12-105.


Section 16-23.      Discharging firearms.


It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or firearm of any description or other thing containing gun powder or other combustible or explosive material.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-25.)


Section 16-24.      False fire alarm.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and intentionally to give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire.


(2)  Any person who shall give or cause to be given a public alarm of fire unless he/she can show that he/she had good and sufficient reason for believing that there was, at the time of giving such alarm, a fire in progress threatening the destruction of property in the City, shall be deemed guilty of giving a false fire alarm. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-23.)



ARTICLE 4.  OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS.


Section 16-25.      Loitering defined.


Loitering or loiter shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location, to be dilatory, to tarry, to dawdle and shall include but not be limited to standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering or prowling.



Section 16-26.      Loitering after curfew.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter on or about any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot, playground, yard, public building, or place of amusement or entertainment, whether public or private, without the consent or permission of the owner or occupant thereof, during the hours between 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except that for the period beginning with Friday evening and ending Sunday morning, the hours in which this restriction applies shall be between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of the minor.


(2)  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).


Section 16-27.      Responsibility of parents; penalty for violation.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor to knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions of Section 16-26.

(2)  Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) or more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) and/or a jail sentence of not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days at the discretion of the Municipal Judge.


Section 16-28.      Furnishing tobacco to minor under age 16.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish any tobacco or article made in whole or part of tobacco, to any child under sixteen (16) years of age, without the written order of the father, mother or guardian of such child.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-65.)


Section 16-29.      Abandoned refrigerators; removal of locks.


It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building, dwelling or any other place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, unused or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door, snap or other device which may not be released from the inside of such icebox, refrigerator or container, without first removing therefrom such door, lock or device. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-1 and 17-2.)


ARTICLE 5.  OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS.


Section 16-30.      Common gambler defined.


As used herein, a common gambler shall mean a person who keeps or exhibits any gambling table, device or apparatus to win or gain money or other property, or aids, assists or permits others to do the same, or engages in gambling for a livelihood.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-26.)


Section 16-31.      Permitting gambling on premises.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or as owner to rent any room, building, arbor, booth, shed or tenement of any description to be used or occupied for gambling or knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied for gambling.


(2)  If the owner of the premises stipulated in Subsection (1) herein has knowledge that any gambling table, apparatus or device is kept or used in such premises he/she shall forthwith cause complaint to be made against the person so keeping or using such premises; if he/she shall fail to do so he/she shall be taken, held and considered to have knowingly permitted the same to be used and occupied for gambling.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-27.)


Section 16-32.      Gambling Unlawful.


It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in gambling, as that term is defined in C.R.S. 18-10-102(2).


Section 16-33.      Gambling with intoxicated persons or minors.


It shall be unlawful for any person, by any device or pretense, to entice, or prevail upon, or cause any minor or intoxicated person to engage in any game whatsoever, for any sum of money or property of value, or make any bet or wager with such minor or intoxicated person.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-29.)


Section 16-34.      Indecent exposure.


It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place in a state of nudity, or make an indecent exposure of his/her person, or be guilty of any lewd or indecent act or behavior. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-32.)


Section 16-35.      Urinating in public.


It is unlawful for any person to urinate in any public way, or place which is public in nature, or any place within the City open to public view.


Section 16-36.      Allowing prostitution on premises.


It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in charge of any building or premises to permit the same to be used for purposes of prostitution.  (Code 1958, Sec. 17-16.)


Section 16-37.      Prostitution - Plying vocation.


It shall be unlawful for any prostitute, courtesan or lewd woman, by word, gesture or action to ply or attempt to ply her vocation upon the streets, highways or thoroughfares, or from the door or window of any house, or in any public place. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-44.)


State law reference: As to regulations pertaining to prostitution, see C.R.S., Sec.  18-7-201 et seq.


Section 16-38.      Prostitution prohibited; cohabitation with prostitute.


It shall be unlawful for any female person to solicit or receive visits as a prostitute, or to occupy any house, room or apartment, and use the same for purposes of prostitution, or for any male person to cohabit with any female prostitute. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-45.)



Section 16-39.      Enticing to house of ill repute.


It shall be unlawful for any person to entice any male or female of good repute to any house of ill fame, or to any assignation house, or to any other house of bad repute. (Code 1958, Sec. 17-62.)


Section 16-40.      Keeping of disorderly house.


(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a bawdy house, house of ill fame, house of assignation or disorderly house, within the limits of the City or within three (3) miles beyond such limits, or be an inmate of or in any way connected with or contribute to the support of any such house or permit any building in his/her possession or under his/her control situated within the City or within three (3) miles beyond the limits of the City or to be used for any such purpose; or within the City or within three (3) miles beyond the limits thereof, suffer any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful gaming or any disorderly conduct whatever on his/her premises.


(2)  The license of any business operated in the premises described in (1) shall be subject to revocation.



ARTICLE 6.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH.


DIVISION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 16-41.      Poison to be labeled.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or deliver any deadly poison, knowing it to be such, without marking it in legible letters "Poison".  (Code 1958, Sec. 16- 18.)


State law reference: As to State requirements, see C.R.S. 1973, Sec. 12-22-119.


Section 16-42.      Tainted provisions not to be sold.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any diseased, tainted or putrid meat, poultry, fish, game or provisions of any kind or any decayed fruits or vegetables.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-20.)


Section 16-43.      Unwholesome provisions not to be sold.


It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale in any market or elsewhere within the City, any emaciated, tainted or putrid meat, provisions or vegetables, which may be deemed unwholesome.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-21.)


Section 16-44.      Cleaning of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults; when required.


All grease traps and privy vaults shall be cleaned once a year or oftener if ordered to do so by the Health Department, and all cesspools shall be cleaned when their contents are up to the inlet and the condition created by the failure to clean shall constitute a nuisance.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-3.)


Section 16-45.      Discontinuance of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults; filling.


Whenever any grease trap, privy vault or cesspool is discontinued, it shall be cleaned to the bottom and filled up with earth or other suitable material and such work shall be done under the supervision of the Health Department.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-4.)


Section 16-46.      Removal of contents of cesspools, grease traps and privy vaults.


The contents of privy vaults, grease traps, cesspools or accumulation of garbage, within the limits of the City, shall not be removed or be transported through any street, alley or public place except in the most sanitary manner, through or by means of airtight suction tanks, if soft and mixed with water, and if solid or dry, in sheet steel tight tanks in such manner as shall prevent the escape of any noxious or offensive odors and preserve such contents from sight or exposure during transportation.  All tools, appliances, and vehicles used in such removal shall be kept and maintained in a good sanitary condition, subject to the inspection of the Health Department at all times.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-5.)


Section 16-47.      Substances of abuse.


(1)  As used in this Ordinance, the term "Substance of Abuse" shall mean any toxic, noxious, or volatile chemical, compound or substance containing toluene, acetone, or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapors.


(2)  No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell, inhale or ingest the fumes from any substance of abuse, provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.


(3)  No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this Ordinance, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession, or receive possession of any substance of abuse.


(4)  Any person, other than a minor, violating any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Any minor violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be dealt with in accordance with the Children's Code as adopted by the State of Colorado.


(5)  This section shall have no application to any alcoholic or fermented malt beverage, nor to any drug, compound, or substance regulated under Title 12 or Title 18 of the Colorado Revised Statutes as amended.


DIVISION 2.  SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.


Section 16-48.      Legislative intent.


In order to serve the public health, safety and general welfare, it is the declared policy of the City of Trinidad to prohibit smoking in accordance with Colorado Revised Statutes, Section 25-14-201 et. seq. , and to recognize and enforce violations of the Colorado Law.


Section 16-49. through Section 16-55 Repealed. (Ord. 1820, eff. 10/13/06)



ARTICLE 7.  NUISANCES.


Section 16-56. Discharging foul substances into street.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to allow to be discharged or permit to flow from any still house, workshop, manufacture or other house or place owned or kept by him/her, foul or nauseous liquor or substance of any kind, upon any street or alley or other public place, so as to be a threat to the health or safety of any person, or offensive to persons living in the vicinity.


Section 16-57.      Accumulating offensive substances.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit or cause any grease traps, cesspool matter, animal or human excrement, garbage, refuse or filth to be deposited, buried, or allowed to accumulate in or upon any premises owned or kept by him/her or to deposit, bury or allow to accumulate such offensive substances on any sidewalk, alley, premises, vacant lot or other place within the City.


Section 16-58.      Offensive cellars; sewers.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privies, sewer or grounds upon any premises belonging to, or occupied by him/her to become nauseous, foul or injurious to the public health.


Section 16-59.      Accumulation of junk.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, old lumber, construction material or debris, bricks, building remnants, rags, empty bottles, broken glass, paper, bagging or other similar junk to be deposited, stored or allowed to accumulate in or on any vacant lot, or in or on any other premises within the City.  Any person who shall create, cause to be created, maintain, continue, increase or permit any nuisance specified in this Section, shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance.


Section 16-60.      Exclusion from provisions.


The provisions of Section 16-59 shall not apply to the conduct, operation or establishment of a junk shop or junk yard business duly licensed as such by the City.


Section 16-61.      Barbed wire and other projections into thoroughfares.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to put upon, keep or maintain any barb, barbed wire, sharpened nails or sharpened thing of metallic substance upon any fence, cellar guard or window guard, railing or bannister, that may front upon or that may be erected or constructed upon any street, avenue, lane, alley, building or sidewalk so that it shall project or extend beyond the surface of the wood or other material of which such fence, cellar guard or window guard, failing or bannister may be constructed.


Section 16-62.      Placing obstructions on public right-of-way.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to place or assist in placing or cause to be placed in or upon any street, alley, highway, or in or upon the track or right-of-way of any railway company, any construction material, building, fence, rubbish or other obstruction of any kind or description without obtaining the prior consent of the City Manager, and no such consent shall authorize the obstruction of more than one-half (½) the width of any street.


Section 16-63.      Dangerous or hazardous conditions.


It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any building, structure or land owned or occupied by him/her which is accessible to the public, to become or remain in such a condition as to present a substantial danger or hazard to the public health or safety.


Section 16-63.5    Broken windows .


It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any windows on the ground level story of any building or structure within the City to remain broken or removed, or otherwise in a state of disrepair.  A window shall be considered broken or in a state of disrepair if glass is actually missing from the window area.  A cracked window shall not constitute a nuisance.  Any person who shall create, cause to be created, maintain, continue, increase, or permit any such nuisance, shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance.  No such nuisance shall be considered abated unless and until such broken or removed window has been replaced by glass or other translucent material.  (Ord. 1602, eff., 3/1/99)


Section 16-64.      Notice to abate nuisance.


Any person who violates either of sections 16-57, 16-58, 16-59, 16-61, 16-62, 16-63, or 16-63.5 of this Code shall be notified in writing by the City Manager or his/her designee of such violation.  Such written notice shall identify the nuisance and order the person in violation to abate or remedy such nuisance within a reasonable period of time from the date the notice is issued, to be determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.  The violator shall be served with such written notice by either first class mail, certified mail, or personal service.  A failure to comply with such notice shall subject such person in violation to punishment as provided in Section 1-8 of this Code for each day he/she neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance beyond the period of time he/she is given to abate the nuisance.  In addition, if the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice, the City Manger may then proceed to have the nuisance abated. (Ord. 1602, eff., 3/13/99)


Section 16-65.      Assessment of costs and collection of assessments.


(1) Upon abatement of a nuisance by City forces or by independent contractors employed by the City for such purpose, a charge shall be made against the owner of the property or any other person who created or permitted the creation of such nuisance.  The charge shall be actual costs for labor, equipment and materials, or the contract price of an independent contractor, together with a $1,000 administrative fee thereon for administrative supervision, inspection, and noticing. (Ord. 2050, repealed and reenacted, eff., 11/21/17)


(2)  The City Clerk, as soon as practicable after such charge has accrued, shall send by first class mail, addressed to the owner of such property and/or any other person who has created or permitted the creation of such nuisance, at the last known address of such person or persons, a notice of such charge, which notice shall contain a description of the lots or tracts of land, the name of the owner or owners and the amount of the assessment.


(3)  It shall be the duty of the owner or any other person who has created or permitted the creation of such nuisance, to pay such charge within twenty (20) days after the mailing of such notice, and upon his/her failure to do so, provided the notice has been mailed to the owner, such charge shall be certified to the officer having custody of the tax list, in the same manner as the City taxes are certified to such officer, to be collected according to the laws of the State of Colorado for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and the redemption thereof.


(4)  Provided such notice has been mailed to the property owner, such charge shall become a lien upon the respective lots or tracts of land at the time the City Clerk certifies such charge to the officer having custody of the tax list.


(5)  The City may also proceed to collect such charge by obtaining a judgment in the County or District Court against  the property owner or any other person who has created or permitted the creation of such nuisance, and enforcing such judgment through such means as are provided by law.


Section 16-66.      General notice to clean up.


Whenever the Mayor deems it necessary to give a general notice to all the inhabitants and the property owners to clean up and remove from their premises all filth, garbage, excrement, rubbish and refuse matter of every kind, a formal notice issued by the City and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City shall be deemed sufficient and legal notice; and any person failing to comply with the requirements of such notice shall be liable to the penalties prescribed in this Code for maintaining a nuisance.  (Code 1958, Sec. 16-26.)


Section 16-67.      Summary abatement of nuisances.


The City Manager, if he/she should determine that the existence of a nuisance is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, shall have the power to proceed to have the nuisance abated, without prior notice to the property owner or other person who created or permitted the creation of the nuisance.



ARTICLE 8. PENALTIES


Section 16-68.      Penalty for violations by minors.


Whenever, in this Chapter of this Code, any act or failure to do a required act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, the violation of any such provision by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), notwithstanding any other penalty for such offense which may be provided elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. 1674, 3 eff., 10-26-01)

CHAPTER 17.  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.


ARTICLE 1.  IN GENERAL.


Sections:


17-1                       Street names - Reference to map and plat.

17-2                       Street names to be placed on corners.

17-3                       Sprinkling sidewalks before sweeping.

17-4                       Shaking or cleaning rugs in streets or sidewalks prohibited.

17-5                       Placing obstructions on streets; consent required; limitation.

17-6                       Obstruction to gutters prohibited.

17-7                       Openings in sidewalk; disrepair of sidewalk.

17-8                       Merchandise on sidewalk; passageway; time limitation.

17-9                       Property owner to keep sidewalks cleaned.

17-10                     Property owner to remove snow and ice from sidewalks.

17-11                     Slippery sidewalks; City not liable.

17-12                     Work done by City; assessment of costs.

17-13                     Installation of underground structures; plat and data to be filed.

17-14                     Plats - Contents.

17-15                     Line for poles on streets.

17-16                     Operating tractors on pavement.

17-17                     Oil on pavement - Pouring or spilling prohibited.

17-18                     Oil on pavement; oil delivery wagons and tanks.

17-19                     Water and sewer connections in proposed paving districts.


ARTICLE 2.  NUMBERING BUILDINGS.


17-20                     Owners and occupants to number buildings.

17-21                     Manner of numbering.

17-22                     Allotment of numbers.

17-23                     Street maps with numbers to be prepared.

17-24                     Assigning numbers; certificate of designation.

17-25                     Size and location of configuration.

17-26                     Refusal to place numbers on existing buildings.

17-27                     Refusal to place, or placing unauthorized numbers on new buildings.

17-28                     Altering numbers or street names - Consent required.


ARTICLE 3.  EXCAVATION.


17-29                     Excavation permit required; contents of application.

17-30                     Excavation permit; conditions of issuance.

17-31                     Excavation permit; work requirements.

17-32                     Excavation permit; indemnification.

17-33                     Excavation permit; warranty.

17-34                     REPEALED (Ord. 1516, 8-26-1995)

17-35                     REPEALED (Ord. 1516, 8-26-1995)



ARTICLE 4.  CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER.


17-36                     Maximum and minimum widths of sidewalks.

17-37                     Sidewalks to conform to established grade; supervision of laying.

17-38                     Slope.

17-39                     Sidewalk construction - Permit required.

17-40                     Application for permit.

17-41                     Sidewalk openings for fuel and light to be covered.

17-42                     Access to basement to be covered.

17-43                     Curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk requirements - New construction.

17-44                     Hearing to consider construction of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk.

17-45                     Order to construct curb, gutter and/or sidewalk.

17-46                     Failure of owner to construct.

17-47                     Assessment of cost against property owner.

17-48                     Notice of assessment.

17-49                     Protest of assessment.

17-50                     Failure of owner to pay assessment.

17-51                     Curbs and gutters - Materials.

17-52                     Curbs on curb lines; gutters to attach to curbs.

17-53                     Street lawns and parks to conform to grade.

17-54                     Article not applicable in commercial districts; City's jurisdiction over parks.

17-55                     Removal of grade or line stakes prohibited.

17-56                     Curb line and curb radius.

17-57                     Fund established to front costs of repairs or replacement.

17-58                     Repair or replacement of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk.


ARTICLE 5.   CULVERTS.


17-59                     When construction of culvert required.

17-60                     Notice to owner to construct culvert.

17-61                     Failure of owner to construct; construction by City; certification to City Clerk.

17-62                     Notice to owner of cost; assessment and hearing.

17-63                     Hearing on assessments; penalty; collection.

17-64                     Driveway - Culvert fund.


ARTICLE 6. CLOSURE OF CITY STREETS FOR ATHLETIC OR SPECIAL EVENTS.


17-65                     Closure of City streets for athletic or special events.

17-66                     Penalty for failure to obtain permit or to comply with terms of permit.


ARTICLE 7. VACATION PROCEEDINGS.


17-67                     Vacation fee.

17-68                     Vacation application.

17-69                     Procedure before Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.

17-70                     Procedure before City Council.


CHAPTER 17.  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.


ARTICLE 1.  IN GENERAL.


Section 17-1.        Street names - Reference to map and plat.


The several streets, avenues and public places in the City shall be known and designated by names applied thereto on the map and plat of the City located in the City Clerk's office, as well as the maps and plats of the several additions by the City lawfully accepted, and on file with the City Clerk. (Code 1958, Sec. 25-1.)


Cross reference: As to prohibition against altering street names, see Section 17-28.


Section 17-2.        Street names to be placed on corners.


The names of all streets or avenues shall be placed on the street or avenue corners.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-2.)


Section 17-3.        Sprinkling sidewalks before sweeping.


It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises to sweep or clean or cause to be swept or cleaned the street sidewalks in front of the premises owned or occupied by him/her unless the same shall have first been sprinkled sufficiently to lay the dust and dirt to prevent the raising and scattering of the dust and dirt collected thereon.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-3.)


Section 17-4.        Shaking or cleaning rugs in street or sidewalks prohibited.


It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises to sweep, clean or shake, or cause to be swept, cleaned or shaken, upon any street sidewalk any rugs, carpets or other like articles.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-4.)


Section 17-5.        Placing obstructions on streets; consent required; limitation.


No person shall be granted permission to place or keep any building material in any street, alley or other public place for a longer period than thirty (30) days unless expressly authorized by the Council.


Section 17-6.        Obstruction to gutters prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in a gutter or ditch at the side of any street for the purpose of carrying off water from such street, or to fill in or deposit earth, sand, gravel or other substance in such gutter or ditch at the point of entrance into a driveway from the street or elsewhere.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-7.)


Section 17-7.        Openings on sidewalk; disrepair of sidewalks.


It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or keep any cellar door, pit or vault or other

subterraneous opening on any sidewalk, street or alley, or suffer the same when in or under his/her charge to be left or kept open or to be in an insecure condition so that passersby may be in danger of falling into any such place, or suffer any sidewalk in front of any premises owned or occupied by him/her to become so broken as to endanger life or limb or so out of repair as to cause water to collect and remain in pools thereon.


Section 17-8.        Merchandise on sidewalks; passageway; time limitation.


It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep or suffer to be placed or kept, upon any sidewalk any goods, wares or merchandise which he/she may be receiving or delivering without leaving a passageway clear upon such sidewalk of six feet (6') wide for the use of foot passengers, and no person receiving and delivering such goods shall suffer the same to be or remain upon such sidewalk for a longer period than three (3) hours.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-9.)


Section 17-9.        Property owner to keep sidewalks cleaned .


Every owner of real property shall keep clean or cause to be kept clean the sidewalk or sidewalk areas in front of or lying along his/her property and shall remove or cause to be removed therefrom all earth, ashes, weeds, trash, refuse and rubbish of all kinds.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-13.)


Section 17-10.      Property owner to remove snow and ice from sidewalks .


Every owner of real property shall within four (4) hours (from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., excepted) after any fall of snow, cause the same and any ice which may have formed, to be removed from the sidewalk in front of or lying along his/her property into the carriageway of the street, and in so doing, shall not interfere with water running in the gutter, with the passage of vehicles more than can be avoided, or to obstruct any street crossing.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-14.)


Section 17-11.      Slippery sidewalks; City not liable .


When it is not practicable to remove all the snow and ice from any sidewalk by reason of its being frozen then the owner of the real property shall sprinkle and spread or cause to be sprinkled and spread upon the sidewalk, ashes, salt or some suitable material to prevent such sidewalk from being slippery.  The failure of any owner of real property to do so shall not render the City liable to any person for damages on account of injuries upon such sidewalk, in any manner different than if the City had not required such owner to clean or sprinkle such walk.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-15.)


Section 17-12.      Work done by City; assessment of costs.

If any owner of real property shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions of Sections 17-9, 17-10 and 17-11, the City may at once proceed to remove from such owner's real property and from the alley in the rear thereof and from the sidewalk and sidewalk area in front of or lying along such owner's real property all weeds, brush, ashes, manure, refuse, trash and rubbish of all kinds and may at once proceed to remove all snow, ice, earth and mud from the sidewalk in front of or lying along such owner's real property.  Such work shall be done, under the direction and supervision of the Superintendent of Streets and Bridges, by employees or agents of the City or by contract.  The City may assess the cost and expense of such work against each lot or tract of real property, upon and for the benefit of which such work was done.  The cost of such work, together with five percent (5%) for the inspection and other costs, shall be assessed, levied and collected in the same manner as provided by ordinance for assessing, collecting and certifying sidewalk assessment.  The assessment, if not paid, shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer or to the officer of the County having custody of the tax list at the time of such certification, together with a ten percent (10%) penalty thereon for collection.  The amount of such assessment shall constitute a lien against the real property described in such assessment.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-16.)


Section 17-13.      Installation of underground structures; plat and data to be filed.


All persons occupying or using any of the streets or alleys, or any part thereof, underground, with water mains, gas mains, or any other kind of main pipes or conduits for wires or in any other manner occupying any part or any of the streets or alleys by franchise or otherwise, with any of the aforesaid things beneath the surface of any such streets or alleys, shall, within ten (10) days after the completion thereof, file in the office of the City Engineer for the use of his/her office, a plat and data showing as nearly as such persons can practicably show, the location and dimensions of all such underground structures so used by them.  Such plats and data shall be certified to by such person, or by some office of such company, as being practically correct.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-17.)


Section 17-14.      Plats - Contents.


All plats mentioned in Section 17-13 shall show the location thereof in reference to the side lines of the street or alley in which the same is located and the depth of the same below the surface of the ground; they shall also show the dimensions and kind or size of pipe or conduit or other construction used.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-18.)


Section 17-15.      Line for poles on streets.


(1)  The established line for poles and posts of whatever nature upon all residence streets platted over eighty feet (80') in width, shall be nineteen feet (19') from the center line of such street measured at right angles each way.


(2)  The established line for poles and posts of whatever nature upon all residence streets platted from forty (40) to and including eighty feet (80') shall be sixteen and one half feet (16 ½') from the center line of such streets, measured at right angles each way.

(3)  Upon all other residence streets not specified in (1) and (2) and upon all business streets, all poles or posts or whatever nature shall be put on line next to the curb between the property line and the curb.


(4)  All poles and posts of whatever nature will be distant at least three feet (3') from any water main or service pipe, sewer pipe or lateral that may be upon that street.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-19.)


Section 17-16.      Operating tractors on pavement.


It shall be unlawful for any person to operate over, across or upon any pavement of whatever kind, any tractor, road-grader or other machine or vehicle of such construction that the metal parts thereof come into contact with the surface of the pavement, or which has caterpillar traction construction, or the wheels equipped with cleats, spikes or any other gripping device, which tractor, road-grader or other machine or vehicle in the course of locomotion breaks, cuts into, indents, leaves an imprint in, mars or defaces, in any manner or to any degree, the surface of such pavement; provided, however, if such road-grader, machine or other vehicle is propelled or moved over planks or other runways in such manner as to prevent defacement of the pavement, then it shall be lawful to operate such tractor, road-grader or other machine or vehicle over the pavement.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-20.)


Section 17-17.      Oil on pavement - Pouring or spilling prohibited.


It shall be unlawful for any person to pour, spill or permit to be poured or spilled, or to drip or flow upon, or to deposit or place in any receptacle upon any asphalt or bituminous macadam paving on any street or alley or public place, any kerosene, benzoin, gasoline, lubricating oil or other similar oil or oily substance, or salt or salt water, except as the same may be the ordinary and natural drip from vehicles and their axles, bearings and equipment when the same are carefully handled and operated. (Code 1958, Sec. 25-21.)


Section 17-18.      Oil on pavement, oil delivery and tanks.


All oil delivery wagons or tanks shall have securely fastened under the taps or faucets thereunto attached, water- tight boxes or trays, and in handling the contents of such wagons or tanks no drip or overflow shall be permitted to fall upon such paving, and no receptacle for handling such contents shall be placed on such paving.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-22.)


Section 17-19.      Water connections in proposed paving districts.


All property and places in areas proposed to be paved, where, in the opinion of the City Council, water service connections or sewer connections are likely to be needed, the owner of such property, shall be required to install water service pipes and sewer connections, from the trunk or main lines in such streets proposed to be paved to the curb line of such property.  If such owner refuses to install such water and sewer lines within thirty (30) days after notice thereof from the City Council, or its authorized agent, such notice to be addressed to last known address of such owner, then the City shall make such installation and charge the same against the property, such charge to become a lien upon such property.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-23.)


Cross reference: As to provision requiring connection with sewer system, see Section 12-46.


ARTICLE 2.  NUMBERING BUILDINGS.


Section 17-20.      Owners and occupants to number buildings.


Owners and occupants of all buildings shall number the buildings in the manner prescribed in this Article and as may be provided by the City Council.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-24.)


Section 17-21.      Manner of numbering.


The following is adopted and declared the manner and mode of numbering of houses in the City:


Main street, and any and all extensions thereof that may hereafter be made, shall be the division street, dividing the City into north and south sections, and the parts of each street intersecting such division street shall be designated as north or south according as the parts of such intersecting streets shall be north or south of Main Street; and Commercial Street, from its southern terminus throughout to its connection with Arizona Avenue and thence with Arizona Avenue north, and any and all extensions of Commercial Street south or of Arizona Avenue north, that may hereafter be made, shall be the division line, dividing the City into east and west sections, and the parts of each street intersecting Commercial Street or that part of Arizona Avenue north from its connection with Commercial Street shall be designated as east or west of the division line according as such parts of the intersecting street shall be east or west of the division line.  All houses and buildings on streets intersecting Main Street shall be numbered north or south from Main Street, and all houses and buildings on streets intersecting Commercial Street and that part of Arizona Avenue north of its connection with Commercial Street shall be numbered east or west from the division streets.  Houses and buildings fronting on streets that do not intersect Main Street or Commercial Street or such part of Arizona Avenue shall be numbered, as nearly as possible, in conformity with the manner and system of numbering hereby prescribed.  One hundred (100) numbers shall be assigned for each block east or west and north or south from the division streets, being fifty (50) numbers to each side of the street.  Blocks approximately double the ordinary frontage shall be given two hundred (200) numbers, and across all tracts of land intervening between portions laid out into blocks, the lines of streets shall be considered to cross the same in regular continuation of streets in blocks adjoining.  Numbering shall begin with "100" in the first (1st) blocks north or south and east or west of the division lines.  The even numbers shall be on the south and east sides and the odd numbers on the north and west sides of the streets.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-25.)


Section 17-22.      Allotment of numbers.


While one hundred (100) numbers are allotted to each block from the division streets, the division numbers to the frontage thereof shall be one (1) number to each twelve and one half feet (12 ½') in the business districts and one (1) number to each twenty five feet (25') in the residence sections of the City, or such other aliquot part of a lot frontage as shall, in the judgment of the City Engineer, be deemed most advisable, it being intended hereby to preserve as nearly as possible a general uniformity in numbering throughout the City.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-26.)


Section 17-23.      Street maps with numbers to be prepared.


The City Engineer shall cause to be prepared from time to time, when required by City Council, maps of the several streets of the City, showing the numbers of all houses. Where the number of any house shall hereafter be changed, by action of the City Council, the same shall be changed and numbered on said plats or maps as directed.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-27.)


Section 17-24.      Assigning numbers; certificate of designation.


The City Engineer shall assign to each house its proper number or numbers and upon application shall deliver free of charge, to the owner or occupant thereof, a certificate designating the proper number or numbers of such house. (Code 1958, Sec. 25-28.)


Section 17-25.      Size and location of configuration.


Each of the figures of every number shall be not less than two (2") inches in length, being so marked as to be distinctly and easily read.  Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or above the front door of the building to which they are attached.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-29.)





Section 17-26.      Refusal to place numbers on existing buildings.


It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building now erected, after having been notified by the City that the house numbers are on record in the City office, to neglect or refuse for thirty (30) days thereafter to number such building in conformity with the provisions of this Article.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-30.)


Section 17-27.      Refusal to place, or placing unauthorized, numbers on new buildings.


It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building hereafter erected to fail, neglect or refuse for thirty (30) days after it shall have been erected to number such building according to the provisions of this Article, or to number such building without first having obtained from the City a certificate designating the proper number.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-31.)


Section 17-28.      Altering numbers or street names - Consent required.


Whenever any street shall be named, numbered or renamed or re-numbered in pursuance of this Article or any ordinance that may hereafter pass, such names or numbers shall not be changed or altered without the consent of the City Council. (Code 1958, Sec. 25-32.)



ARTICLE 3.  EXCAVATIONS.

(Ord. 1516, eff., 8/26/95)


Section 17-29.      Excavation permit required; contents of application.


(1) It is unlawful for any person other than authorized City of Trinidad employees and those under specific written contract with the City, to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, drill, bore, undermine, or in any manner break up any Right Of Way (ROW) or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any ROW, or to place, deposit, or leave upon any ROW any earth or excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the ROW unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefore from the Public Works Department. (Ord. 1516, eff., 8/26/95)


(2) In the event of any emergency in which a utility line in or under any ROW breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such utility line, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this regulation, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. Such person shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next business day and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit under this regulation. The normal excavation permit fees shall apply to any such emergency work. (Ord. 1516, eff., 8/26/95)


(3) No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Public Works Department at least two business days prior to the anticipated time of the excavation work. The written application shall include the following:


(a) Applicant's name

(b) Applicant's address

(c) Application date

(d) Location of the excavation

(e) Purpose of the excavation

(f) Date of commencement of the excavation

(g) Date of completion of the excavation

(h) Proposed size of the excavation cut in square yards

(i) Contractor's license number (if applicable)

(4) The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location and extent of the proposed excavation and a traffic control plan for the work area.


(5) The application shall be accompanied with proper fees. The Application and Inspection Fee shall be $1.00 per square foot of excavation with a minimum fee of $20.00. Any person doing any excavation work without a permit under other than emergency repairs of utility lines that endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual shall be charged double the normal fees.


(6) Any applicant shall be responsible for providing traffic control in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. A traffic control plan shall be provided with the excavation permit application. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide all necessary traffic control devices per the traffic control plan and to assure the safety of the public. (Ord. 1516, 8-26-1995)


Section 17-30.      Excavation permit; conditions of issuance.


(1) Following approval of the application and payment of all fees the Public Works Department shall issue a permit to the applicant for the work described in the application. All excavation work shall comply with all standards for construction, traffic control standards, and safety regulations as have been adopted by the City to restore the surface to its original condition, prevent subsidence and collapse, restore deterioration and otherwise protect the integrity of the ROW, and to protect the public from hazards created by such excavation work. (Ord. 1516, 8-26-1995)


(2) No permit shall be issued to any person who, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, is not qualified to perform the work in accordance with these regulations. Any person who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the City Manager within ten business days of such denial. (Ord. 1516, 8-26-1995)


(3) The excavation permit will expire three months after the proposed completion date. One three month extension may be requested prior to the expiration of the original permit. The application and inspection fee is non-refundable.

Section 17-31.      Excavation permit; work requirements.


(1) The permittee shall obtain utility locations from all utility companies prior to commencing the excavation work. (Ord. 1516, eff. 8/26/95)


(2) A permit issued under these regulations shall at all times be in the possession of a competent person actually on the site representing the applicant. (Ord. 1516, eff. 8/26/95)


(3) The Public Works Director may suspend or revoke any permit for:


(a) Violation of any condition of the permit, any provision of this regulation, or any other applicable law.


(b) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act endangering life or property. (Ord. 1516, eff. 8/26/95)


(4) A stop work order may be issued by the Public Works Director to any person doing or causing any work to be done in the public right of way without a permit or in violation of any provision of this regulation. Stop work orders shall be effective immediately.  It is unlawful for any person to continue work for which a stop work order has been issued.


(5) Protection of utilities. Every permittee making an excavation in or under any street, sidewalk or right of way shall, at his expense, sustain, secure and protect any pipes, poles, mains, cables, utilities or conduits laid or erected in the ROW from injury and replace and compact the earth wherever the same shall have been removed, loosened or disturbed, under or around them, so that they shall be well and substantially supported. If any permittee fails to sustain, secure or protect such pipes, poles, mains, cables, utilities or conduits from injury or to replace and compact the earth under or around them, as the provisions of this section require, then the same may be done by the entity to whom the same may belong and the cost thereof and all damages sustained by such entity thereby shall be paid by such permittee and in default thereof, such entity may maintain an action against him therefor.


(6) Excavation backfill. The permittee shall backfill the excavation in accordance with one of the two following methodologies as set forth below:


(a) METHOD A


(I)  Backfill below the top two (2) feet shall be compacted to 90% of its maximum Modified Proctor density (ASTM D 1557). Backfill material shall be clean dry material free from muck, frozen lumps, vegetative matter or rubbish. All fill shall be placed in uniform and relatively level layers not to exceed eight inches prior to compaction.


(II)  The top two (2) feet shall be backfilled with well graded aggregate with a maximum size of one inch material and shall be compacted to 95% of its maximum Modified Proctor density (ASTM D 1557). The fill shall be placed and compacted at a moisture content within + 2% of its optimum moisture. All fill shall be placed in uniform and relatively level layers not to exceed eight inches prior to compaction.


(III)  The City may perform compaction density tests on any excavation.  Any backfill not meeting the compaction requirements will be removed by the permittee and recompacted as necessary to meet the requirements.


(b) METHOD B


(I)  Backfilling shall be accomplished via the use of flowable fill. Flowable fill is a self-leveling flowable, lean concrete mix which can be placed in one or more lifts with no tamping required. The 28 day compressive strength shall be less than 60 psi to ensure the backfill can be easily re-excavated to facilitate future repairs, but shall be greater than 40 psi to ensure stability of the trench.


(II)  The flowable fill mix design shall be as determined by the City of Trinidad Engineering Department based upon the availability of materials and shall consist of water, portland cement, fine and coarse aggregates. Flowable fill shall be mixed in accordance with ASTM Standard Specifications for Ready Mix Concrete. The flowable fill shall be thoroughly mixed prior to discharging to ensure a uniform product and shall be discharged as close as practical to its final location to reduce segregation. Use of a spud vibrator is recommended to improve the consolidation of the flowable fill mix.


(III)  Use of flowable fill eliminates the need for any compaction of the

backfill. The maximum layer thickness shall be four feet. Additional layers

shall not be placed until the flowable fill can be walked on without indenting

more than two inches.


(7) Pavement repair.


(a)  On asphalt paved streets, the contractor shall place hot bituminous pavement to the depth of the existing street surface or a minimum of three (3) inches, whichever is greater.


(b)  On bricked streets, the contractor shall reconstruct the excavated portion of the street by means of the following procedure: A two inch thick asphalt base shall be placed on the compacted subbase. This is covered with a one inch layer of sand on which the bricks are laid tight. The top surface of the bricks is covered with sand which is broomed into the cracks around the bricks. A small vibratory compactor is used to settle the sand down into the cracks to provide a tight fit.


(c)  Any excavations done during periods that hot bituminous pavement is not available shall be temporarily patched with cold bituminous asphalt. Within a one-year period of time all temporary patches shall be made permanent by the permittee. The warranty period will not begin until the permanent patch has been made.

(d) If the applicant desires the City of Trinidad Street and Bridge Department to make the street patch, said applicant shall pay for the necessary repairs at the following rates: (Ord. 1585, eff., 5-2-98)


Asphalt Patch - $40.00 per square yard

Brick Patch - $85.00 per square yard


Concrete Patch - The City of Trinidad is not capable of performing concrete patch work.  Any such work required and requested of the City shall be contracted out and the applicant shall be assessed the City’s cost plus 10%. (Ord. 1585, eff., 5-2-98)


Traffic Control - The applicant shall be charged a minimum of $50.00 for the setup and removal of traffic control devices at each excavation patch location.  Major excavation patches will be assessed for the traffic control for the actual time and material costs incurred. (Ord. 1585, eff., 5-2-98)


Section 17-32       Excavation permit; indemnification. (Ord. 1516, eff., 8/26/95)


The permittee shall indemnify and hold the City of Trinidad harmless and free from liability on account of any injury or damage to persons or property resulting from or related to the permittee's exercise of any rights under an excavation permit from the City of Trinidad. Such duty of indemnification shall include, but shall not be limited to, the City's reasonable attorney's fees and costs in defending any claims brought against it as a result of the permittee's acts or omissions taken with respect to or as a result of an excavation permit issued by the City of Trinidad. In the event a claim is brought either jointly or independently against the City as a result of acts or omissions of permittee covered under this duty of indemnification, the City, in its sole and conclusive discretion, may permit defense of it by permittee or the City may separately defend, without limiting or reducing the permittee's duty of indemnification hereunder.


Section 17-33.      Excavation permit; warranty. (Ord. 1516, eff. 8/26/95)


Any patching, backfill compaction, or other work done as part of the excavation shall be warranted by the applicant against all defects for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the completion of such work. Any settlement of the surface within such twenty-four (24) month period shall be deemed conclusively to have resulted from improper construction techniques or defective compaction by the applicant. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed to require the applicant to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the City of Trinidad Street and Bridge Department if such repairs should prove to have been defective. If any repairs are required to the excavation area (due to improper construction techniques or defective compaction) during the warranty period, the applicant shall be billed for said repairs if they are performed by City forces.


Sections 17-34 and 17-35 - REPEALED (Ord. 1516, eff. 8/26/95)


ARTICLE 4.  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.


Section 17-36.      Maximum and minimum widths of sidewalks.


All sidewalks shall be not less than five feet (5') and not more than twelve feet (12') in width, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, measured from the front line of the lots upon each street at right angles with such line toward the center of the street.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-43.)


Section 17-37.      Sidewalks to conform to established grade; supervision of laying.


All sidewalks shall be laid to the established grade of the City, which shall be shown or designated by the City Engineer free of charge to the owner of the abutting property, which grade shall be established by ordinance, or proper survey adopted by the City Council.  If the sidewalks are not so laid upon the grades so designated, the City Council may direct them to be rebuilt or repaired as hereinafter provided; and each sidewalk shall be laid under the direction and supervision of the City Engineer.  (Ord. 1200, Sec. 1, 4/21/81.)


Section 17-38.      Slope.


All sidewalks shall be constructed with a dip or incline and with the same uniform grade or slope along the streets as the streets themselves.  Whenever the streets have a grade other than longitudinal, there shall be no steps or setoffs upon the sidewalk other than that deemed necessary by the City Council.    (Code 1958, Sec. 25-45.)


Section 17-39.      Sidewalk construction - Permit required.


No person shall begin the construction of any sidewalks without having first obtained a permit from the City Engineer.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-46.)


Section 17-40.      Application for permit.


The City Engineer shall designate the grade upon which the sidewalk shall be built; and shall issue a permit and instructions thereof, whenever application is made in due form upon printed blanks to be provided by the City, setting forth specifically the location and nature of the walk to be constructed.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-47.)


Section 17-41.      Sidewalk openings for fuel and light to be covered.


All openings for the admission of fuel and light in sidewalks shall be securely covered with iron or iron and glass covers.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-48.)


Section 17-42.      Access to basement to be covered.


The owner or occupant of any building used for business purposes may construct and maintain, so long as the building shall be used for such purposes, upon the sidewalk in front of such building or upon any public alley at the side thereof, an opening for the purpose of affording ingress to and egress from the basement of such building; provided, however, no such opening shall be allowed unless it be constructed entirely within the lines of the lot upon which the building shall stand; and, provided further, every such opening shall be provided with a substantial cover or grating of iron, or shall be protected by a substantial and safe railing of iron to be approved by the City Engineer.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-49.)


Section 17-43.      Curb, gutter and/or sidewalk requirements - New construction.


Whenever any new building or structure is constructed or erected, and no sidewalk, curb and/or gutter exists in front of or along the property where such construction is taking place or the existing sidewalk, curb and/or gutter does not extend the full length of the property, that abuts an existing street right-of way, the City's Engineering Department shall order the property owner to construct such sidewalk, curb and/or gutter or portion thereof.  The Engineering Department may waive such requirement upon good cause shown.  Should the property owner fail or refuse to comply with the order to construct sidewalk, curb and/or gutter, or should the property owner wish to appeal the order of the Engineering Department, either the City or the property owner may request a hearing before City Council.  Conduct of the hearing, and action taken pursuant to the hearing shall be in accordance with Sections 17-44 through 17-50 of this Code.  The City Council shall order the construction of such sidewalk, curb and/or gutter unless good cause be shown.  No certificate of occupancy with respect to the new building or structure shall be issued until the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter has been constructed or the construction requirement has been waived by the City.  Any waiver granted pursuant to this Section shall not be permanent, and shall not prevent the City Council from ordering the construction of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk at such location at a later date.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-44.      Hearing to consider construction of sidewalk, curb and/or gutter.


Upon the request of the City Manager or upon its own motion, City Council may conduct a hearing to determine whether to order any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter or portion thereof, to be constructed by the adjacent or abutting property owner.  Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the adjacent or abutting property owner by either first class mail to the last known address of such property owner, or by delivering a copy thereof to the owner or his/her agent, or by leaving a copy thereof at the owner's usual place of abode with any member of the owner's family over the age of eighteen (18) years, at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.  At the hearing, the adjacent or abutting owner(s) shall have the right to be heard on the question of whether the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter or portion thereof shall be constructed or repaired.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-45.      Order to construct curb, gutter and/or sidewalk.


If following the hearing the City Council determines that it is necessary that any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter, or portion thereof, be constructed, it shall on its own motion, order the same to be done by the adjacent or abutting property owner.  A written notice of said order shall be served on the adjacent or abutting property owner in the manner set forth in Section 17-46. Such notice shall direct the property owner to construct the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter within a period of time not less than fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the notice, and shall further advise the property owner that if the same is not constructed by the owner within the time specified, the City may construct or repair the same, and assess the costs thereof against the property owner.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-46.      Failure of owner to construct.


Whenever any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter shall be ordered by the City Council to be constructed, and the abutting or adjacent property owner fails to do so within the time specified in the notice to construct, such work may be done by City forces or by an independent contractor retained by the City for such purpose. (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-47.      Assessment of cost against property owner.


Upon the completion of construction of sidewalk, curb and/or gutter by  City forces or by independent contractors employed by the City for such purposes, the costs thereof shall be assessed against the abutting or adjacent property owner or owners.  The assessment shall be the actual costs of labor, equipment or the contract price of an independent contractor plus five percent of said costs for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-48.      Notice of assessment.


The City Clerk, as soon as practicable after such charge has accrued, shall send by first class mail, addressed to the owner of such abutting or adjacent property at the last known post office address of such owner, a notice of such assessment, which notice shall contain a description of such abutting or adjacent property, the name of the owner or owners of such property, the amount of the assessment, a statement advising that the owner may protest the amount of the assessment in writing to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing of the Notice, and a statement that the assessment must be paid within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice unless a timely written protest has been filed with the City Clerk.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)

Section 17-49.      Protest of assessment.


Upon receipt of the written protest of assessment, the City Clerk shall refer the protest to the City Council, which shall schedule a hearing on the protest.  The property owner shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing.  At the hearing, the property owner shall have the right to be heard before the Council as to the justness and correctness of the

amount of the assessment.  (Ord. 1453. 08/03/93.)


Section 17-50.      Failure of owner to pay assessment.


If the property owner shall fail to pay the assessment within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice, or the date by which City Council has ordered payment to be made in full or any installment payment, the City Clerk shall certify the assessment to the County Treasurer, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes assessed upon said property.  The assessment shall be a lien against such lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-51.      Curbs and gutters - Materials.


All curbs and gutters, or curbs and gutters combined, shall be laid, constructed, rebuilt or repaired of concrete, in accordance with the requirements of the City ordinances and the specifications promulgated by the City Engineer.  Said specifications shall be maintained in the Office of the City Engineer.  (Ord. 1200, 04/21/81.)


Section 17-52.      Curbs on curb lines; gutters to attach to curbs.


All curbs shall be built upon the established curb lines of the street and the elevation of such curb shall be determined and designated by the City Engineer.  All gutters shall be laid and constructed upon the established grade of the street and shall abut or be attached to the outside of the curb.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-59.)


Section 17-53.      Street lawns and parks to conform to grade.


The space between the sidewalks and the street curb shall be for street lawns and parks.  All street lawns or parks shall be made so as to conform to the grade of that part of the street upon which they abut, and shall be kept by the owner of the premises free from holes, depressions, ridges or obstructions that are liable to cause injury.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-60.)


Section 17-54.      Article not applicable in commercial districts; City's jurisdiction over parks.


Nothing in this Article shall in any manner be construed to conflict or interfere with the laying of sidewalks or paving in the business part of the City or with the jurisdiction of the City over the parks for the construction of any public or other improvement that the City may desire or authorize constructed over, upon or across such property.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-61.)


Section 17-55.      Removal of grade or line stakes prohibited.


No grade or line stakes set by the City Engineer for the purposes of this Article shall be removed or otherwise disturbed except by order of the City Engineer or City Council.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-62.)


Section 17-56.      Curb line and curb radius.


Curb lines of all residential streets and curb radii at intersections shall be determined in accordance with the State of Colorado Department of Highways, Roadway Design Manual, latest revised edition.  (Ord. 1200, Sec. 4, 04/21/81.)


Section 17-57.      Fund established to front costs of repair or replacement.


There is established a fund to front the cost of repair or replacement of existing sidewalk, curb and gutter.  The City Council, in its discretion, shall determine when monies from such fund shall be used to front the cost of repair or replacement of sidewalk, curb and/or gutter.  If the City Council directs the fronting of monies to pay such costs, the adjoining or abutting property owners may be required to reimburse the City for its costs.  The City may enter into an agreement with the adjoining or abutting property owners allowing such property owners to reimburse the City in installment payments over a period of time.  Any such agreement shall be approved by City Council.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)


Section 17-58.      Repair or replacement of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk.


(1)  The City Council may in its discretion, order the repair or replacement of any sidewalk, curb and/or gutter pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 17-44 and 17-45 of the Code of Ordinances.


(2)  If the adjoining or abutting property owners fail to comply with the order to repair or reconstruct sidewalk, curb and gutter, the City Council may order that such work be done by City forces or by independent contractor pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 17-46, and assess costs for such work in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 17-47 through 17-50.  The City may be reimbursed for expenses pursuant to an agreement with the adjoining or abutting property owners, as set forth in Section 17-57.  (Ord. 1453, 08/03/93.)



ARTICLE 5. CULVERTS.


Section 17-59.      When construction of culvert required.


Whenever the owner or tenant of any property shall, in order to gain access from a public street to his/her property, fill in or cause to be filled in any ditch or gutter, lying between such street and such property, used for street drainage purposes, or shall, in order to gain access, place earth, sand, gravel or any other substance in such ditch or gutter, whereby the flow of water may be obstructed, the City Council, upon report of such condition by the Superintendent of Streets may, by resolution, order the owner of the property to place or construct in such ditch or gutter, at the point of access from the street to such property, a suitable culvert, which shall be in accordance with specifications to be prepared by the City Engineer, and which when in place shall be capable of carrying the full capacity of such ditch and at the same time permit a ready ingress to and egress from such property.  The City Engineer shall, upon order of the Council, prepare specifications for the type of culvert best suited for the case in question.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-74.)


Section 17-60.      Notice to owner to construct culvert.


Upon the entry of an order by the Council, the Superintendent of Streets shall forthwith cause to be served on the property owner a written notice of such order requiring the installation of such culvert within fifteen (15) days from the date of service, which service shall be accomplished by delivering a copy of said notice to such owner, or his/her agent, or by leaving a copy thereof at the usual place of abode of such owner with any member of his/her family over the age of eighteen (18) years.  In case such owner be a nonresident, and have no resident agent, service shall be made by mailing said notice addressed to such owner at the latest address of such owner contained on the general tax assessment roll in the office of the Treasurer of Las Animas County.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-75.)


Section 17-61.      Failure of owner to construct; construction by City; certification to City Clerk.


Upon failure or refusal of the property owner to construct such culvert within the time specified, it shall be constructed under the direction of the Superintendent of Streets and Bridges, who, upon completion of work shall certify in writing to the City Clerk the cost of such culvert, together with a description of the real estate served by it and the name of the owner of such real estate.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-79.)


Section 17-62.      Notice to owner of cost; assessment and hearing.


The Clerk shall, by registered mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of the property to be assessed that the culvert has been constructed, the cost thereof, and that any complaints or objections which may be made in writing by such owner to the City Council shall be filed in the office of the Clerk within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice and will be heard and determined by the Council before the passage of a resolution assessing the cost of such culvert; and the date when and place where such complaints and objections will be heard.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-77.)


Section 17-63.      Hearing on assessments; penalty; collection.


At the time specified in the notice, or, at some adjourned time, the Council shall hear and determine all such complaints and objections, and shall thereupon, by resolution, assess the cost of the culvert, together with all costs and expenses of these proceedings, on the property it serves.  The amount so assessed shall from the date of such assessment constitute a lien against the real estate of such owner, and unless the same be paid within ten (10) days after such assessment, it shall, together with ten percent (10%) penalty, be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer in the same manner as special improvement taxes are certified to such officer, to be collected according to law.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-78.)





Section 17-64.      Driveway - Culvert Fund.


There is created the driveway - culvert fund to be composed of money paid in under the provisions of this Article, warrants in payment of culvert construction costs shall be drawn on and payable out of this fund; provided, however, when there shall be insufficient moneys in said fund to meet a payment, such deficit may be met from the street and bridge fund which shall thereafter be reimbursed from such driveway - culvert fund.  (Code 1958, Sec. 25-79.)


ARTICLE 6.  CLOSURE OF CITY STREETS FOR ATHLETIC OR SPECIAL EVENTS.


Section 17-65.      Closure of City streets for athletic or special event.


(1)       (a)  City streets or designated portions of City streets may be partially or completely closed for the purpose of conducting athletic or special events thereon or for the purpose of ensuring the safe and efficient movement of traffic to and from or around an athletic event or special event which is in such  proximity to a City street that the event or any traffic attendant thereto will have a significant effect on the normal traffic flow.


(b)  When the term "close" or "closure" is used in this Section, it shall be deemed to include the partial closure of any land or other portion of a City street or the restriction or regulation of traffic on the City street by the Trinidad Police Department.


(c)  The City Manager has the authority to close a City street or portion thereof for the purposes of paragraph (a) of this subsection (1), when an athletic or special event is proposed to be held on such street or when a proposed event may cause a significant disruption to the normal flow of traffic on a City street.


(d)  The City Manager shall not approve an event which the City does not have sufficient resources to properly manage in the manner consistent with the preservation of the public peace, health and safety.

(2)  A closure by the City Manager may be authorized only if:


(a)  A written application therefor is submitted to the City Manager at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the proposed closure, containing such information as the City Manager deems necessary, and the application is approved by the City Manager.


(b)  If in the opinion of the City Manager, liability coverage by the applicant is necessary in order to protect the public peace, health and safety, the applicant shall pay for and provide evidence of liability coverage in amounts deemed adequate by the City Manager to protect the City from any injuries or damages which may arise out of the closure of the City's assistance in ensuring the safe conduct of the closure.


(c)  The closure is implemented in a manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the driving public consistent with the requirements of the athletic or special event and the event can be conducted in a manner consistent with the preservation of the public peace, health and safety.


(3)  If the City Manager approves the application, a permit shall be issued to the applicant authorizing the closure as requested by the applicant or as modified by the City.


(4)  No liability shall attach to the City of Trinidad for any injuries or damages which are caused solely by the use of a City street for an athletic or special event when such event has not been approved by the City Manager.  (Ord. 1396, 6/04/91.)


Section 17-66.      Penalty for failure to obtain permit or to comply with terms of permit.


Any person who conducts an athletic or special event on a City street when a permit for said event has not been issued or any person who violates the terms of a permit which has been issued for an athletic or special event, commits a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine of up to Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment of up to ninety (90) days, or both.  (Ord. 1306, 6/04/91.)




ARTICLE 7.  VACATION PROCEEDINGS.

(Ord. 1604, eff., 4-17-99)


Section 17-67.      Vacation fee.


Any person or persons making application for vacation of a City street or other City right-of-way shall be required to pay an application fee of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) to the City at the time application is made.  Of the fee, Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) shall be a non-refundable payment for reimbursement of the City’s administrative costs.  The remaining Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) shall be applied toward the City’s publication costs incurred in connection with the application.  If the publication costs are less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.  If the publication costs exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), the applicant shall be required to make additional payment to the City equal to the amount by which publication costs exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).  The requirement to pay all costs due under this Section shall not be affected by the denial of any application.


Section 17-68.      Vacation Application.


Any application for vacation of a City street or other City right-of-way shall be made to the person designated by the City Manager to receive such applications on application forms provided by the City.  Such City Manager designee shall circulate the vacation application among City department heads for their review and comment.  Following completion of review and comment by department heads, the vacation application shall be referred to the City’s Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission for its review and recommendation. (Ord. 1607, eff., 5/15/99)


Section 17-69.      Procedure before Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission.


The Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission shall consider the application for vacation at a regular or special meeting.  The City shall give written notice to the applicant and persons who reside or own real property within one block of the City street or other right-of-way requested to be vacated.  At the proceeding at which the application is considered by the Commission, the applicant and those favoring or opposing the application shall be given an opportunity to be heard.  After the applicant and other interested parties have been heard, the commission shall make its recommendation as to whether the application should be approved.  In making its recommendation, the Commission shall consider only the application as submitted to the City or as amended by Applicant.  The Commission shall not consider any proposals for land trades or sale of the property proposed to be vacated, in lieu of a vacation. (Ord. 1607, eff., 5/15/99)


Section 17-70.      Procedure before City Council.


After the Planning, Zoning and Variance Commission has reviewed the vacation application and made its recommendation, the application shall be referred to the City Council for its decision.  The decision as to whether to vacate any City street or other right-of-way shall lie with the City Council.  The City Council shall have full discretion as to whether grant or deny a vacation request, except that no vacation shall be approved unless it meets State statutory requirements.  The vacation of any City street or other right-of-way shall be by ordinance.  (Ord. 1607, eff., 5/15/99)

CHAPTER 18.  TELEVISION FRANCHISE.


Sections:



18-1                 Approval of Cable Television System Franchise Agreement with Comcast of Colorado/Pennsylvania/West Virginia, LLC. (Ord. 1880, eff., 3/27/09, Ord. 1577, eff., 12/27/97)


18-2 to 18-14  REPEALED (Ord. 1577, eff., 12/27/97)

























CHAPTER 18.  TELEVISION FRANCHISE.


Section 18-1.  Approval of Cable Television System Franchise Agreement with Comcast of Colorado/Pennsylvania/West Virginia, LLC


The City of Trinidad, Colorado, acting by and through its Mayor and City Council, having previously approved a CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM FRANCHISE AGREEMENT with Century Trinidad Cable Television Corp., which agreement is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth in this Ordinance, does hereby approve a FRANCHISE RENEWAL AGREEMENT with Comcast of Colorado/Pennsylvania/ West Virginia, LLC, successor and assignee to Century Trinidad Cable Television Corp., which renewal agreement is attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth in this Ordinance.

Section 18-2 through 18-14.  REPEALED  (Ord. 1577, eff. 12/27/97).

CHAPTER 19.  TREES AND VEGETATION.


ARTICLE 1.  PROTECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER VEGETATION.


Sections:


19-1                       Purpose and intent.

19-2                       Definitions.

19-3                       License required to cut or remove trees; liability insurance; license fee.

19-4                       Public nuisances.

19-5                       Unlawful to permit public nuisance.

19-6                       Inspection.

19-7                       Abatement procedure and notice.

19-8                       Rights of property owner.

19-9                       Responsibility for damaging trees on public property.

19-10                     Interference unlawful.

19-11                     Penalty clause.

19-12                     Severability.


ARTICLE 2.  HAZARDOUS GROWTH.


19-13                     Hazardous growth - Defined.

19-14                     Declaration by City Council.

19-15                     Cutting and removal of hazardous growth required.

19-16                     General notice to cut and remove.

19-17                     Notice; failure to comply.

19-18                     Assessing costs.

19-19                     Notice of assessment.

19-20                     Collection of assessments.

19-21                     Penalty.

19-22                     Payment of assessment will not avoid fine.




ARTICLE 3.  CITY TREE BOARD.


19-23                     Creation and Establishment.
19-24                     Term of Office.
19-25                     Compensation.

19-26                     Duties and Responsibilities.
19-27                     Operation.



CHAPTER 19.  TREES AND VEGETATION.


ARTICLE 1.  PROTECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER VEGETATION.


Section 19-1.        Purpose and intent.


(1)  Purpose.  It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for regulation of protective methods, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the City of Trinidad.


(2)  Intent.  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Trinidad to promote:


(a)  The protection, maintenance, removal and survival of desirable trees, shrubs, and other plants within the City; and


(b)  The control of Dutch Elm Disease by accepted methods of treatment, removal and disposal of infected wood; and


(c)  The protection of citizens from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the City of Trinidad from property damage, caused by improper protective efforts, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants located within the City.


Section 19-2.        Definitions.


(1) City Inspector shall mean a City employee and/or contractor designated by the City Manager of the City of Trinidad to enforce and carry out the purpose and intent of this ordinance including issuance of permits.


(2) City-owned property shall mean property owned by the City, or implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use or purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements.


(3) Parkway shall mean City-owned property located within the sidewalk area in front of privately-owned property, which includes the area between the private property line and the curb line, if curb exists, and between the private property line and the traveled portion of the public street, if no curb exists.


(4) Property owner shall mean the record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.


(5) Trees, shrubs, or other plants shall mean all vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in height.






Section 19-3.        License required to cut or remove trees; liability license fee.


(1)  Scope.  Any person who engages in or solicits the business of cutting, trimming, pruning, removing or spraying trees, shrubs or vines, shall not do so without first procuring a license therefor from the City Clerk.


(2)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant has presented to the City Clerk a satisfactory public liability insurance policy covering all operations within the scope of this Chapter in the amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) per accident and Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) for any accident involving bodily injury and Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for property damage liability.


(3)  The license fee shall be Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) per year or fraction thereof, payable in advance.


Section 19-4.        Public nuisances.


(1)  Definition.  The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this ordinance:


(a)  Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city-owned property or on private property.


(b)  Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city-owned property or on private property which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or other plant.


(c)  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city-owned property or on private property which by reason of location             or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.

(d)  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light.


(e)  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the view in the "visibility triangle" as such may be determined by the City.


(f)  Any dead, severely damaged, diseased and/or infested elm tree as follows:


(I)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch Elm Disease, Ceratoycystis ulmi (Buisman), Mureau, or any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eich.), or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.) or European Elm Scale, Gossyparia supria (Mod.), or Elm Leaf Beetle, Galerucella xanthomelaena (Schrank).  As used herein, the word "infected" or "infection" shall mean also infested or infestation.


(II)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed.


(III) Any dead or severely damaged branch or part of an elm tree.


Section 19-5.        Unlawful to permit public nuisance.


It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this Chapter to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him/her within the City, or in the alley behind such property, or in the parkway in front of such property.  Any such nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed in this Chapter.


Section 19-5.1.           Unlawful to permit tree topping.


(1)  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the City’s Urban Forestry Board, or at the determination of the City of Trinidad Public Works Department if an emergency situation exists.  (Ord. 2027, eff. 5/12/17)



Section 19-6.        Inspection.


(1)  The City Inspector or designated contractor shall inspect all premises and places within the City as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in Section 19-4 exists therein, subject to the provisions of subsection B of this Section.  The City Inspector or designated contractor shall also investigate all reports of conditions described in Section 19-4.


(2)  The City Inspector or designated contractor may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to him/her hereunder provided he/she has either received the consent of the owner, agent or lessee of such premises to enter upon the premises, or has obtained a search warrant from the Municipal Judge authorizing him/her to enter upon such premises for inspection purposes.  The City Inspector or designated contractor shall follow the procedures set forth in "Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure" in obtaining a search warrant.


(3)  Upon finding conditions described in Section 19-4, the City Inspector or designated contractor shall immediately take such steps for diagnosis as may be necessary to remedy such condition.


Section 19-7.        Abatement procedure and notice.


(1)  Any public nuisance as defined in this Chapter, which is located on city-owned property, except the alleys behind privately-owned property and the parkways in front of privately-owned property shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the City to whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.


(2)  With respect to any elm tree-related public nuisance under this ordinance which is located either on city-owned or privately-owned property, the elm tree or part thereof constituting such a nuisance shall be removed, trimmed and disposed of, or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of any condition described in Section 19-4.  Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the current technical and expert methods and plans as may be determined by the City Inspector or designated contractor. The City Inspector or designated contractor shall establish specifications for removal, treatment, trimming, and disposal methods consistent therewith.


(3)  Any public nuisance as defined in this Chapter, which is located on privately-owned property or in the alleys behind such privately-owned property or within the parkway in front of such property, shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the property owner, his/her agent, lessee or occupant of such property in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance.


(4)  Upon the determination by the City Inspector that any public nuisance as defined in this Chapter exists on privately-owned property or in the alleys behind such privately-owned property or parkway in front of such privately-owned property, the City Inspector shall cause a written notice to be personally served upon the owner or owners of record of such privately-owned property or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the owner or owners of such privately-owned property.  In those instances where the nuisance consists of a diseased tree, the Inspector shall also tag and/or mark said tree, which tag and/or marking shall not be removed until the nuisance has been abated.


(5)  Such notice shall contain the following:


(a)  Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other plant or plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance, its location on the property, and the reason for declaring it a nuisance.


(b)  Such notice shall describe by legal description or by street address the premises;


(c)  Such notice shall state the actions that shall be undertaken to abate the nuisance;


(d)  Such notice shall require the abatement of the nuisance no less than twenty (20) days after the notice is delivered or sent to the record owner or owners;


(e)  Such notice shall also state that if such nuisance shall not have been abated within the time provided, the owner, lessee or occupant may be charged with a violation of Section 19-4 for maintaining a public nuisance and assess the cost against such property.


(6)  If the owner, person in control, lessee or occupant of such property fails to abate such nuisance within twenty (20) days after personal service of the notice or twenty (20) days after the date of mailing of the notice, if service was by certified mail, the City Inspector shall proceed to have such nuisance abated.  Any expense incurred by the City in so doing shall be a charge and lien upon said property and shall be collected as a special assessment in the same manner as other special assessments, or such expenses may be collected from the owner of the property in an action at law.


Section 19-8.        Rights of property owner.


(1)  The owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any privately- owned property abutting a parkway shall have the right to:

(a)  Plant or transplant trees, shrubs, or other plants within such parkway, except that the location and, spacing of any tree or trees planted or transplanted, must be first approved by the City;


(b)  Place a container or enclosure for trees, shrubs, or other plants on such parkway;


(c)  Water or fertilize any tree, shrub, or other plant located in such parkway.


(2)  This Section shall not be construed to permit such owner, agent, lessee or occupant to create a public nuisance as defined in this Chapter on either privately-owned property or within a parkway.


Section 19-9.        Responsibility for damaging trees on public property.


(1)  Any person who shall injure, damage or destroy any tree situate in any public place shall promptly notify the City Inspector of such fact.


(2)  The City Inspector shall cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the person responsible for such damage or destruction shall be required to pay to the City the costs of such repair or replacement.


Section 19-10.      Interference unlawful.


It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Inspector or designated contractor while engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this Section.


Section 19-11.      Penalty clause.


The penalty for violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment.


Section 19-12.      Severability.


If any provision of this Article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid by any court, other provisions or applications of the Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable.  (Ord. 1426, Sec. 1, 07/21/92.)



A RTICLE 2.  HAZARDOUS GROWTH .


Section 19-13.      Hazardous growth - Defined.


Hazardous growth shall mean weeds, grass, brush, volunteer growth of bushes or herbaceous plants and other vegetation which is in excess of six inches (6") in height and shall include:  Bindweed, Canada Thistle, Perennial Sowthistle, Russian Knapweed, Common Ragweed, Milkweed, Common Sunflower, Dandelion, Russian Thistle, Fireweed, Mustards Sandburs, Hairy Stickweed and grass.  The foregoing enumeration is not exclusive, but rather intended to be indicative of those types of plants which are considered detrimental to health and safety, but weeds shall not include flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and small grain plots.  (Ord. 1176, 7/1/80.)


Section 19-14.      Declaration by City Council.


The City Council finds that hazardous growth contributes to and aggravates respiratory disease, that hazardous growth is a potential fire hazard endangering the inhabitants of the City of Trinidad and that hazardous growth may conceal accumulations of debris and filthy deposits.  (Ord. 1176, 7/1/80.)



Section 19-15.      Cutting and removal of hazardous growth required.


(1)  It shall be the duty of each and every owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or tract of land in the city to cut below a height of six inches (6") all hazardous growth on each such lot or tract of ground, on or along any street or roadway adjoining the same, between the property line and curb line thereof, or on or along any alley adjoining the same between the property line and the center of such alley; and to keep said growth cut below six inches (6") during all times of the year.


(2)  All hazardous growth shall immediately upon cutting, be removed from the lot or tract of land to a disposal sight which conforms with the law, by the owner, lessee or occupant of same.


(3)  It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or tract of land in the City to remove from said lot or tract of land, cut hazardous growth lying upon said land regardless of source or origin.  (Ord. 1350, Sec. 1, 4/4/89.)


Section 19-16.      General notice to cut and remove.


The City Clerk shall, from time to time, publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, to all owners of property, without naming them, that it is their duty to remove hazardous growth and debris from their properties and from the streets and alleys as provided in this Article; and that, in default of cutting and removal, the work may be done under the orders of the City Manager and the cost thereof, together with an administrative fee,

would be charged to said properties in the manner provided in this Article and that, in default of cutting and removing, the owners, lessees or occupants of said properties will be subject to penalties provided in this Article.  (Ord. 1176, 7/1/80.)


Section 19-17.      Notice; failure to comply.


(1)  In case of failure of any owner, lessee or occupant of lots or tracts of land within the City, to cut and remove hazardous growth as provided in this Article, the City Manager or any officer or employee of the City designated by him/her, is authorized to give notice to the owner, lessee or occupant of such property by any one of the following methods:


(a)  Certified mail addressed to the last known post office address of the owner, lessee or occupant;


(b)  First class mail addressed to the last known post office address of the owner, lessee, or occupant;


(c)  Personal service of the Notice on the owner, lessee or occupant;


(d)  Or if an occupied dwelling is located on such lot or tract of land and no one is on the premises at the time service is attempted, by posting the Notice in some conspicuous place on the premises.


(2)  Such notice shall require the cutting and removal of such growth within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. In the event such work is not done within the fifteen (15) days, the City Manager may then proceed to have the work done as soon as practicable.  (Ord. 1350, Sec. 2, 4/4/89.)


(3) Any notice issued pursuant to this Section, which is served in one of the methods set forth in subsection (1), complies with the requirements of subsection (2), is issued to and served on the owner of record as shown by the most current records of the County Assessor; and advises such owner of record of the right to request an administrative hearing before the City Manager or his/her designee on the issue of ownership, shall be deemed valid and legally enforceable, unless as a result of such hearing the City Manager or his/her designee finds that such owner of record is not the current owner of said property. (Ord. 1605, eff., 5/1/99)


Section 19-18.      Assessing costs.


(1) Upon cutting and removing hazardous growth by City forces or by independent contractors employed by the City for such purpose, a charge shall be made against the owner of the property.  The charge shall be actual costs for labor, equipment and materials, or the contract price of an independent contractor, together with a $500 administrative fee thereon for inspection, noticing, and other incidental costs in connection therewith. (Ord. 2049, Repealed and re-enacted, eff. 12-01-17)


Section 19-19.      Notice of assessment.


The City Clerk, as soon as practicable after such charge has accrued, shall send by mail, addressed to the owner of such property, at the last known post office address of such owner, a notice of such charge, which notice shall contain a description of the lots or tracts of land, the name of the owner or owners and the amount of the assessment.  (Ord. 1176, 7/1/80.)


Section 19-20.      Collection of assessments.


(1)  It shall be the duty of the owner to pay such charge within twenty (20) days after the mailing of such notice, and upon his/her failure to do so, such charge may be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer who shall collect the assessment, together with a ten percent (10%) penalty for cost of collection, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. The laws of the State of Colorado for assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale and redemption of property for taxes shall apply to the collection of such assessments.


(2)  Such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments.  (Ord. 1330, Sec. 2, 10/20/87.)


Section 19-21.      Penalty.


(1)  Any owner, agent, lessee, occupant or person in possession or control of land within the City who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor less than Thirty Dollars ($30.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.


(2)  Regardless of whether a notice pursuant to Section 19- 17 has been issued to any person in violation of Section 19-15 or a notice by the City Clerk has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City pursuant to Section 19-16, any person in violation of Section 19-15 shall be subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court and to the penalties set forth in this Section.  (Ord. 1330, 10/20/87.)


Section 19-22.      Payment of assessment will not avoid fine.


The fact that assessments have been made against property as provided in this Article for cutting and removing hazardous growth, shall not prevent the owner, lessee or occupant from being punished by fine or jailing, but such fine or penalty may be imposed on those found guilty of violating the provisions of this Article in all cases, whether an assessment has or has not been made in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 1176, 7/1/80.)


ARTICLE 3.  CITY TREE BOARD.

(Ord. 2027, repealed and reenacted, eff. 5/12/17)


Section 19-23.      Creation and Establishment.


There is hereby created and established the Urban Forestry Board (formerly the City Tree Board) for the City of Trinidad, Colorado which shall consist of up to seven (7) members, citizens and residents of this city who shall be selected and appointed by the City Council.    At the time of adoption of this ordinance, the existing members of the City’s Tree Board will remain seated and transition to the Urban Forestry Board under their existing terms.


Section 19-24.      Term of Office.


The term of office of the seven (7) persons selected and appointed by the City Council shall be three (3) years.  In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.


Section 19-25.      Compensation.


Members of the Urban Forestry Board shall serve without compensation.


Section 19-26.      Duties and Responsibilities.


(1) It shall be the responsibility of the Urban Forestry Board to study and develop and/or update a written proposed work plan.  Said plan will include recommended practices and associated costs for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of street and park trees and landscape plantings.  The Board will create a plan for the City to assist with Hazardous trees in residential areas.


(2)  The Public Works Director shall be consulted by the Urban Forestry Board prior to presentation of the proposed annual work plan to the City Council to ensure said plan does not conflict with ongoing and/or proposed City activities.


(3)  The plan will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive urban forestry plan for the City.  The City Council will attempt to follow, as closely as possible, the plan submitted by the Urban Forestry Board.


(4)  The Urban Forestry Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.


(5)  The Urban Forestry Board shall develop and implement a public education plan.  The plan should include assisting residents determine what are appropriate, climate-adapted, drought tolerant species of trees and landscape plantings, as well as proper planting techniques of the same.


(6)  The Urban Forestry Board shall work with City staff to ensure trees are pruned properly, through training efforts implemented by the Board.


(7)  The Urban Forestry Board will act as advocates of the existing urban forest by identifying areas or specific vegetation in need of care to City staff, and work with staff to ensure proper upkeep.


(8)  The Urban Forestry Board may be consulted with planning choices for street landscaping and municipal projects.


Section 19-27.      Operation.


The Urban Forestry Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.  Interested individuals may attend meetings but will not vote.

CHAPTER 20.  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC.


ARTICLE 1.  MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC CODE.


Sections:


20-1                       Model Traffic Code for Colorado - Adoption.

20-2                       Additions and modifications.

20-3                       Penalties.

20-4                       Application.

20-5                       Validity, Repeal and Interpretation.



ARTICLE 2.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20-6                       Certain streets as part of State Highway.

20-7                       Commercial activity within right of way prohibited.

20-8                       Parking restrictions; traffic control devices.

20-9                       Parking prohibited during snow removal.

20-10                     Traffic regulations subject to approval by Department of Transportation.

20-11                     Penalty for violation.

20-11.1                  State of Colorado, State Highway Access Code, Volume 2, Code of Colorado Regulations 601-1, March 2002, as amended



ARTICLE 3.  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES AND DISPOSE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.


20-12                     Definitions.

20-13                     Impounding of vehicles; emergency circumstances.

20-14                     Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.

20-15                     Abandonment of vehicles; procedures preceding impoundment.

20-16                     Leaving of wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on the street or                 other public property.

20-17                     Wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on private property.

20-18                     Disposal of vehicles removed and impounded pursuant to this Article.



ARTICLE 4.  ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.


20-19                     Parking in freight loading zone.

20-20                     Limitations on parking.

20-21                     Repealed (Ord. 1854, eff. 6/27/08)

20-22                     Registered owner liable for parking violations.

20-23                     Persons prohibited from restricting parking on public streets.

20-24                     Parking not to obstruct traffic.



ARTICLE 5. PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND UTILITY TRAILERS


20-25                     Definitions.

20-26                     Restricted areas and times.

20-27                     School zones.

20-28                     Penalty for violation.



ARTICLE 6. COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAFFIC


20-29                     Definitions

20-30                     Designation of routes, maps

20-31                     Operation of commercial trucks

20-32                     Use of engine compression brake prohibited

20-33                     Penalty for violation



CHAPTER 20.  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC .


ARTICLE 1.  MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC CODE.


Section 20-1.        Model Traffic Code for Colorado - Adoption.


Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive of the 2010 Revised Edition of the “Model Traffic Code for Colorado”, promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700., Denver, CO  80222.  The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City.  The purpose of this Ordinance and the Code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation.  Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Trinidad, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours.  The 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length.  (Ord. 1947, repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/17/13)


Section 20-2.        Additions and modifications. (Ord. 1822, eff., 12/15/06)


The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the following modification:


(1)   Section 1412(10)(b).

No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon any sidewalk located within the following street segments of the downtown area:


Commercial Street from Colorado Avenue (Five Points) to First Street;

Main Street from Carbon Street and Santa Fe Trail to Walnut Street;

Animas Street from Nevada Avenue and University Street to First Street.


(2)   A violation of any provision of Chapter 20 of this code shall be deemed to be a traffic infraction if, at the time of the commission of the violation, its counterpart violation under the provisions of Article 4 in Title 42 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, if any, is designated by state law as being a traffic infraction.  If no counterpart violation exists under state law, the violation shall be deemed to be a traffic infraction.  All other violations under Chapter 20 of this code shall be considered misdemeanors punishable as described in paragraph (2) of Section 20-3.  Any person against whom judgment is entered for a traffic infraction under this code shall be subject to the penalty of a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars and shall not be subject to imprisonment on account of such judgment.

(a)   Model Traffic Code Parts 1 and 2, and 5 to 15 and 19 are traffic infractions, except as otherwise provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) below.


(b)   Model Traffic Code Sections 107, 228(8), 233, 235, 507, 508, 509, 1005, 1401, 1402(1), 1413, and 1903(1)(a) are class 2 traffic misdemeanors.


(c)   In section 1101 of the Model Traffic Code a violation of driving one to twenty-four miles per hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed or in excess of the maximum lawful speed limit of seventy-five miles per hour is a traffic infraction; a violation of driving twenty-five or more miles per hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed or in excess

of the maximum lawful speed limit of seventy-five miles per hour is a class 2 misdemeanor traffic offense.


(d)   Violation of subsection (2) of section 1402 is a class 1 traffic misdemeanor.


Section 20-3.        Penalties. (Ord. 1947, Sec. 20-3 repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/17/13)


The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this ordinance:


(1) It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this Ordinance.


(2) Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(3)     (a) Any persons convicted of a violation of the Compulsory Insurance requirements of the State, MTC 1409(1), (2), or (3), shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of not less than five hundred

dollars ($500.00). The court may suspend up to one half of the fine upon a showing that appropriate insurance as required pursuant to CRS 10-4-619 or 10-4-624 has been obtained.


(b) Nothing in this paragraph (3) shall be construed to prevent the court from imposing a fine greater than the minimum mandatory fine.


(c) Upon a second or subsequent conviction under MTC 1409(1), (2), or (3), within a period of five years following a prior conviction under said MTC 1409(1), (2), or (3), in addition to any imprisonment imposed pursuant to paragraph 2 of this section, the defendant shall be punished by a maximum mandatory fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).  The court may suspend up to one half of the fine upon a showing that appropriate insurance as required pursuant to CRS 10-4-619 or 10-4-624 has been obtained.


(d) In addition to the penalties prescribed in paragraphs 3(a), (b), and (c) of    this section, any person convicted pursuant to this section may, at the        discretion of the court, be sentenced to perform not less than forty hours   of community service.


(e) Testimony of the failure of any owner or operator of a motor vehicle to present immediate evidence of a complying policy or certificate of self-insurance in full force and effect as required by law, when requested to do so by a peace officer, shall constitute prima facie evidence, at a trial concerning a violation charged under this paragraph (3), that such owner or operator of a motor vehicle violated said MTC 1409(1), (2), or (3).


(4) All penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be paid to the City Department of Finance and deposited into the General Fund of the City of Trinidad in support of the Trinidad Police Department.



Section 20-4.        Application. (Ord. 1947, Sec. 20-4 repealed and reenacted, eff. 12/17/13)


This ordinance shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this municipality, the use of which this municipality has jurisdiction and authority to regulate.  The provisions of section 1401, 1402, 1413, and part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and accidents and accident reports shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout this municipality.


Section 20-5.        Validity, Repeal and Interpretation. (Ord. 1947, Sec. 20-5 repealed and reenacted 12/17/13)


(1) Validity. If any part or parts of this ordinance are for any reason held to be invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one part or parts be declared invalid.


(2) Repeal. Existing or parts of ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this ordinance are hereby repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this ordinance.


(3) Interpretation. This ordinance shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State’s uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic.  Article and section headings of the ordinance and adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof.



ARTICLE 2.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.


Section 20-6.        Certain streets as part of State Highway.


The portions of the streets in the City which State Highway 12 lies are hereby dedicated to the people of the State as connecting links in and as a part of Colorado State Highway No. 12 and the streets or highways shall have priority over local intersecting streets.  (Ord. 914, 7/3/67.)



Section 20-7.        Commercial activity within right of way prohibited.


No commercial activity or encroachment shall be permitted within the right-of-way boundaries of the streets described in Section 20-6 and that the width from curb to curb of said streets shall be a minimum of fifty-six feet (56'). (Ord. 914, 7/3/67.)


Section 20-8.        Parking restrictions; speed limitations.


Parking on the streets described in Section 20-4 or portions thereof is prohibited at certain places as specified in Section 42-4-1204 C.R.S., as amended; parking when and where permitted shall be parallel unless otherwise specifically provided by other Sections of this Code; traffic control devices on said streets shall conform to the uniform standards as adopted by the State Department of Highways.


Section 20-9.        Parking prohibited during snow removal. (Ord. 1515, eff., 8/26/95)


(1) No person shall park or otherwise leave unattended a motor vehicle within any of the following street segments within the City, which shall be designated as emergency snow routes by official signs containing the snowflake symbol, between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. until snow removal has been completed, whenever there exists an accumulation of three inches of snow or more, necessitating the use of the City's emergency snow removal equipment within such designated snow emergency routes:


(a)    Pine Street between State Street and Commercial Street.

(b)    Commercial Street between Pine Street and First Street

(c)    Animas Street between Purgatoire Drive and Main Street.

(d)    Maple Street between Elm Street and First Street.

(e)    Chestnut Street between Elm Street and First Street.

(f)     Santa Fe Trail between Main Street and First Street.

(g)    Beech Street between Main Street and First Street.

(h)    Convent Street between Cedar Street and First Street.

(i)     Main Street between Interstate 25 and Ash Street.

(j)     Elm Street between Commercial Street and Maple Street.

(k)    Plum Street between Commercial Street and Maple Street.

(1)    Church Street between Commercial Street and Animas Street.

(m)   First Street between Maple Street and Chestnut Street.


(2) Any vehicle parked or otherwise left unattended within an emergency snow route in violation of this Section which causes an obstruction to snow removal equipment, shall be subject to immediate impoundment and removal.


Section 20-10.      Traffic regulations subject to approval by Department of Transportation.


All traffic and parking regulations hereafter adopted which pertain to the streets and roadways which form a part of the State Highway System and constitute a connecting link thereof shall be submitted to the Colorado Department of Transportation for approval in accordance with the provisions of Section 43-2-135. C.R.S., before they shall become effective.


Section 20-11.      Penalty for violation.


Any violation of this Article shall be punishable in the Municipal Court of the City by penalty as provided by the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, 1977, as adopted herein.  Any police officer of the City is authorized and required to enforce the provisions of this Article and the said Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and try any person charged with its violation.  (Ord. 914, 7/3/67.)


Section 20-11.1.   State of Colorado, State Highway Access Code, Volume 2, Code of Colorado Regulations 601-1, March 2002, as amended.


The State of Colorado, State Highway Access Code, Volume 2, Code of Colorado Regulations 601-1, March 2002, as amended originally adopted June 18, 1998 by the Transportation Commission of Colorado pursuant to §43-2-147(4), C.R.S. in accordance with §24-4-103, C.R.S. effective August 31, 1998 and any amendments made to the same through March, 2002, promulgated and published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80222, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.  At least one copy of said Access Code as above set forth has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk.


The subject matter of the Access Code relates primarily to comprehensive standards for the design and location of driveways and other points of access to public highways, including streets under the jurisdiction of the City that are not part of the state highway system.  The purpose of the Access Code and the City’s adoption thereof is to provide the procedures and standards necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to maintain smooth traffic flow, to maintain highway right-of-way drainage and to protect the functional level of public highways while meeting state, regional, local and private transportation needs and interests.  (Ord. 1746, eff., 2/17/04, Ord. 1890, eff., 11/14/09)


ARTICLE 3.  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES AND DISPOSE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.


Section 20-12.      Definitions.


The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:


(1) Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slide to transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, airplane, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, tractor, buggy and wagon.


(2) Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.


(3) Property shall mean any real property within the City which is not a street or highway.


(4) Collector's item shall mean a motor vehicle which is either at least twenty-five (25) years old, a make or model recognized by the Executive Director of the State Department of Revenue as being antique, or a make or model of motor vehicle recognized by the Executive Director of the State Department of Revenue as having unique interest or historic value.


(5) Wrecked or junked vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following:  one or more flat tires, a broken window,

windshield or both, missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission; or cannot be operated mechanically

or legally upon the public right-of-way.  (Ord. No. 1477, 8-2-94.)


Section 20-13.      Impounding of vehicles; emergency circumstances.


In the circumstances hereinafter enumerated, preservation of the public safety and welfare requires that vehicles be removed from the public right-of-way without delay.  Therefore, police officers are hereby authorized to remove, or have removed, at their discretion, a vehicle from any street, alley, highway, roadway, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, public parking lot, or from any other public way or place, to the lot maintained by the City or the Police Department for the storage of impounded vehicles, or to any other place of safety under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:


(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or other public way or place, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;


(2)  When a vehicle upon a street or other public way is so disabled as to

constitute an obstruction to traffic, or the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and

removal;


(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or any other public way or place, and is parked so illegally as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal flow of traffic;


(4)  When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the Police Department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street or other public way or place;


(5)  When the driver of any vehicle or the vehicle which he/she is driving is reasonably suspected of having been involved in any hit and run accident;


(6)  When removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm or other emergency reason;


(7)  When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being a stolen vehicle, or parts thereof to be stolen parts; or


(8)  When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for a suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle is suspected of containing stolen goods or other contraband.




Section 20-14.      Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.


Any vehicle, not subject to immediate removal under Section 20-13, which is parked in violation of any provision of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Trinidad, within a public street or highway or on any other public property within the City for a period of twenty four (24) hours or more shall be subject to removal and impoundment either by or at the direction of a police officer, without prior notice.  (Ord. No. 1477, 8/2/94.)


Section 20-15.      Abandonment of vehicles; procedures preceding impoundment.


(1)  Promotion and preservation of the public health and safety requires that vehicles left abandoned on public property or private property without permission of the owner, be removed.  No person shall abandon any vehicle on any street, highway or other public property within the City, or on any private property other than his/her own without the consent of the owner thereof.


(2)  A vehicle meeting any of the following criteria is an abandoned vehicle:


(a)  Any vehicle left unattended on private property for a continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his/her legally authorized agent;


(b)  Any vehicle left unattended on public property, other than a street or highway, for a continuous period of seventy two (72) hours or more;


(c)  Any vehicle left unattended within a public street or highway for a continuous period of more than seven (7) days, unless such vehicle is parked entirely within the area abutting residential property occupied by the owner of such vehicle and has current registration and at least one current license plate.


(3)  Whenever an officer has reason to believe that a vehicle may be abandoned within a street or highway, he/she shall securely affix to the windshield or to the driver's side door, a conspicuous warning notice, indicating that the vehicle is believed to be abandoned in violation of this Section, and the reason for such a belief.  If the vehicle does not have current registration and at least one (1) current license plate, the notice shall state that the vehicle must be removed from the public right-of-way unless current registration is obtained and current license plates are affixed to the vehicle, and the vehicle is moved to a location in the public street or highway immediately abutting the owner's residence within seven (7) days.  If the vehicle does have current license plates, the notice shall state that the vehicle must be either removed from the public right-of-way or to a location in the public street or highway immediately abutting the owner's residence within seven (7) days.  The Notice shall further state that if the vehicle is not removed as set forth above, within the seven (7) day time period, a Municipal Court citation may be issued, and the vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City following the expiration of the seven (7) day period, unless a hearing has been requested in writing during that period.


(4)  No vehicle alleged to be abandoned may be removed and impounded by the City until the following additional steps have been taken:


(a)  Reasonable efforts shall be made to find the owner of the vehicle, including checking the records of the State Department of Motor Vehicles and County Clerk and Recorder, and inquiring of residents of abutting properties.


(b)  If the owner is located, he/she shall be notified by first class mail, certified mail or

personal service that his/her vehicle is believed to be abandoned in violation of this Section, and the reason for such a belief, and that unless either the vehicle is removed or a hearing is

requested within seven (7) days after the mailing or service of the notice, the vehicle shall be subject to removal and impoundment without delay.


(c)  If the owner, after reasonable efforts to locate have been made, cannot be located, the vehicle may be removed and impounded by the City without delay, provided that seven (7) days have elapsed since the warning notice was affixed to the vehicle.


(5)  Any hearing must be requested in writing to the City Manager within seven (7) days after a warning notice has been affixed to the vehicle, if the owner cannot be located, or within seven (7) days after mailing or service of the second notice, if the owner is located.  If a written request is made for a hearing, a vehicle may not be impounded until after the hearing has been held and a decision rendered.


(6)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to this Section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable, at which time testimony and evidence may be presented relative to the propriety of impounding such vehicle, and the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written decision following the hearing as to whether the vehicle is abandoned pursuant to this Article and therefore, subject to impoundment.  If the City Manager or his/her designee determines that such vehicle is subject to impoundment, the owner shall have twenty four (24) hours to remove the vehicle from the public right-of-way, or to a location within the public right-of-way immediately abutting the owner's residence, or to satisfy any other requirement set forth in the written decision.  Should he/she fail to do so, the vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City.


(7)  Any vehicle left unattended on private property for twenty four (24) hours or more without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or the owner's legally authorized agent, shall be subject to removal and impoundment, without prior notice or hearing, upon the request of such owner, lessee or agent.


(8)  Any vehicle left unattended on public property, other than a street or highway, for a period of seventy two (72) hours or more, shall be subject to removal and impoundment, without prior notice or hearing.


(9)  A Municipal Court Summons and Complaint for violation of this Section may be issued after either completion of the administrative hearing and rendering of the hearing officer's decision, if a hearing has been requested, and the hearing officer has determined the vehicle to be abandoned, or expiration of all periods during which a hearing may be requested, if no hearing has been requested.  (Ord. No. 1477, 8/2/94.)


Section 20-16.      Leaving of wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on the street or other public property.


(1)  Preservation of the public health and safety requires that junked, wrecked and partially dismantled vehicles left on public property, including streets and highways, be removed or repaired.  Therefore, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles left on public property are declared to be

a nuisance.  No person shall leave any wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle on any public property within the City.


(2)  Whenever a vehicle has been left wrecked, junked or partially dismantled within a public street or highway or any other public property continuously for more than forty-eight (48) hours, an officer shall securely affix to the windshield or driver's side door, a conspicuous warning notice indicating that the vehicle is believed to be wrecked, junked or partially dismantled in violation of this Section and the reason for such a belief.  The notice shall also state that if the vehicle is not removed from the street, highway or other public property or necessary repairs are not made within seven (7) days, a Municipal Court citation may be issued, and the vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City following the expiration of the seven (7) day period, unless a hearing has been requested in writing during that period.


(3)  No vehicle alleged to be wrecked, junked or partially dismantled, may be removed and impounded by the City until the following additional steps have been taken:


(a)  Reasonable efforts shall be made to find the owner of the vehicle, including checking the records of the State Department of Motor Vehicles and the County Clerk and Recorder, and inquiring of residents of abutting properties.


(b)  If the owner is located, he/she shall be notified by first class mail, certified mail or personal service that his/her vehicle is believed to be wrecked, junked or partially dismantled in violation of this Section, and the reason for such a belief, and that unless the vehicle is removed from the street, highway or other public right-of-way or adequately repaired, or a hearing is requested within seven (7) days after the mailing or service of the notice, the vehicle shall be subject to removal and impoundment without delay.


(c)  If the owner, after reasonable efforts to locate have been made, cannot be located, the vehicle may be removed and impounded by the City without delay, provided that seven (7) days have elapsed since the warning notice was affixed to the vehicle.


(4)  Any hearing must be requested in writing to the City Manager within seven (7) days after a warning notice has been affixed to the vehicle, if the owner cannot be located, or within seven (7) days after mailing or service of the second notice, if the owner is located.


(5)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to this Section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable, at which time testimony and evidence may be presented relative to the propriety of impounding such vehicle, and the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written decision following the hearing as to whether the vehicle has been left wrecked, junked or partially dismantled on public property and is therefore, subject to impoundment.  The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the vehicle owner to demonstrate that the vehicle is mechanically operable.  If the hearing officer determines that such vehicle is subject to impoundment, the owner shall have twenty-four (24) hours to remove the vehicle from public property or have it adequately repaired.  Should he/she fail to do so, the vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City.


(6)  A Summons and Complaint for violation of this Section may be issued after either completion of the administrative hearing and rendering of the hearing officer's written decision, if a hearing has been requested, and the hearing officer has determined the vehicle to be wrecked, junked or partially dismantled, or expiration of all periods during which a hearing may be requested, if no hearing has been requested. (Ord. No. 1477, 8/2/94.)


Section 20-17.      Wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicles on private property.


(1)  Preservation of the public health and safety requires that vehicles left wrecked, junked or partially dismantled on private property, be removed.  It is therefore unlawful for any person who is the owner of any vehicle, or the owner of any real property, or who is in charge or control of any such real property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant lessee or otherwise, to permit or allow any wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof to remain on such real property longer than thirty (30) days, as determined by recorded observation or signed complaint, and such vehicle is declared to be a nuisance, provided that this Section shall not apply with regard to a collector's item where the provisions of C.R.S. 42-12-103 have been complied with; a vehicle or parts of a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained for impounded vehicles by the City. (Ord. 1530, eff., 4/27/96)

(2)  If any wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof has remained on any privately owned premises for more than thirty (30) days, as determined by recorded observation or signed complaint, the police department shall require the removal of such vehicle within ten (10) days, by written notice personally served on the owner of the vehicle, or on the owner or agent of the owner of the premises whereon is situated such vehicle, or sent by certified mail to either the owner of the vehicle, at his/her last known address, or owner or agent of the premises whereon is situated such vehicle.  The vehicle or parts thereof must be removed from public view or adequately repaired within ten (10) days of the mailing of or personal service of the notice, unless a written request for a hearing is made to the City Manager during that time period.  A vehicle or parts thereof moved onto the public right-of-way or onto other public or private property after service or mailing of the notice, shall be subject to removal without further notice.  Change in ownership of the vehicle or the real property where it is located, after service or mailing of the notice shall not necessitate the giving of any additional notice prior to removal and impoundment of the vehicle by the City or at its direction.


(3)  The notice referred to in this Section shall state that the vehicle must be removed from public view or repaired within ten (10) days of the mailing or service of the notice, unless a hearing is requested in writing within the ten (10) day period.  The notice shall indicate that failure to remove or repair the vehicle will result in it being impounded, and any expenses incurred by the City being assessed against the owner or his/her property.


(4)  For the purposes of this Section, the tenant, occupant, or lessee of any premises shall be deemed the agent of the owner of such premises.


(5)  Any hearing must be requested in writing to the City Manager within ten (10) days after the date of mailing or service of the warning notice.  If a written request is made for a hearing, a vehicle may not be impounded by the City until a hearing has been held and a decision rendered.


(6)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal or any owner or agent of the owner so notified, to properly dispose of such vehicle or parts thereof within the time limits herein set forth, unless a hearing has been requested, the Police Department is authorized and empowered to remove the same at the expense of such owner or agent of the owner, which expenses shall include the cost of removal plus administrative costs of the City, not to exceed five percent (5%) of the cost of removal.


(7)  In case the owner or agent of such property shall fail to pay such bill within thirty (30) days after the same has been rendered, the Police Department shall report the same to the City Manager or his/her designee who shall assess the costs against the property in question.  Such assessment shall constitute a perpetual, first and prior lien on the property involved.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall certify to the County Treasurer the assessments which are not paid within twenty (20) days of the date of assessment.  Ten percent (10%) of the amount shall be added to the assessment to pay the cost of collection.


(8)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to this Section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable, at which time testimony and evidence may be presented relative to the propriety of impounding such vehicle, and the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a decision following the hearing as to whether the owner or other person in charge of or in control of any private property, or the owner of any vehicle has permitted or allowed such wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof to remain on private property longer that thirty (30) days pursuant to this Section, and whether such vehicle or parts thereof, is subject to impoundment.  The fact that such property has changed owner, lessee or occupant, or that such vehicle has been moved to another location within the City within public view, other than a licensed junkyard or garage, shall not be a bar to impoundment.  If the City Manager and his/her designee determines that such vehicle is subject to impoundment, the agent of the owner of the property, or the vehicle owner shall have twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the written decision, to remove the vehicle from public view or adequately repair the vehicle.  Should he/she fail to remove or repair such vehicle, the Police Department is empowered to remove such vehicle at the expense of the owner, plus administrative expenses of the City.


(9)  A Municipal Court Summons and Complaint for violation of this Section may be issued after either completion of the administrative hearing and rendering of the hearing officer's decision, if a hearing has been requested, and the hearing officer has determined that the owner of other person in charge or in control of any private property, or the owner of any vehicle has permitted or allowed such wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof to remain on such private property longer than thirty (30) days, or expiration of the period during which a hearing may be requested, if no hearing has been requested.  Such summons and Complaint may be issued to either the owner or agent of the owner of the premises on which the vehicle or parts thereof, is located, or to the vehicle owner, or all of them.

Section 20-18.      Disposal of vehicles removed and impounded pursuant to this Article.


(1)  If removal and impoundment of a vehicle is not effected by the Police Department, the police officer shall cause removal and impoundment to be effected only by a private towing company which has been licensed by the State Public Utilities Commission and carries adequate liability insurance to cover the cost of any damage inflicted on the vehicle during towing or storage.  No vehicle may be towed which has not first had its contents properly inventoried by a police officer or other official of the City.


(2)  Whenever a vehicle is impounded and ordered held pursuant to this Article, the Police Department shall notify the owner of record, if ascertained, of the impoundment of such vehicle, and of the owner's and/or lienholder's opportunity to request a hearing to determine the validity of the impoundment.


(3)  Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lienholder, if ascertained, within five (5) working days of the receipt of the report from the Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall include the following information:


(a)  The address and telephone number of the motor vehicle owner, if ascertained;


(b)  The location of storage of the motor vehicle;


(c)  The location from which the motor vehicle was towed;


(d)  The reason for which the vehicle was impounded;

(e)  A description of the motor vehicle, which shall include, if available, the make, model, license plate number, mileage and vehicle identification number.


(f)  That in order to obtain a hearing concerning the validity of the impoundment, the owner and/or lienholder must request such hearing in writing to the City Manager within ten (10) days after the date appearing on the notice, when applicable.


(g)  That unless the vehicle is claimed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the vehicle shall be subject to sale.

(4)  Any such hearing shall be conducted within a reasonable time after receipt of the owner's or lienholder's request, not to exceed ten (10) days after receipt of such request, unless the hearing is postponed to a later date at the owner's or lienholder's request.  The granting of such request for postponement shall be at the discretion of the hearing officer.  The failure of the owner or lienholder to request a hearing or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the hearing requirements of this Section.


(5)  The sole issue at the hearing shall be the legality of the impoundment of the motor vehicle.  The burden of proof shall be on the Trinidad Police Department to establish probable cause that one or more of the grounds set forth in this Article exist for the impoundment.


(6) If the hearing officer determines that the impoundment was invalid, the City of Trinidad shall be responsible for the costs incurred in the towing and storage of the motor vehicle.  If the hearing officer determines that the impoundment was valid, and the vehicle is not reclaimed by the owner or lienholder pursuant to State statute within thirty (30) days of the hearing officer’s decision, then unless such vehicle is being held for evidence in a criminal case the owner could not legally reclaim such vehicle during the thirty (30) day period, the vehicle shall be presumed to be abandoned and the


provisions for sale and disposal of same set forth in C.R.S. 42-4-1806 shall apply. (Ord. 1530, 20-18(6), 4-27-96)


(7)  Any motor vehicle owner who has been previously afforded an opportunity to request a pre-impoundment hearing shall not be entitled to a post-impoundment hearing.


ARTICLE 4.  ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS


Section 20-19.      Parking in freight loading zone.


(1)  No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery of pickup and loading of materials in any place officially marked as a freight loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. (Ord. 1532, eff., 5-18-96)


(2) In no case shall the parking for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. 1532, eff., 5-18-96)


Section 20-20.      Limitations on parking.


No person shall park a vehicle at a location for a period of time greater than that permitted by

official signs or during those hours in which parking is prohibited by official signs. (Ord. 1532, 20-20, 5-18-96)


Section 20-21.      Repealed. (Ord. 1854, 6-27-08)


Section 20-22.      Registered owner liable for parking violations.


The registered owner of any motor vehicle is liable for payment of a parking violation fine.  It is no defense to the prosecution of a parking violation, that at the time of the parking violation, the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of another person. (Ord. 1532, 20-22, 5-18-96)


Section 20-23.      Persons prohibited from restricting parking on public streets.


(1)  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which attempts to regulate, limit, restrict or prohibit the parking of any motor vehicle on or within any public street or highway, nor shall any person, without lawful authority, in any other way attempt to regulate, limit, restrict, or prohibit the parking of any motor vehicle on or within any public street or highway.(Ord. 1562, 5-31-97)


(2)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the City is empowered to remove the same of cause it to be removed without notice. (Ord. 1562, 5-31-97)


(3)  Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. 1562, 5-31-97)




Section 20-24       Parking not to obstruct traffic.


No person shall park any vehicle upon a public street, alley, or highway in a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)



ARTICLE 5. PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND UTILITY TRAILERS


Section 20-25       Definitions.


(1) “Commercial Vehicle” shall mean any vehicle having more than two axles, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles which exceed twenty feet (20') in length, any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles eighty four inches (84") or more in width, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds (10,000#) or more.  A Commercial Vehicle includes a truck tractor. (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)


(2) “Recreational Vehicle” shall mean any vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven, and designed to serve as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping, or travel use, and including, but not limited to travel trailers, camping trailers, converted buses, and self-propelled motor homes.  Excluded from this definition are passenger vehicles designed for everyday use, and stock vans customized as conversion vans. (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)


(3) “Utility Trailer” shall mean a vehicle without motorized power, designed to be towed by a passenger automobile or truck, but not designed for human occupancy, and which may included but not limited to a utility trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer, snowmobile trailer, animal trailer, produce trailer, goods or commodity trailer. (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)


Section 20-26       Restricted areas and times.


It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand or to allow any vehicle, passenger car, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle, or utility trailer to park or stand upon any public street, row, lot, highway, alley, public property not zoned for parking, public property that is not improved, or public right-of way for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle or any of the above mentioned within a municipal parking lot for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours.  (Ord. 2001, Sec. 20-26 repealed and reenacted, eff., 4-29-16)


Section 20-27       School zones.


It shall be unlawful to park a recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle, or utility trailer on a public street in a school zone when school is in session.  This restriction shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as it actually necessary to loan or unload passengers. (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)



Section 20-28       Penalty for violation.


Every person convicted of a violation of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1725, eff., 6-13-03)


ARTICLE 6.  COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAFFIC


Section 20-29.  Definitions.


The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:


(1) Commercial Truck means any motor vehicle having more than two axels, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles which exceed 20 feet in length, any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles 84 inches or more in width, or any single commercial vehicle or combination of said vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination rating of 10,000 pounds or more designed or used primarily for the transportation of property, including vehicles used for delivery purposes.  This definition excludes privately-owned recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 20-25(2), and publicly owned mass transportation motor vehicles.


(2) Immediate area of operation means a segment of a restricted route between successive

intersecting streets, including any restricted route which provides the only practical access to that

segment of the restricted route.


(3) Through truck travel means operation of a truck without an origin or destination in the immediate

area of operation.  Origin or destination shall not include the residence of the owner, lessee or

operator of the truck.


(4) Truck route means any street, highway, public way or portion thereof designated specifically for

the operation of commercial trucks.


Section 20-30.  Designation of routes, maps.

(1) In accord with a City Council approved truck route plan, City Council shall have the authority to designate all or portions of those streets, highways, public ways and roadways upon which trucks shall operate. The City Council shall have the additional authority to restrict the operation of trucks upon streets, highways, public ways or portions thereof. Such designation and restrictions shall be made upon the recommendation of the Public Works Director and shall be based on traffic engineering investigations and studies, public safety, environmental considerations, economic factors affecting trucking and the trucking industry, desires of the inhabitants and neighborhood characteristics of affected areas.

(2) Public Works shall maintain in the Public Works Office maps designating truck routes. Copies of the maps shall be made available to trucking interests and the public through the Public Works Office and/or the Police Department. Any change to truck routes shall be published by the Public Works.

(3) Public Works shall post with appropriate signs those routes that are restricted. Public Works may also post designated truck routes with appropriate signs. Truck route maps shall be made available to all persons upon request. The posting of signs shall not be required for enforcement.


Section 20-31. Operation of commercial trucks.


(1)  Through truck travel shall be unlawful upon prohibited routes. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a commercial truck upon a prohibited route without an origin or destination in the immediate area of operation.

(2) Upon the designation of truck routes, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a commercial truck upon any other street, highway or other public way. Commercial trucks may deviate from truck routes while traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a service or place of loading or unloading, and may proceed from a destination not located upon a truck route to another destination without returning to a truck route if to so return would unreasonably increase the distance to be traveled between destinations.

(3) Any person operating a commercial truck upon all or any portion of a street, highway, public way or roadway that is not a truck route, or upon a prohibited route, shall have in the person's possession a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of the point of origin and destination to justify the presence of the vehicle upon the route. Failure to produce evidence upon request of a police officer shall be unlawful.

(4) The following City streets within the limits of the City of Trinidad are hereby designated as truck routes:

SH 12
Commercial Street (Colorado Avenue to Elm Street)
Linden Avenue (Goddard Avenue to Main Street)
160 Bypass
Goddard Avenue (I-25 to Nevada Avenue)
Elm Street (Commercial Street to Maple Street)
Plum Street (Elm Street to Commercial Street)
Section 20-32.  Use of engine compression brake prohibited.

Use of engine compression brakes within the corporate city limits of Trinidad shall be prohibited.

Section 20-33.  Penalty for violation.

Every person convicted of a violation of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00).

CHAPTER 21. SPECIAL EVENTS


ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.


Sections:

1-1. Short Title

1-2. Purpose.

1-3. Findings.

1-4. Definitions

1-5. Permit Required.

1-6. Exemptions.

ARTICLE 2. APPLICATION


2-1.                  Application for Permit.

2-2.                  Fees.

2-3.                  Investigation of Application.

2-4.                  Permit.

2-5.                  Relationship to Other City Ordinances

2-6.                  Denial of Permit.

2-7.                  Authority to Impose Conditions on Permit.

2-8.                  Non-Discrimination and Content Policy

2-9.                  Decision by City Manager or their designee.

2-10.                Notice of Decision.

2-11.                Appeal, Denial, or Conditional Approval of Permit.

2-12.                Contents of Permit.

2-13.                Permit Not Transferable.

2-14.                Notice of Issuance of Permit.

2-15.                Insurance Requirement

2-16.                Duties of Permittee.

2-17.                Posting of Permit.

2-18.                Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

2-19.                Penalties, Injunctive Relief.

2-20.                Rules and Regulations.

CHAPTER 21. SPECIAL EVENTS


ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.


Section 1-1. Short Title

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Trinidad Special Events Ordinance.


Section 1-2. Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for permitting and regulating special events, as that term is defined in this chapter. The permitting process established by this chapter is intended to be content-neutral and not subject - matter based. This chapter is intended merely to establish a nondiscriminatory mechanism by which the City can control, through appropriate regulation, the holding of special events.


Section 1-3. Findings.

The City Council hereby finds and determines as follows:


A. The City of Trinidad is authorized to regulate businesses operating within the City pursuant to Chapter 9 of the City of Trinidad Municipal Code and Section 31-15-501, Colorado Revised Statutes.


B. The City of Trinidad also may issue temporary permits for any public space or property within the City of Trinidad pursuant to 11.14 of the City of Trinidad Charter.


C. Special events, as defined in this chapter, contribute to the economic, cultural, social, and environmental health and well - being of the community.


D. Special events, however, create special regulatory concerns, including, but not limited to, the need for crowd control, sanitation, security, traffic management, parking, infrastructure, and desire to balance the quality and quantity of events.


E. In enacting this chapter the City council is exercising its police power as granted by the City's Charter, and the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Colorado, as well as its power to license and regulate business activities.

DEFINITIONS :

Section 1-4. Definitions

As used in this chapter the following words have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:


(1) APPLICANT: A person or entity who has submitted an application for permit pursuant to this chapter.


(2) APPLICATION:  An application for permit submitted pursuant to this chapter.


(3) DAY: A calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.


(4) ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, touring exhibitions, concerts, performances of dance, music, drama, art and comedy, parades, sporting exhibitions or contests, festivals, fairs, automotive displays, and performances of skill.


(5) FILMING: The taking of motion pictures, the taking of still photography or the use and operation of television cameras or transmitting television equipment, including radio remotes and any preparatory activity associated therewith, and shall include events that include, but are not limited to, the making of feature or documentary films, television serials, webcasts, simulcasts or specials. The City Manager or their designee has discretion to set administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter appropriate exemptions from the permitting requirements of this chapter for filming and photography activities not significantly affecting City property and not requiring substantial City services .


(6) PERMIT: A permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.


(7) PERMITTEE: The applicant to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter.


(8) PERSON: Has the meaning provided in Section 1-4(1) of this code.


(9) SPECIAL EVENT OR EVENT: A planned or organized occurrence that:

A. Includes an expected gathering if:

i.) the primary purpose of the occurrence is entertainment;

ii.) the public or a substantial portion of the public is invited to the occurrence, either by express invitation or by implication; and,

iii.) the occurrence is expected to have a visual, sound, or environmental impact, or to cause disruption of the normal routine of the community or the affected neighborhood; or i nvolves filming .


Section 1-5. Permit Required.

No person shall stage, hold, present, or conduct a special event within the City without a valid permit issued in accordance with this chapter.


Section 1-6. Exemptions.

The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:


(1) A special event  held by the  City;


(2) An event held at Central Park, or the City's multipurpose fields contracted through the Parks and Recreation Department and constituting "normal or regular" use of those City facilities.

ARTICLE 2. APPLICATION


Section 2-1. Application for Permit.


A person seeking to obtain a permit shall file an application with the City Manager or their designee. The form of the application shall be established by the City Manager or their designee in the administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter.


(1) An application for a special event permit shall be filed with the City Manager or their designee not less than forty-five (45) days no more than three hundred sixty five (365) days before the special event is proposed to begin. The City Manager or their designee may waive the minimum forty-five (45) day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter time period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the special event, number of events on the proposed date, the anticipated number of participants, and the City services required in connection with the special event, the City Manager or their designee determines that sufficient time exists for the proper investigation and review of the application; that the waiver will not present a hazard to public health, safety or welfare; and that the waiver will not create a substantial burden on the City's staff or financial  resources.


(2) An applicant may be required to obtain a building permit depending on the size and scale of any temporary structures proposed to be used in connection with the special event. The need for a building permit will be determined by the City Manager or their designee once the application has been received and reviewed.


(3) An application for a special event permit shall contain such information as shall be established in administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter.


(4) Applications shall be processed by the City Manager or their designee in order of receipt.


Section 2-2. Fees.


(1) When an application is filed, an applicant shall pay to the City a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as shall be established by the City Manager or their designee in the administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter.


(2) If  the application includes a request to use any City property or any City service in connection with the special event, then before the permit is issued the applicant shall pay to the City any required charges, fees, or deposits required by the City in connection with the use of the requested City property or the provision of the requested City service.



Section 2-3.  Investigation of Application.


(1) Upon receipt of a properly completed application, together with all information required in connection therewith, and the payment of the application fee as required by Section 2-2 of this chapter, the City Manager or their designee or their designee shall transmit copies of the application to such persons, agencies, or departments as identified in the administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter.


(2) Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a completed application those City Departments and other referral agencies shall provide with comments concerning the application. If an application is accepted less than forty-five (45) days before the proposed special event is to be held, the City Departments and other referral agencies shall use their best efforts to provide their comments in a timely manner so that the City Manager or their designee will have the comments before making a decision on the application.


Section 2-4. Permit.

The City Manager or their designee shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the City manager or their designee determines that:


(1) The application (including any required attachments and submissions) is complete and sign by the applicant;


(2) The applicant has paid the application fee and any other fees required by Section 2-2 of this chapter;


(3) The application does not contain a material falsehood or misrepresentation;


(4) The application complies with all of the requirements of this chapter;


(5) The applicant is legally competent to contract under Colorado law;


(6) The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application is made has not previously damaged City property and failed to pay in full for such damage, and the applicant does not have other outstanding and unpaid debts to the City;


(7) The duration of the event will not be longer than three (3) consecutive days, unless the City Manager or their designee after taking into account all relevant factors related to the event, determines that the proposed event may be longer;


(8) The proposed special event will not conflict with:


a. A special event for which a permit has previously been issued; if concurrent events are scheduled to occur, it shall be determined by the City Manager or their designee, if one or both are allowed to occur.


b. A City-sponsored event;


c. An annual special event which is reasonably expected to be held again, but for which an application has yet to be submitted.


(9) The holding of the proposed special event will not cause significant disruption in the ability of the City to deliver or provide essential governmental services;

(10) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available at or sufficiently near to the proposed special event area(s);


(11) Sufficient parking is available near the site of the proposed special event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected for the event, or an acceptable transportation and  parking plan to provide adequate  parking for the proposed  special event has been submitted and approved  by the City Manager;


(12) The proposed special event will not pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare;


(13) The proposed special event will positively impact the City culturally, economically, environmentally or socially.


Section 2-5. Relationship to Other City Ordinances

Notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary :


(1) A permit issued under this chapter is not a special-events liquor license. If alcoholic beverages are to be served at the special event, the permittee must obtain the  required  permit or approval from the City clerk or the City of Trinidad  liquor licensing    authority.


(2) Except as specifically provided in this section, in addition to a permit a permittee must obtain all other required City permits and approvals before holding the special event authorized by the permit.


Section 2-6. Denial of Permit.


A. The City Manager or their designee shall deny an application for a special event permit if the City Manager or their designee determines that:


(1) The application conflicts with another event as described in subsection Section 2-4(8)(a) of this chapter;


(2) Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant,  is found to be false  in any material  respect;


(3) The application fails to meet any of the standards  set forth in Section 2-4 of this chapter;


(4) The time, route, or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic on or contiguous to the event site or route or will disrupt the use of a street or highway at a time when  it is usually subject to heavy traffic   congestion;


(5) The location of the event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled  to take  place upon or along the City streets  or  property;


(6) The applicant has failed to pay costs, fees, or deposits for a previous special event permit within the preceding five (5) years; or the applicant has failed to pay the City for damages arising from a previous special event held by the applicant , regardless of when such event was held; or


(7) The applicant has failed to abide by the requirements or conditions of previous special event permits within the preceding five (5) years.


Section 2-7. Authority to Impose Conditions on Permit.


(1) The City Manager or their designee shall have the authority to impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a permit as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; to promote economic success, and to obtain compliance with the requirements of this chapter and applicable law.


(2) The City of Trinidad has the authority based on the Municipal Charter and Code to impose a change of venue to any and all events if it has determined that the proposed area limits total economic viability of the City of Trinidad.



(3) The City Manager or their designee shall have the authority to ensure that all permit applications conform to the Colorado Non-Discrimination Statutes.


Section 2-8. Non-Discrimination and Content Policy
The City Manager or their designee shall uniformly consider each application for a permit upon its merits, and shall not discriminate in granting or denying a permit under this chapter based upon race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex , age, veteran status, sexual orientation, or physical or mental disability. Further, the City Manager or their designee shall be content neutral in reviewing an application, and shall not consider the subject matter of any type of speech proposed as part of the application.


Section 2-9. Decision by City Manager or their designee.


The City Manager or their designee shall approve, deny or conditionally approve an application within thirty  (30) days of the receipt of the completed application unless, by written notice to the applicant, the decision  period is extended for an additional ten (10) days; provided, however, the City Manager or their designee shall  render a decision on an application  not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the  scheduled  commencement of the special event which  is the subject of the application.


In the event an application is conditionally approved, the City Manager or their designee shall clearly set forth in writing the conditions of approval.



Section 2-10. Notice of Decision.


The City Manager or their designee shall notify the applicant of the decision on the application within three (3) business days of rendering the decision. Notice shall be given by mailing a copy of the City Manager or their designee's decision to the applicant by regular mail, postage prepaid, at the address shown in the application. Notice is deemed to have been properly given upon mailing.


Section 2-11. Appeal, Denial, or Conditional Approval of Permit.


(1) An applicant has the right to appeal directly to the City Manager in regards to a denial or conditional approval of an application to the City council.


(2) An applicant does not have the right to appeal a change of venue or location.


(3) The burden of proof in an appeal filed under this section shall be on the applicant.


(4)  If there is any conflict between the provisions and requirements of this section and the provisions and requirements of this code, the provisions and requirements of this section shall control

Section 2-12. Contents of Permit.

The required contents of a permit shall be established by the City Manager or their designee in administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter .


Section 2-13. Permit Not Transferable.


A permit is nontransferable and non-assignable. Any attempt to transfer or assign such permit voids the permit.


Section 2-14. Notice of Issuance of Permit.


Immediately upon the issuance of a permit, the City Manager or their designee shall send a copy of the permit to such persons, agencies, or departments as the City Manager or their designee shall identify in administrative rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 2-20 of this chapter.


Section 2-15. Insurance Requirement


(1) E ach permit shall require the permittee to file prior to commencement of the setup of the special event a certificate of insurance demonstrating that the permittee has in effect a policy or policies of general liability insurance covering the special event with minimum combined single limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).


(2) Such insurance shall remain in full force throughout the entirety of the special event for which the permit is issued.


(3) The City shall be named as an additional insured und er such insurance policy. If alcoholic beverages will be served at the special event, the permittee must also provide proof of liquor liability insurance.


Section 2-16. Duties of Permittee.


In connection with the holding of the event for which a permit is issued, a permittee shall:


(1) Comply with all of the terms  and conditions of the permit;


(2) Comply with all applicable City Ordinances and state and federal laws; and


(3) Permit inspection of its records and special event facilities by the City Manager or their designee for the purpose of determining the permittee's compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. special event facilities by the City Manager or their designee for the purpose of determining the permittee's compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. ???

Section 2-17. Posting of Permit.


A permit shall be continuously posted in a conspicuous location at the site of the special event throughout the duration of the special event.


Section 2-18. Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

A. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager or their designee after hearing for the following reasons:


(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement of material fact contained in the permit application;


(2) A violation  of any city, state, or federal  law or  regulation;


(3) A violation  of any of the terms and conditions of the permit;


(4) A  violation  of any of the provisions of this  chapter;


(5) Any outside factor that may or indeed poses a risk to public health, safety, or welfare


B. In connection with the suspension of a permit, the City Manager or their designee may impose reasonable conditions.


C. In deciding whether a permit should be suspended or revoked, and in deciding what conditions to impose in the event of a suspension,  if any, the City Manager shall   consider:


(1) The nature and seriousness  of the violation;


(2) Corrective action, if any , taken by the permittee;


(3) Prior violation(s), if any , by the permittee;

The likelihood of recurrence;

(4) All circumstances surrounding the violation;


(5) Whether the violation was willful;


(6) The number of previous special events held by the permittee;


(7) The number of previous violations by the permittee; and


(8) Previous sanctions, if any, imposed against the permittee.


E. The City Manager or their designee shall have the authority to summarily suspend a permit during a special event if it appears that a permittee has violated one or more of the terms and   conditions of a permit or any applicable law and, based upon the available information, results in an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare. No appeal is allowed from a summary suspension of a permit issued by the City Manager or their designee pursuant to this subsection.


F. No fee previously paid by a permittee in connection with the application shall be refunded if such permit is suspended or revoked.

Section 2-19. Penalties, Injunctive Relief.

A, It is a misdemeanor offense for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person convicted of having violated any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 1 of this code.


B. The staging, holding, presenting, or conducting of a special event without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be enjoined by the City in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the City's Municipal Court pursuant to this code.

Section 2-20. Rules and Regulations.

The City Manager shall have the authority from time to time to adopt, amend, alter, and repeal administrative rules, regulations and fees as may be necessary for the proper administration of this chapter .